CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF KEY WEST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted May 21, 2002 
Effective June 10, 2002 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KEY WEST, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jimmy Weekley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jeremy Anthony 
Harry Bethel 
Charles Percy Curry 
Merili McCoy 
Tom Oosterhoudt 
Carmen Turner 
City Commission 
____________ 
Julio Avael 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bob Tischenkel 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cheryl Smith 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KEY WEST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Craig Cates 
Mayor 
____________ 
Teri Johnston 
Clayton Lopez 
Mark Rossi 
Billy Wardlow 
Jimmy Weekley 
Tony Yaniz 
City Commission 
____________ 
Bob Vitas, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Shawn Smith 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cheryl Smith, MMC, CPM 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the land development, general and permanent ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, as supplemented through November 21, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
VOLUME I CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 GENERAL ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLES GOCT:1 GENERAL ORDINANCES STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE GOSLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 GENERAL ORDINANCES INDEX GOi:1 VOLUME II LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS LDR:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLES LDRCT:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE LDRSLT:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS INDEX LDRi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cheryl Smith, City Clerk, Bob Tischenkel, City Attorney and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Key West, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Key West, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Key West, Florida. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 02-14 
An Ordinance of the City of Key West, Florida, Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the City of Key West, Florida: 
    Section 1: The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Key West, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 122, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2: All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 16, 2001, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3: The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and a term of imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relieve and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5: Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6: Ordinances adopted after October 16, 2001, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7: This Ordinance shall go into effect on June 10, 2002. 
    Read and passed on first reading at a regular meeting held this 7th day of May, 2002. 
    Read and passed on final reading at a regular meeting held this 21st day of May, 2002. 
    Authenticated by the presiding officer and Clerk of the Commission on 22nd day of May, 2002. 
    Filed with the Clerk May 22, 2002. 
/s/   
      JIMMY WEEKLY, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      CHERYL SMITH, CITY CLERK   
SUBPART A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Key West, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1986, § 1.01) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Key West, Florida, as amended, printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The term "city" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of Key West, Florida." 
    City boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, etc. Whenever reference is made to a board, committee, commission, officer, employee, etc., in this Code, it shall be construed to mean that of the City of Key West, Florida. 
    City commission. Whenever the term "city commission" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of Key West, Florida. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Key West, Florida." 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, rule 1.090(a). 
    County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Monroe, Florida. 
State Law reference- Boundary of Monroe County, F.S. § 7.44. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the city manager, head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the city manager, head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number may extend and be applied to a single person or thing. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city. 
State Law reference- Legal time, F.S. § 1.02. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including but not limited to any park, street, public way, public square, cemetery or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city, and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1.02, 1.11) 
State Law reference- Definitions of terms used in Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1986, § 1.03) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any annual appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or fees. 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles, loading zones, or other traffic regulations not inconsistent with this Code. 
(9)  Any land development or zoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grade of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance regarding personnel policies, benefits or practices. 
(b)  All such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 75-12, § 3, 9-2-1975) 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at any time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
(Code 1986, § 1.14) 
Sec. 1-9. - Continuation of existing Code provisions. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, 1976, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
(Code 1986, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the additions and amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code of Ordinances, City of Key West, Florida, shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code or, if chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof are repealed by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city commission. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full) ." 
(d)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section or chapter or other designation, as the case may be, to be numbered _____, which reads as follows: (Set out new provisions in full) ." 
(e)  In lieu of subsection (d) of this section, when the city commission desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the city commission desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city commission, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(f)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter number, or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1.04-1.08) 
Charter reference- Ordinances generally, art. VII. 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments subject to general penalty. 
    If the city council amends any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-15 shall apply to the section, as amended. If such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Code 1986, § 1.09) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1.10) 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to amend or alter any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete any page or portion thereof or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1986, § 1.12) 
State Law reference- Unlawful alteration of public records, F.S. § 831.01. 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1.15) 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, whenever in this Code of Ordinances section 1-15 is referred to as providing a penalty for violation, the violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment. 
(b)  All such violations may be enforced by notice to appear in the county court as provided by F.S. § 901.28 or for a threat to public health, safety and welfare by arrest as provided in F.S. § 901.15(1), except where prohibited by law. 
(c)  Through section 86-11 hereof, a violation of a city zoning or land development regulation is deemed a civil infraction, unless such a specific regulation provides for criminal penalties. The special master of the city, under his or her authority to impose administrative fines and non-criminal penalties, may hear cases of alleged violations of the zoning or land development regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 1.13(a); Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, 2-19-2003) 
State Law reference- General penalty, F.S. § 162.22. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); administration of animal regulations, § 10-41 et seq.; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 34-61 et seq.; human relations, ch. 38; administration of fair housing regulations, § 38-56 et seq.; pensions and retirement plans, ch. 46; personnel policy, ch. 50; planning and development, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; administration for land development regulations, ch. 90; administration of concurrency management regulations, § 94-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of tree protection, § 110-286 et seq.; administration of subdivision regulations, § 118-41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Disruption of city meetings prohibited. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "person" shall mean all persons including the mayor, city commissioners, other elected and appointed city officers, city employees and members of the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interrupt any meeting of the city boards, committees or commissions or the city commission. The use of obscene or profane language, physical violence or the threat thereof, or other loud and boisterous behavior which the presiding officer or a majority of the city commission shall determine is intended as a disruption of the meeting and a failure to comply with any lawful decision or order of the presiding officer or of a majority of the city commission shall constitute a disturbance. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section may be ejected from the city commission chambers or other meeting room for the duration of the meeting or for such lesser period as the presiding officer or a majority of the city commission shall determine. Any decision of the presiding officer shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order and the bylaws of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1.23, 1.24) 
State Law reference- Disruption of public meetings, F.S. § 871.01. 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Vacancy in office. 
(a)  If a permanent vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor or city commissioner, caused either by death, resignation or removal from office, such vacancy shall be filled by the procedures set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(b)  Within 15 days of the occurrence of a permanent vacancy in the office of mayor or city commissioner, the city commission shall appoint an eligible person to serve until either an election is held to fill the position or until the end of the term. The city commission by resolution shall establish a procedure for nomination and selection of the appointment. At the time of such appointment, the city commission shall also determine the date, if any, of the election to fill the permanent vacancy, as provided in subsection (c) of this section. If the city commission is unable to agree on the appointment of an eligible person, the city commission shall set a date for a special election within 120 days of the occurrence of the permanent vacancy or such time immediately thereafter that will provide the city clerk sufficient time to comply with state and federal election laws. If 180 days or fewer remain in the term of the vacated office at the time of vacancy, the city commission may refrain from holding a special election. 
(c)  As provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city commission shall set a date for a special election to fill a permanent vacancy. That date shall be the next municipal election as established in section 6.01 of the Charter, so long as there is sufficient time for the city clerk to comply with state and federal election laws. If such election would be scheduled for a date when 180 days or fewer remain in the term of the vacated office, the city commission may refrain from holding the election. 
(d)  In an election to fill a permanent vacancy, the person who wins the greatest number of votes shall be elected. Only qualified voters of the district where the vacancy has occurred shall vote in the vacancy-filling election. A person elected to fill a vacancy shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term until the next election. 
(e)  If a temporary vacancy occurs that is caused by the governor's suspension of the mayor or a city commissioner, the city commission may appoint a temporary replacement. The city commission shall use the relevant procedure of nomination and selection that is established pursuant to subsection (b) of this section for the filling of a permanent vacancy. No election may be called to fill a temporary vacancy. If the city commission does not appoint a temporary replacement within 15 days of notification of the suspension, it shall refer the appointment to the governor. The term of the temporary appointment shall be for the period of the suspension, not to extend beyond the term of the suspended member. 
(Code 1986, § 2.03) 
State Law reference- Elections, F.S. § 6.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-32. - Salaries of mayor, commissioners. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "salary" shall mean total compensation paid by the city as personal income. 
(b)  The mayor shall receive an annual salary as set forth below: 
FY 2010-11: $10,000.00 per year. 
FY 2011-12: $13,125.00 per year. 
FY 2012-13: $16,250.00 per year. 
FY 2013-14: $19,375.00 per year. 
FY 2014-15 and thereafter: $22,500.00 per year. 
(c)  Each city commissioner shall receive an annual salary as set forth below: 
FY 2010-11: $8,500.00 per year. 
FY 2011-12: $11,375.00 per year. 
FY 2012-13: $14,250.00 per year. 
FY 2013-14: $17,125.00 per year. 
FY 2014-15 and thereafter: $20,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1986, § 2.01; Ord. No. 11-13, § 1, 9-20-2011) 
Charter reference- Compensation, § 3.03. 
Sec. 2-33. - Review of proposed ordinances. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "action" shall mean a reading of the proposed ordinance and hearing as provided by the Charter and the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. § 166.041. 
(b)  No proposed ordinance shall appear on the agenda of any regular or special city commission meeting for action by the city commission until such proposed ordinance has been reviewed by the city manager and the city attorney in accordance with Resolution No. 84-78. 
(c)  This section may be waived by a two-thirds vote of the city commissioners in attendance at the meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 1.25) 
Sec. 2-34. - Financial interest in business on city-owned real property. 
    No elected member of the city commission shall acquire a financial interest in any entity doing business on city-owned real property while in office or for a period of two years following termination of office. 
(Code 1986, § 2.06) 
Secs. 2-35-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTION 

Sec. 2-61. - Establishing boundaries and numbering of districts. 
    The city shall be divided into six single-member districts of approximately equal population distribution as determined by the city's election official. The city commission shall no less than every ten years consider and adopt district lines in order to maintain an equal population distribution and to preserve minority voting rights. Upon adoption by ordinance the district boundary map shall be signed and certified by the chief election administrator as the official voting district boundary map of the city. The official voting district boundary map shall govern as to the location of district boundary lines and the district number assigned to a given area located within the boundary lines of a district. The map shall be maintained in the city clerk's office, available for inspection upon request of any person. 
(Code 1986, § 2.04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-26, § 1, adopted August 7, 2012, provided for the adoption of a 2012 District Boundary Map, attached to said ordinance as Exhibit A. Exhibit A is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-62. - Conflicts in voting district boundary map. 
    Any question regarding the interpretation of the official voting district boundary map shall be resolved by the city's election administrator. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the election administrator may appeal that decision to the city commission. A unanimous vote of the city commission shall be required to overturn any decision of the elections administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 2.05) 
Sec. 2-63. - Alternative means of qualifying. 
(a)  A candidate for city commission may qualify for the ballot by a petition process. A person qualifying by this alternative method shall not be required to pay a qualifying fee. A person using this petition process shall file a sworn affidavit with the city clerk stating that he intends to use this alternative method of qualifying for office. The candidate need not attest to an undue burden on his resources due to the qualifying fee. 
(b)  The affidavit shall be filed at any time after the first Tuesday after the first Monday in January of the year the election is held, but prior to noon of the 21st day preceding the first day of the qualifying period for the office sought. The affidavit shall be on a form prescribed by the city clerk which is on file in the city clerk's office. No signature shall be obtained by a candidate on any petition prior to the filing of the affidavit. The affidavit and petition process shall begin only after the opening of a campaign account pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Each candidate for the position of city commissioner who is using the petition process shall obtain the signatures of a number of the qualified electors equal to three percent of the registered electors of the election district, as shown by the compilation of the supervisor of elections for the county for the last preceding general election. Each candidate for the position of mayor who is using the petition process shall obtain the signatures of a number of the qualified electors equal to three percent of the registered electors of the city, as shown by the compilation of the supervisor of elections for the county for the last preceding general election. The petition for signatures shall be on a form prescribed and distributed by the city clerk. 
(d)  Each candidate for city commission shall submit his petition to the city clerk prior to 12:00 noon of the 21st day preceding the first day of the qualifying period of the office sought. On or before the first day for qualifying, the city clerk shall certify whether the required number of signatures has been obtained and shall thus notify the candidate. If the required number of signatures has been obtained and if the candidate has otherwise fulfilled the qualifications for office, the candidate shall be entitled to have his name printed on the ballot. 
(e)  This section shall be applicable to elections for members of the city utility board of the city. Candidates for the utility board may use the petition process to obtain the signatures of a number of qualified electors equal to three percent of the registered electors of the city, as shown by the compilation of the supervisor of elections for the county for the last preceding general election. 
(f)  Signature verification procedures of F.S. § 99.097 shall pertain. The candidate shall be responsible for paying the cost of signature verification by the supervisor of elections. Election assessment requirements of F.S. § 99.093 are not affected by this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2.07) 
Sec. 2-64. - Residency requirement for mayor and city commission office. 
(a)  Any city elector shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor. Any candidate for mayor shall reside in the city at the time of qualification. 
(b)  Any city elector who, as of the date of qualification, resides in the district which he is seeking to represent shall be eligible to hold the office of city commissioner. Any person elected to represent a district shall maintain residency in that district for the term of office. 
(Code 1986, § 2.02) 
Secs. 2-65-2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Executive and administrative, art. IV. 
Cross reference- Building official's office, § 14-36; fair housing director, § 38-116 et seq.; general employees, § 46-26 et seq.; police officers, § 46-166 et seq.; firefighters, § 46-201 et seq.; hearing officer, § 108-1026 et seq.; city archeologist, § 110-32. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-116-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- City manager appointment, duties; designation of administrative officer during temporary absence of city manager; departments and department heads, §§ 4.01-4.05. 

Sec. 2-141. - Appointment of assistant city managers. 
    The city manager may appoint assistant city managers, not to exceed three in number at any one time, to serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 4.01) 
Sec. 2-142. - Duties of assistant city managers. 
    The assistant city managers shall be officers of the city and shall perform such duties as are assigned by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 4.02) 
Secs. 2-143-2-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Animal control department, § 10-71 et seq.; fire department, § 30-26 et seq. 

Sec. 2-196. - Established. 
    There shall be departments of the city as established pursuant to Charter section 4.05. 
(Code 1986, § 4.04) 
Charter reference- Departments and department heads, § 4.05. 
Sec. 2-197. - Number of departments headed by one person; remuneration. 
    A department head may be the head of more than one department, but not more than three departments on a permanent basis. A department head fulfilling the duties of more than one department head may be remunerated as provided by the city manager, but not to exceed the aggregate salary of the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 4.06) 
Charter reference- Eligibility of board or commission members for city employment, § 4.09. 
Sec. 2-198. - Deputy directors. 
    The city manager shall appoint deputy directors of departments who shall perform those tasks assigned and outlined in an administrative order from the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 4.05) 
Charter reference- Department heads, § 4.05. 
Sec. 2-199. - Internal auditor. 
    The position of internal auditor is hereby established. The internal auditor shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city commission which shall prescribe his or her duties. The internal auditor shall report directly to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-29, § 1, 12-6-2005) 
Secs. 2-200-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Fair housing board, § 38-116 et seq.; board of trustees for general employees, § 46-61 et seq.; board of trustees for police officer's and firefighter's retirement plan, § 46-276 et seq.; civil service board, § 50-56 et seq.; planning board, § 90-51 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 90-96 et seq.; historic architectural review commission, § 90-126 et seq.; tree commission, § 90-171 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-251. - Prohibited appointments. 
    No city employee or officer shall serve as an appointed member to any permanent city board, commission, or authority that provides a salary or other forms of remuneration. 
(Code 1986, § 6.25) 
Secs. 2-252-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UNIFORM PROCEDURES FOR ADVISORY BOARDS 

Sec. 2-281. - Application. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code and in the land development regulations and excepting the city commission, this division shall be designated as the uniform procedures for the city's advisory boards, including those boards designated as commissions. 
(Code 1986, § 11.01) 
Sec. 2-282. - Appointment; tenure. 
    All persons who desire to serve on an advisory board shall be city residents, except as provided in section 46-62 of this Code or as otherwise provided by law. All such persons shall submit a resume to the city commission as part of their application. All advisory board members serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed by majority vote of its full membership, notwithstanding that they were appointed for a specific term. No member derives any property rights in his appointed position. 
(Code 1986, § 11.08; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 8-5-2003) 
Sec. 2-283. - Officers. 
    From among its members the advisory board shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 11.02) 
Sec. 2-284. - Quorum; procedures. 
    The next whole number of members above 50 percent of the advisory board members shall constitute a quorum. Each advisory board shall adopt procedures for the conduct of its meetings. 
(Code 1986, § 11.05) 
Sec. 2-285. - Regular meetings. 
    The advisory board shall convene on a regularly scheduled basis at least once each month, and notice of such meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days in advance thereof. At any special or regular meeting the advisory board may set a future meeting date. 
(Code 1986, § 11.03) 
Sec. 2-286. - Absences. 
    If a member of an advisory board is absent from three consecutive regular meetings or is absent from more than one-half of the regularly scheduled meetings during any six-month period, without prior approval of the chairperson, the advisory board shall declare the member's office vacant. The advisory board shall certify the vacancy to the city commission. The chairperson shall give approval for absence for reasons of personal illness, family illness and death in the family, and may approve an absence for such other reason as the chairperson deems reasonable. 
(Code 1986, § 11.09) 
Sec. 2-287. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of an advisory board may be called by the chairperson or by written notice of three voting members. Reasonable notice of a special meeting shall be conspicuously posted; notice of a special meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in all instances when time allows. 
(Code 1986, § 11.04) 
Sec. 2-288. - Open meetings. 
    Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of an advisory board. All such meetings shall be open to the public, and an agenda for each meeting shall be available to the public at city hall 48 hours in advance thereof; provided, however, that agendas for special meetings shall be available to the public either 48 hours before the special meeting or as soon before the meeting as practicable. 
(Code 1986, § 11.06) 
State Law reference- Open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011. 
Sec. 2-289. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  All advisory board members are subject to the conflict of interest provisions of F.S. ch. 112. Board members with an actual conflict of interest in a particular agenda item shall not vote or in any way participate in the item. Accordingly, when a board member who has declared a conflict of interest is either the applicant or a representative of the applicant of the particular agenda item, that board member must remove himself from the dais during the discussion of the item. 
(b)  Advisory board members shall refrain from using their official positions as board members to solicit or obtain business for personal remuneration. No board member shall use information not available to the general public and gained because of his official position for his personal gain or benefit or for the personal gain or benefit of any other person or business entity. 
(c)  When considering an appointment or reappointment to an advisory board, the city commission shall consider the applicant's record of conflicts of interest. 
(Code 1986, § 11.07) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
Secs. 2-290-2-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACTORS EXAMINING BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 2-316. - Creation; composition. 
    The contractors examining board is created, to consist of the following seven members appointed by the city commission: 
(1)  One general contractor. 
(2)  One master electrician. 
(3)  One master plumber. 
(4)  One land surveyor, architect or registered professional engineer. 
(5)  One roofer. 
(6)  Two consumer representatives. 
(Code 1986, § 14.01) 
Sec. 2-317. - Terms of office; qualifications; removal; vacancies. 
(a)  The members of the contractors board of examiners shall be appointed for terms of two years from January 1 in the year of appointment, and thereafter biannually before January 1 of each year for terms of two years each or until their successors are appointed and confirmed. 
(b)  All members of the board shall be city residents or shall own or work for businesses licensed to operate in the city. 
(c)  Any member of the contractors examining board may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city commissioners. 
(d)  Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of office of any member of the contractors examining board shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term, within 30 days after such vacancy occurs. 
(Code 1986, § 14.02) 
Sec. 2-318. - Officers. 
(a)  The director of public service shall serve as secretary of the contractors examining board. The secretary shall be permitted to designate a staff member to serve in his stead. 
(b)  The board shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. Terms of all officers shall be two years, beginning with their election, with elections to be held at the first meeting in January biannually. 
(Code 1986, § 14.03) 
Sec. 2-319. - Meetings; minutes; quorum. 
(a)  The contractors examining board shall hold not less than four regular meetings each fiscal year. 
(b)  Meetings shall be called by the chairperson of the board and in his absence by the vice-chairperson of the board. 
(c)  All minutes of board meetings shall be public records, except those portions which are of a confidential nature. All minutes shall be kept in the office of the zoning and building department. 
(d)  Four members of the fully appointed board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting, and a majority vote of those present shall be required to make any decision. 
(Code 1986, § 14.04) 
Sec. 2-320. - Employees. 
    For the purpose of administering article III of chapter 18, the contractors examining board may call on the city manager to furnish such employees as may be necessary to carry on or assist the board in performing its duties. 
(Code 1986, § 14.05) 
Sec. 2-321. - Rules and regulations. 
    The contractors examining board may make such rules and regulations as are consistent with the general policies of article III of chapter 18, including the power to administer oaths and subpoena witnesses in the manner provided for subpoenaing witnesses in the county court. 
(Code 1986, § 14.06) 
Sec. 2-322. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The contractors examining board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Determine if a license or certificate of competency of any contractor should be suspended for any violation of chapter 14, article III of chapter 18 and article II of chapter 34 and fix the length of time for such suspension; 
(2)  Revoke the license or certificate under the provisions of chapter 14, article III of chapter 18 and article II of chapter 34; 
(3)  Appoint a city employee to investigate any complaints made against a licensed contractor and determine whether it shall take administrative action against the contractor, including the levying of a fine in accordance with section 2-324; 
(4)  Direct the city's investigator to initiate prosecution for an alleged violation against the contractor; and 
(5)  Call upon members of the industry to advise and assist it. 
(b)  The examining board shall have the power to examine and issue certification to plumbers and electricians, as set forth in section 2-325. 
(Code 1986, § 14.07) 
Sec. 2-323. - Mediation board. 
(a)  The examiners mediation board is created, the membership of which shall be made up of the members of the contractors examination board. The public service director shall serve as secretary and shall have no vote. 
(b)  The examiners mediation board shall meet at the call of the chairperson and shall make such rules and regulations and shall keep such records as are consistent with the requirements and policies of sections 18-152 through 18-155 and 18-158 through 18-161. Four members shall constitute a quorum, and decisions shall be made by majority vote. Members shall not receive any compensation. 
(c)  The examiners mediation board shall be empowered to decide questions arising which pertain to or are applicable to article III of chapter 18, with the exception of any matter concerning plumbing. 
(d)  Matters to be considered by the examiners mediation board may be referred to it by the secretary of the board, or the matter may be initiated by the examiners mediation board. 
(Code 1986, § 14.08) 
Sec. 2-324. - Disciplinary proceedings. 
(a)  Report of complaint; petition of bankruptcy. The secretary of the contractors examining board may upon his own motion or shall upon a sworn complaint in writing of any person investigate or cause to be investigated by a special investigator appointed by the board the charges against any contractor qualified and submit a written report to the examining board. Irrespective of the foregoing, upon the filing of petition of bankruptcy by or against a qualified contractor, the secretary of the board shall immediately suspend the certificate of competency and report the matter to the examining board for revocation action. 
(b)  Decision on report. The examining board, upon receipt of a report conveyed to it pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall decide if the report makes a prima facie showing of a violation of chapter 14, article III of chapter 18 and article II of chapter 34 and, if so, shall take one or both of the following actions: 
(1)  Instruction of the secretary to send, by registered mail, a letter to the qualified contractor to his last known address, as shown by the board's records, setting out the name of the complainant, the time of commission of the alleged offense, and the specific section of the contractors' regulations in article III of chapter 18 alleged to be violated, and notification of the qualified contractor to appear before the board at a time and place fixed, not sooner than 20 days from the mailing of the registered letter, to show cause why his certificate of competency should not be suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Instruction of the investigator or complainant to file a sworn affidavit for the arrest of the qualified contractor if he has violated any of the sections of chapter 14, article III of chapter 18 and article II of chapter 34. 
(c)  Hearing. A hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The administrative hearing provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(3)  The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the board finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are or may be recognized in civil actions. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(4)  Each party shall have the right to: 
a.  Call and examine witnesses; 
b.  Introduce exhibits; 
c.  Cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues, even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; 
d.  Impeach any witness, regardless of which party first called him to testify; and 
e.  Rebut the evidence against him. 
(5)  A decision shall be made by the examining board by a majority of the entire board within five days after the close of the hearing. The decision shall be one of the following as is relevant: 
a.  Not guilty. 
b.  Suspension of the certificate of competency, stating the time. 
c.  Revocation of the certificate of competency, naming the effective date. 
d.  Issuance of a letter of reprimand stating the nature of the offense and the action required for correction. A copy of the letter shall also be retained by the building department in a file pertaining to the party. This option shall not be available, however, where the contractor is found to have violated the same provision which was the subject of a prior letter of reprimand. 
e.  Imposition of an administrative fine up to but not to exceed $250.00 per violation for a first violation or $500.00 per violation for a repeat violation for each of the charges upon which a contractor has been found in violation by the board. The board may also impose the administrative costs incurred in investigating and hearing a complaint, which cost shall be set at seven percent of the administrative fine or $100.00, whichever is greater. This penalty may be imposed alone or in addition to the penalties set forth in subsections (c)(5)a through (c)(5)d, inclusive, of this section. Failure of the contractor to pay the fine within 20 days of issuance of the notice by the board of such fine shall result in the administrative suspension by the city's chief building official of the contractor's certificate of competency, if any, until payment is made. A certified copy of an order of the board imposing a penalty under this subsection may be recorded in the public records of the county and thereafter shall constitute a lien against any real or personal property owned by the violator. After three months from the filing of any such lien that remains unpaid, the board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. 
(d)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the contractors examining board may be made by the contractor involved to the circuit court of the sixteenth judicial circuit in and for the county within 20 days, but not thereafter. 
(Code 1986, § 14.09) 
Sec. 2-325. - Examination of plumbers and electricians. 
(a)  Every person engaged in or working at the business of electrician or plumber, either as a master plumber or electrician, employing plumber or electrician or journeyman plumber or electrician, shall make written application to the contractors examining board for examination as to such applicant's ability and fitness to engage in such work. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for an electrician's or a plumber's examination, the board shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing of the time and place of the next examination to be held. 
(c)  The examination required by this Code shall be held by or under the direction of the board and shall be designed to test all applicants' practical ability and technical knowledge of electricity, plumbing work, ventilation, water supply, etc. 
(d)  If an applicant for an examination required by this Code passes the examination and the board is satisfied with his competency, the board shall issue a certificate to such applicant to engage in the business of electrician or plumbing, either as a master plumber or electrician, employing plumber or electrician, or journeyman plumber or electrician, as the case may be. 
(e)  The fee to be charged for the examination of an applicant to engage in the business of master plumber or electrician shall be $50.00, and every person to whom a certificate shall be issued shall register and renew his certificate on or before January 1 of each year, and for such registration and renewal of the certificate shall pay the sum of $50.00. 
(1)  The cost of such annual renewal fee for the master plumber's or electrician's certificate shall be credited to the cost of the license fee for a plumbing or electrical contractor under section 66-109. To be entitled to such credit, a master plumber or electrician shall have a bona fide plumbing or electrical contractor business in a properly zoned area in the city. 
(2)  A master plumber or electrician who possesses a master plumber or electrician certificate and who desires to become inactive as a master plumber or electrician may purchase annually an inactive renewal certificate from the city, for the sum of $2.00, to retain his status as a master plumber or electrician and shall not be required to purchase an active renewal certificate for $50.00 or purchase a business tax receipt; provided, however, the master plumber or electrician at any time thereafter may, upon payment of the renewal fee of $50.00, regain the status of an active master plumber or electrician. 
(f)  The fee to be charged for the examination of a person desiring to engage in the business as journeyman plumber or electrician shall be $15.00, and each journeyman plumber or electrician to whom such certificate shall be issued shall, on or before January 1 of each year, register and renew his certificate, and for such registering and renewal of the certificate shall pay the sum of $2.00. 
(g)  Any master plumber or electrician who is employed by the city or the county as a plumbing or an electrical official and who does not actively engage in the plumbing or electrical trade is exempt from payment of any renewal fees, and the proper authorities shall issue the certificate to such master plumber or electrician without cost. 
(h)  A certificate issued by the board under this section shall be effective only in the city. No certificate issued by any other similar board shall be recognized as valid in the city. 
(i)  A nonresident plumbing or electrical contractor holding a license in another city shall also be obliged to make written application to the board for examination as to his ability and fitness to engage in the business of plumbing or electrician as a master plumber or electrician and shall take the examination as provided. 
(j)  The duties of the board under this section may, at the direction of the city manager, be performed by the chief building official. Any applicant for a certificate to engage in the business of plumbing or electrician as provided by this Code shall be deemed to have complied with the examination requirements of this section upon proof of a timely passing score on any examination administered according to laws of the county, so long as such examination shall be identical to the examination administered by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14.10; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Secs. 2-326-2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- This division is derived from Special Act 57-1470, §§ 2, 4, which created the current housing authority board of commissioners. Sections 1 and 3 of the act requiring the abolishment of the former board and the transfer of its records and property to the current housing authority board of commissioners have been omitted. 
Cross reference- Human relations, ch. 38. 

Sec. 2-351. - Created, composition, terms, vacancies. 
    There is created a board of commissioners of the housing authority to be composed of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor for terms of four years. Vacancies in the board shall be filled as provided for the original appointments for the balance of the term of the membership vacated. 
(Sp. Acts, 57-1470, § 2; Code 1986, § 15.01) 
Sec. 2-352. - Powers. 
    The board of commissioners of the housing authority created by division shall be vested with all the powers and authorities and shall administer the affairs of the housing authority in all respects as though created by virtue of F.S. § 421.05 and shall be subject to all the provisions of F.S. ch. 421 or other law relating to municipal housing authorities in this state. 
(Sp. Acts, 57-1470, § 4; Code 1986, § 15.02) 
Secs. 2-353-2-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 09-01, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, repealed Art. V, Div. 5, §§ 2-381-2-386, which pertained to the Port Advisory Board, and derived from the 1986 Code and Ord. No. 06-21, adopted Oct. 17, 2006. 

Secs. 2-381-2-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CAROLINE STREET CORRIDOR AND BAHAMA VILLAGE COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Redevelopment agency, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 

Sec. 2-416. - Findings. 
    The city commission finds and determines that there is a need for a community redevelopment agency as defined in F.S. § 163.356 in order to function in the city to carry out the community redevelopment purposes of F.S. ch. 163, part III. 
(Code 1986, § 19.12) 
Sec. 2-417. - Created. 
    There is created, in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 163, part III, a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency, referred to as "the agency." 
(Code 1986, § 19.13) 
Sec. 2-418. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
    The Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities imposed upon or granted to a community redevelopment agency by F.S. ch. 163, part III. 
(Code 1986, § 19.14) 
Sec. 2-419. - City commission declared as agency; officers; funding. 
    The city commission, in accordance with F.S. § 163.357, declares itself to be the Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency and designates a chairperson of the agency and a vice-chairperson. The remaining officers of the agency shall be designated by the agency in conformity with the bylaws of the agency to be adopted at its organizational meeting. The city commission shall appropriate to the agency such amounts as it deems necessary for the administrative expenses and overhead of the agency. 
(Code 1986, § 19.15) 
Sec. 2-420. - Redevelopment trust fund. 
(a)  Established. A redevelopment trust fund is established for use within the city's approved community redevelopment area to assist in the financing or refinancing of community redevelopment under an approved community redevelopment plan. 
(b)  Funding. Funding of the redevelopment trust fund shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, there is established a redevelopment trust fund for the Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency. Funds allocated to and deposited in this fund shall be used to finance or refinance community redevelopment projects undertaken in the redevelopment area and, when directly related to the financing or refinancing of a community redevelopment project, may be expended for any purposes authorized by F.S. § 163.387, including the following: 
a.  Administrative and overhead expenses necessary or incidental to the implementation of a community redevelopment plan adopted by the agency; 
b.  Expenses of redevelopment planning, surveys, and financial analysis, including the reimbursement of the city commission or the agency for such expenses incurred before the redevelopment plan was approved and adopted; 
c.  The acquisition of real property in the redevelopment area; 
d.  The clearance and preparation of the community redevelopment area for redevelopment and relocation of site occupants as provided in F.S. § 163.370; 
e.  The repayment of principal and interest or any redemption premium for loans, advances, bonds, bond anticipation notes, and other forms of indebtedness; and 
f.  All expenses incidental or connected with the issuance, sale, redemption, retirement, or purchase of agency bonds, bond anticipation notes, or other forms of indebtedness, including funding of any reserve, redemption or other fund or account provided for in the ordinance or resolution authorizing such bonds, notes or other forms of indebtedness. 
(2)  For the duration of the community redevelopment plan, the annual funding of the redevelopment trust fund established by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be in an amount not less than that increment in the income, proceeds, revenues and funds of the taxing authority derived from or held in connection with the undertaking and carrying out of community redevelopment projects pursuant to F.S. § 163.387. Such increments shall be determined annually and shall be that amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between the following: 
a.  The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by each taxing authority, exclusive of any amount from any debt service millage, on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
b.  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the taxes levied each year by or for each taxing authority, exclusive of any debt service millage, upon the total assessed value of the taxable real property in the community redevelopment area as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 96-31 (December 20, 1996). 
(3)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.387(2), commencing upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 96-31 and for the duration of any community redevelopment project undertaken pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, each taxing authority shall annually appropriate and pay on or before January 1 to the redevelopment trust fund a sum that is no less than the increment of ad valorem tax revenues as defined and determined in subsection (b)(2) of this section. Any taxing authority that does not pay the increment to the trust fund by January 1 shall pay to the trust fund an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the increment and shall pay interest on the amount of the increment equal to one percent for each month the increment is outstanding. 
(4)  The obligation to fund the redevelopment trust fund annually shall continue until all loans, advances, and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon of the agency incurred as a result of a community redevelopment project have been paid, but only to the extent that the tax increment described in this section accrues. The city commission covenants that so long as its obligation to fund the redevelopment trust fund continues, it shall take all necessary action to enforce the performance of the obligation of each taxing authority to make the annual appropriations required by subsection (b)(3) of this section; provided, however, that the obligation of the city commission to fund the redevelopment trust fund shall not be construed to make the city a guarantor of the obligations of other taxing authorities under this section or F.S. § 163.387, nor shall it be construed to require the exercise of the taxing power of the city or the payment to the redevelopment trust fund from any other funds of the city except the incremental revenue provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(5)  The city commission may, at its discretion, deposit such other legally available funds into the redevelopment trust fund as may be described by resolutions adopted on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 96-31. 
(6)  The redevelopment trust fund shall be maintained and administered as a separate account of the city for the agency. Any money that remains in the trust fund after the payment of expenses pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section for such year shall be: 
a.  Returned to each taxing authority which paid the increment in the proportion that the amount of the payment of such taxing authority bears to the total amount paid into the trust fund by all taxing authorities within the redevelopment area for that year; 
b.  Used to reduce the amount of any indebtedness to which increment revenues are pledged; 
c.  Deposited into an escrow account for the purpose of later reducing any indebtedness to which increment revenues are pledged; or 
d.  Appropriated to a specific redevelopment project pursuant to an approved community redevelopment plan, which project will be completed within three years from the date of such appropriation. 
(c)  Independent financial audit. The Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency shall provide for an independent financial audit of the trust fund each fiscal year and a report of such audit. Such report shall describe the amount and source of deposits into and the amount of and the purpose of withdrawals from the trust fund during such fiscal year and the amount of principal and interest paid during such year on any indebtedness to which is pledged increment revenues and the remaining amount of such indebtedness. The agency shall provide a copy of the report to each taxing authority. 
(Code 1986, § 19.16) 
Secs. 2-421-2-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - NAVAL PROPERTIES LOCAL REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 

Sec. 2-446. - Established. 
    There is established the naval properties local redevelopment authority (the LRA), a public body corporate and politic, having all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Community Redevelopment Act of 1969, Laws of Fla. ch. 69-305, codified as F.S. ch. 163, part III, as amended, and this division, subject to all of the limitations set out therein. 
(Code 1986, § 19.17) 
Sec. 2-447. - Organization. 
(a)  The naval properties local redevelopment authority shall be governed by a board consisting of the seven members of the city commission. 
(b)  The board shall adopt bylaws and a seal and shall establish a headquarters within the city. The bylaws shall include the creation of standing committees which will provide input to the naval properties local redevelopment authority and shall include both private and public sector involvement which will develop a community consensus for the use and redevelopment of naval properties. 
(c)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the naval properties local redevelopment authority and for all other purposes. Actions may be taken by the naval properties local redevelopment authority upon a vote of the majority of the members present, unless in any case the bylaws shall require a larger number. 
(d)  The board shall include ex officio members consisting of the member of Congress or designee representing the United States Congressional District which includes the city, the state representative or designee of the city's legislative district, a member or designee of the board of county commissioners and the commanding officer or designee of the Key West Naval Operations. 
(Code 1986, § 19.18(a)-(c), (e)) 
Sec. 2-448. - Compensation. 
    Individual board members of the naval properties local redevelopment authority shall receive no compensation for services, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of duties. 
(Code 1986, § 19.18(d)) 
Sec. 2-449. - Redevelopment plan. 
    The naval properties local redevelopment authority shall prepare or cause to be prepared a redevelopment plan which meets the requirements of F.S. § 163.360, as amended, and 32 CFR 91 for the naval properties redevelopment area, which the city commission has, by resolution, determined to be a blighted area as defined in F.S. § 163.340, as amended. The naval properties local redevelopment authority shall conduct public workshops and utilize other media to ensure the greatest public participation in the preparation of the redevelopment plan. 
(Code 1986, § 19.19) 
Sec. 2-450. - Powers. 
    The powers which the city commission has delegated to the naval properties local redevelopment authority include the following: 
(1)  The power of eminent domain as set forth in F.S. § 163.375, as amended, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 95-32 in exhibit A, with the express limitation that, prior to the exercise of such power, the city commission shall have adopted a resolution approving the acquisition of the specific parcel. This delegation shall not, in any way limit the city's eminent domain powers as set forth in F.S. chs. 73 and 74; 
(2)  The power to hold, improve, clear, or prepare any acquired property; 
(3)  The power to dispose of property acquired within the community redevelopment area for uses in accordance with the community redevelopment plan; 
(4)  The power to construct improvements necessary to carry out community rebuilding objectives; 
(5)  The power to carry out programs of management, repair and rehabilitation; 
(6)  The power to plan for and assist in the relocation of persons displaced by rebuilding activities; 
(7)  The power to receive and utilize tax increment revenues to fund rebuilding activities; and 
(8)  All other powers granted under F.S. ch. 163, part III, as amended, unless specifically withheld from the naval properties local redevelopment authority by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 19.20) 
Sec. 2-451. - Powers withheld by city commission. 
    For the purposes of this division, the powers remaining with the city commission are the powers to: 
(1)  Determine an area to be a slum or blighted area, or combination thereof; designate such area as appropriate for community redevelopment; and hold any public hearings required with respect thereto. 
(2)  Grant final approval to community redevelopment plans and modifications thereof. 
(3)  Authorize the issuance of revenue bonds as set forth in F.S. § 163.385, as amended. 
(4)  Approve the acquisition, demolition, removal, or disposal of property as provided in F.S. § 163.370(3), as amended, and assume responsibility to bear loss as provided in F.S. § 163.370(3), as amended. 
(5)  Zone or rezone any part of the city or make exceptions from building regulations, and enter into agreements with a housing authority, which agreement may extend over any period. 
(6)  Close, vacate, plan, or replan streets, roads, sidewalks, ways, or other places and plan or replan any part of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 19.21) 
Sec. 2-452. - Annual audit. 
    The naval properties local redevelopment authority shall file with the city clerk and with the state auditor general, on or before March 31 of each year, a report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year, which report shall include a complete financial statement setting forth its assets, liabilities, income, and operating expenses as of the end of such fiscal year. The fiscal year of the naval properties local redevelopment authority shall be from October 1 to September 30. At the time of filing the report, the naval properties local redevelopment authority shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice to the effect that such report has been filed with the city and that the report is available for inspection during business hours in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the naval properties local redevelopment authority. 
(Code 1986, § 19.22) 
Sec. 2-453. - Supplement to statute. 
    This division shall be deemed supplemental to the provisions of F.S. ch. 163, part III, as amended, the provisions of which are incorporated in this division by this reference. 
(Code 1986, § 19.23) 
Secs. 2-454-2-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 

Sec. 2-481. - Established; general duties. 
    There is established an art in public places board. It shall advise the city commission in the selection and location of public art in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22.01) 
Sec. 2-482. - Composition; terms of office. 
    The art in public places board shall consist of seven members. The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one member of the board. The term of the board member shall be equal and shall run parallel to that of the appointing commissioner. The board member's term shall end at the conclusion of the commissioner's term; a reelected commissioner may reappoint a board member. 
(Code 1986, § 22.02(a)) 
Sec. 2-483. - Applicability of general provisions. 
    All sections of division 2 of this article are applicable to art in public places board members except that members shall have a business, employment, or profession related to the creation or sale of art within the City of Key West and reside in the Lower Keys from Key West, to, and including Big Coppitt Key. 
(Code 1986, § 22.02(b); Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 2-484. - Organization. 
(a)  Four members of the art in public places board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business during both regular and special meetings. 
(b)  The board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings, which shall include Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. At its inaugural meeting, the board shall establish a mission statement and goals and objectives, and transmit them to the city manager. At the end of each fiscal year, the board shall submit a year-end report to the city commission. 
(c)  The board shall convene scheduled meetings during the evening hours for the convenience of the public. 
(Code 1986, § 22.03(a), (c), (d)) 
Sec. 2-485. - Clerk. 
    The city manager shall appoint a clerk of the art in public places board. The clerk shall be responsible for preparing all board agendas and minutes, ensuring that all board meetings are properly noticed, and maintaining all records of the board. 
(Code 1986, § 22.03(f)) 
Sec. 2-486. - Duties. 
    The art in public places board shall: 
(1)  Develop written guidelines for the location and display of public art. 
(2)  Develop written guidelines for the competitive selection of and purchase of public art consistent with the goals of the city's purchasing procedures. 
(3)  Investigate and recommend to the city commission funding sources for public art. With respect to city funds, the board shall recommend an annual budget. 
(4)  Subject to the procurement process outlined in chapter 2, article VII, division 3, be responsible for the expenditure of and accounting for the one (1) percent set aside funds and limit the amount of dollars spent on art/cultural activities, programs and events to no more than fifteen (15) percent of the one (1) percent set aside funds in a fiscal year. 
(5)  Coordinate the installation of public art with the city's building department and historic architectural review commission in order to comply with building codes and historic district guidelines. 
(6)  Coordinate the organizing of art on public property sponsored art, cultural events, and programs. 
(7)  Coordinate with the city manager's office for the maintenance of public art, once installed. 
(8)  Forward to the city manager the board's written recommendation for the purchase of each piece of public art. 
(9)  From time to time, commission public art, after approval of the city commission, and in both commissioning and selecting public art seek to reflect diversity in the artistic community. 
(Code 1986, § 22.04; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 2-487. - Funding of art in new construction and major renovation projects. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the intent of the city's Art in Public Places Program (the "Program) to encourage the inclusion of works of art in public and private construction projects in order to expand citizens' and visitors' experience with visual art and enable them to better understand our community and their individual lives. By encouraging artists capable of creating works of art in public places, the Program shall strive to stimulate the vitality and economy of the city by enhancing the visual beauty of the city and contributing to making the city the "island of the arts." It is the goal of the Program to expend private and public funds on works of art and art projects of redeeming quality that advance public understanding of art and enhance the aesthetic quality of public places. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Art in Public Places (AIPP) Board or the "board" means the advisory board appointed by the city commission as set forth in this division. 
Artist or professional artist means a practitioner in the arts generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional possessing serious intent and ability. Indications of a person's status as a professional artist include, but are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission of artwork, frequent or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in public institutions or museums, receipt of honors and awards, and training in the arts. 
Artwork or works of art means all forms of original creations of art, which may be portable as well as permanent and shall include, but not be limited to: 
Paintings of all media, including both portable and permanently affixed works such as frescoes and murals; 
Sculpture of any form and in any material or combination of materials including statues, monuments, fountains, arches or other structures intended for ornamentation or commemoration, reliefs, mobiles, kinetic, electronic and neon sculptures; 
Other works of art, such as inscriptions, stained glass, fiber works, carvings, mosaics, photographs, film and video works, performance art, drawings, collages, textile works, prints and other decorative and utilitarian works in clay, fiber, wood, metal, glass, stone, plastic and other materials; and 
Artist-designed landscape and earthworks, including the artistic placement of natural materials or other functional art objects. 
Construction costs means the total of all construction and renovation costs, as determined by the building official in issuing a building permit, associated with a particular major development plan as defined in chapter 108 of the city land development regulations of a particular public or private construction or renovation project within the city, excluding architectural fees, engineering fees, asbestos abatement, other environmental preparation, site work and contingency costs. 
Developer means any person, property owner, corporation, public or private entity or governmental agency responsible for undertaking a qualifying construction or renovation project for which the city's Art in Public Places Program applies. 
Publicly accessible means locations that are open to the general public during normal business hours and visible by the general public at all times. 
(c)  Public art set-aside. One percent (1%) of the construction costs of all new public or private construction and renovation projects, including any governmental agency owned project within the city, as specified herein shall be set aside for the acquisition, commission and installation of works of art to be placed on the site of said construction or renovation, as well as a consultant, or coordinator/employee, as requested by the AIPP Board and approved by the city manager and/or the city commission, as prescribed by city ordinance. 
(1)  Applicability. The one-percent for public art fund set-aside requirement shall only apply to: 
a.  New public or private construction projects that qualify as a major development plan as defined in chapter 108 of the City of Key West Code of Ordinances and exceed $500,000.00 in construction costs; and 
b.  Public or private renovation projects that qualify as a major development plan as defined in chapter 108 of the City of Key West Code of Ordinances and exceed $100,000.00 in construction costs. 
c.  Non-profits whose projects qualify under provisions a or b of the above section may have their public art fund set aside requirement waived, all or in part by action of the city commission on a case by case basis upon a showing of a valid public purpose. 
(2)  Compliance options. When a new construction or renovation project is subject to the one-percent for public art set-aside requirement, the developer shall have the following options: 
a.  On-site artwork. The developer may allocate one percent (1%) of the construction costs as defined in subsection 2-487(b) to the commissioning and installation of permanent, on-site public artwork as part of the development project. All artwork shall be permanently located in publicly accessible locations. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the developer shall provide a performance bond to the city equal to the one percent (1%) public art set-aside. The artwork shall be commissioned, installed and approved by the city before a certificate of occupancy may be issued for the new construction or renovation project. If the artwork is not produced and installed, then said performance bond shall be transferred to the city public art fund described in subsection 2-487(e), and a certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
1.  Private and non-city public projects. The developer may contract with a professional artist to create the on-site artwork. If desired by the developer, support shall be available from city staff and the AIPP board to assist in the selection of an artist. Before contracting with the artist and prior to issuance of a building permit for the project, the developer shall submit for review and approval by the AIPP board a public art plan as set forth in subsection 2-487(c)(3). Following approval of the public art plan, the developer may contract with the artists. A non-city public agency may substitute its own art in public places program as long as the minimum one percent (1%) public art set-aside of the city program is provided. 
2.  City projects. The commissioning and placement of on-site artwork for qualifying city projects shall comply with applicable purchasing and procurement requirements of the city code and AIPP guidelines promulgated pursuant to section 2-486. 
b.  In-lieu fee. In lieu of on-site artwork, the developer may opt out by contributing one percent (1%) of the construction costs as defined in subsection 2-487(b) to the city AIPP fund to be used for purposes under subsection 2-487(e). The in-lieu fee shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit associated with said major development plan. 
(3)  On-site public art plan requirements and artwork budget. 
a.  The public art plan shall include the following: 
1.  Names and qualifications of the proposed professional artists as defined in subsection 2-487(b); 
2.  Draft contract with the proposed artists; 
3.  Description of proposed artwork, including overall length, width and height, materials, and method of construction; 
4.  Detailed drawings or photographs of the proposed artwork; 
5.  Detailed drawings of the specific public art sites showing: 
A.  Location of artwork(s); 
B.  Location of any electricity, landscaping, parking, plumbing or other amenities for artwork(s); 
C.  Location of plaque for artwork(s); 
6.  Statement on conservation and maintenance requirements; 
7.  Itemized construction costs of the qualifying construction or renovation project; 
8.  Itemized public art budget; and 
9.  Any other information as requested by staff or the board. 
b.  The AIPP board shall review the public art plan budget to be certain that the proposed budget meets the one percent set-aside requirement. The budget shall be adequate to cover all eligible costs for the design, fabrication, insurance, transportation, storage and installation of the proposed artwork, plus reasonable unforeseen circumstances. An itemized budget shall be prepared for the public art plan including the following eligible costs: 
1.  Artist costs for design and fabrication including materials, insurance, permits, taxes and site preparation; 
2.  Transportation fees; 
3.  Delivery and installation fees, including lighting, electricity and plumbing as necessary; 
4.  Pedestals, foundations or other structures to support the artwork; 
5.  Acknowledgement/identification plaque; and 
6.  Additional amenities as expressly related to public art installation. 
c.  Maintenance shall not be an eligible cost of the artwork budget. However, in-lieu fees collected pursuant to this section may be used for maintenance of artwork on public property as set forth in subsection 2-487(e) and AIPP guidelines. 
d.  The following criteria, at a minimum, shall be considered by the AIPP board in the review and approval of the public art plan: 
1.  Exceptional quality, enduring value and maintenance; 
2.  Appropriateness to the site and environmental conditions; 
3.  Character, environment and history of the city and the Florida Keys; 
4.  Accessibility to the public; 
5.  Whether the artwork too closely resembles a business logo or sign; and 
6.  Any other criteria set forth in the AIPP guidelines, as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Timing of cost calculation. To determine program applicability, all applications for major development plan shall include an estimate of construction costs. All construction costs to be used in determining the AIPP appropriation shall be calculated as of the date of building permit issuance, including any subsequent modifications of the major development plan. 
(e)  Accounting; use of funds. In-lieu funds collected under this provision, as well as any gifts, grants and donations made to the City of Key West for the purpose of acquiring and installing art in public places, shall be separately accounted for and may be used only for the following purposes: acquisition, administration, personnel, grants, matching funds, proposals, activities, programs, projects, commissions, installation, and maintenance of art in public places. 
(f)  Ownership and maintenance of on-site artwork. 
(1)  Ownership of all works of art incorporated into city construction or renovation projects shall be vested in the city, which shall retain title to each work of art. 
(2)  All contracts for artwork to be acquired or accepted for ownership by the city shall be reviewed and approved by the city's legal department. 
(3)  Ownership of all works of art incorporated into private or non-city public construction or renovation projects shall be vested in the property owner who shall retain title to each work of art. Art in private or non-city public construction or renovation projects shall be installed and maintained permanently on the property, and shall be the responsibility of the property owner and any and all successors in title. The artwork shall not be altered, modified, relocated or removed other than as provided herein without the prior approval of the AIPP board. 
(4)  Property owners shall be required to maintain the work of art in good condition in the approved location, as required by law or other applicable guidelines including, but not limited to, the city code enforcement rules, to ensure that proper maintenance is provided. 
(5)  The owner may request that the artwork be removed from the site due to hardship with the approval of the board. In addition, in the event there is a condition or accident that occurs outside the reasonable control of the owner, such as an act of God, resulting in damage or destruction of the artwork, then the artwork may be removed or replaced with the approval of the board. 
(g)  Compliance with historic district guidelines. All public artwork, including murals, shall adhere to all applicable portions of the city land development regulations, including, but not limited to, chapter 108 historic preservation. If necessary, a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed artwork shall be obtained prior to installation. 
(h)  Compliance with building codes. If required pursuant to chapter 14 of the City Code, a building permit for the proposed artwork shall be obtained prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 16-01, § 3, 1-5-2016) 
Secs. 2-488-2-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MAYOR'S REVOLVING LOAN FUND BOARD 

Sec. 2-516. - Created. 
    There is created a mayor's revolving loan fund board, which shall supersede any mayor's revolving loan fund committee of the city, and such committee is hereby abolished. 
(Code 1986, § 23.01) 
Sec. 2-517. - Composition, terms. 
    The mayor's revolving loan fund board shall consist of five volunteer city residents who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city commission. Appointments shall be made on a staggered basis for a term of three years, except that appointments to replace a vacating member shall be for the unexpired term of the member. 
(Code 1986, § 23.02) 
Sec. 2-518. - Organization and rules. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, the mayor's revolving loan fund board shall be governed by division 2 of this article; provided, however, that the board's regular meetings may be scheduled on a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly basis, as the board may determine. 
(Code 1986, § 23.03) 
Sec. 2-519. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor's revolving loan fund board shall review the city's use of certain funds obtained from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, which funds have been committed to a loan program to benefit citizens of the city as provided in this section. 
(b)  The board shall recommend to the city commission specific uses of the loan funds. The city manager may concur or object to the recommendation. Funds shall be disbursed only upon resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  The board shall recommend disbursement of available loan funds only as follows: 
(1)  To applicants who, by title or leasehold interest, have the right to occupy and improve certain residential or small business properties in the city which, because of the occupant's advanced age or limited income and resources, are in need of improvements reasonably beyond the ordinary financial capabilities of the applicant; 
(2)  In an amount which, together with other existing mortgages, liens, and encumbrances on the property, shall not exceed 50 percent of the appraised value of the applicant's fee or leasehold interest after rehabilitation, and which in no event shall exceed $50,000.00 per dwelling unit or business; 
(3)  For a term which shall not exceed 20 years, or three-fourths of the remaining economic life of the structure after rehabilitation, or the remaining leasehold period less than two years, whichever is less; 
(4)  Upon condition that the loan be repaid in monthly installments or through such other repayment plan as the board may specifically recommend; and 
(5)  Upon condition that the loan shall immediately be paid in full if the applicant ceases to occupy the property or transfers or assigns title or the leasehold interest therein; provided however, that a successor in interest meeting the requirements of subsection (c)(1) of this section may, by request and at the discretion of the city commission, assume the benefits and obligations of the loan. 
(d)  The board shall submit recommendations for securing the city's interest in the loan funds, which recommendations shall accompany each recommendation for disbursement. 
(e)  The board shall recommend such proportionate charges or fees as it finds necessary to recover to the city the costs of the loan program described in this division. 
(f)  The board shall review all aspects of the loan program provided by ordinance, including the selection of applicants; the disbursement, security, repayment and recovery of funds; and reasonably related procedures and fiscal results and shall present to the city commission such further recommendations as are consistent with the goals of the program as provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 23.04; Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-520. - Loan funds. 
(a)  Loans made pursuant to this division shall: 
(1)  Bear interest on the outstanding balance at three percent per annum for residential use, and six percent for business use; 
(2)  Be made in the name of the city to persons having title or leasehold interests in no more than two dwelling units or one business on the parcel which is the subject property of the loan; 
(3)  Meet the requirements of section 2-519(c), provided that the city commission may, as a legislative body, accept, reject, or vary from recommendations of the board and, for reasons which shall be stated upon the city commission record, may vary from the criteria set forth in section 2-519(c) and subsection (a)(2) of this section; and 
(4)  Be funds available from the monies formerly established as the mayor's revolving loan fund or the Key West Mayor's Rehabilitation Loan Fund, which previous funds are superseded and their contractual rights and obligations assumed. 
(b)  The city manager, on an annual basis, shall report to the city commission the amount of funds under contractual obligation pursuant to this section or previously obligated under the funds referenced in section 2-520(a)(4). He shall report the amount currently available for loans as provided in this division and shall indicate whether the funds are encumbered by legal constraints on use. If any exceptional constraints have expired, such that the monies are eligible for alternate or general fund use, he shall indicate his recommendation as to use of the funds. 
(Code 1986, § 23.05) 
Secs. 2-521-2-545. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - KEY WEST BIGHT MANAGEMENT DISTRICT BOARD 

Sec. 2-546. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Banking means an executive officer of a banking institution. 
    Board means the appointed members of the seven-member Key West Bight Management District. 
    Chamber of Commerce means a member of the Chamber of Commerce endorsed by its board. 
    Historic preservation means a board member or a past board member or current or former executive director of any group or organization whose purpose is primarily to study, preserve, protect or encourage historic preservation in the city. 
    Key West Bight Management District means the 8.8 acres of real property and the submerged baybottom land under lease from the trustees of the internal improvement trust fund owned or leased by the city at Key West Bight, and further described in the deed recorded at OR Book 1240, pages 1109 through 1133 and OR Book 1240, pages 1134 through 1154, of the county records. 
    Legal means a person having graduated from an accredited law school in good standing with the state bar or the bar of another state. 
    Manager means any person whether natural or corporate who has the following contractual duty, which includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Management of the city-owned Key West Bight real property, including the marina; 
(2)  Preparation of an annual budget and business plan; 
(3)  Negotiation of lease terms with existing tenants and setting market rental amounts, subject to board approval; 
(4)  Collection of rental payments and remitting them to the city; 
(5)  The development of rules and regulations for the marina and uplands; and 
(6)  Any other duties or responsibilities assumed by the manager by contractual agreement. 
    Maritime means a person with professional maritime experience. 
    Real estate means a person with experience in property management engaged as a licensed real estate broker, or state-licensed real estate appraiser. 
    Tenant means any person whether corporate or natural having the legal right to occupy the city property at Key West Bight regardless of status as a tenant or subtenant of the property as of May 24, 1993. 
(Code 1986, § 24.01; Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-547. - Findings; purpose. 
    The city commission finds that the management, preservation, and redevelopment of the Key West Bight property owned by the city is a public purpose, and further finds that the public purpose can be best achieved by creating the Key West Bight Management District Board having the power and duty to oversee the management, preservation and development of the city's property at Key West Bight for the best interest of the city and its citizens. 
(Code 1986, § 24.02(a)) 
Sec. 2-548. - Created; composition. 
    The city commission creates the Key West Bight Management District Board, referred to as the "board," and charges the board to use the power and authority conferred upon it by this Code to further the purposes expressed in this division. The board shall consist of a seven-member board appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 24.02(b)) 
Sec. 2-549. - Composition; appointments; terms. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven members who shall reside in the city or who shall have a business or profession located in the city and reside in the lower keys, south of the seven-mile bridge, and who shall be appointed by vote of the city commission. 
(b)  The mayor shall present a slate of nominees to the city commission with not less than two nor more than three nominees for each discipline to be represented. The nominee from each discipline receiving the highest number of votes shall be appointed. At least one person with a demonstrated interest in community service from each of the following disciplines shall be represented on the board: legal, banking, historic preservation, maritime, real estate, Chamber of Commerce. Additionally, one member of the board shall be an individual nominated by the Key West Bight Preservation Association Inc. (KWBPA). The KWBPA shall provide a list of two nominees to the city commission, from which the commission shall appoint one individual to the board. Any officer or director of the KWBPA shall be excluded from consideration as a member or nominee to the board. 
    If no applicant is reasonably available to represent a discipline, the mayor may nominate a person from outside of the discipline. 
(c)  Appointments shall be made on a staggered basis, and each appointment shall be for a term of four years. However, appointments to replace a vacating member shall be for the unexpired term of the member. 
(d)  Any member may be removed by the city commission for cause, which shall include but not be limited to a violation of law relating to the member's office. 
(e)  The Key West Bight Neighborhood Association shall appoint one of its members to serve as a non-voting liaison to the KWBMDB. 
(Code 1986, § 24.04; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 1-2-2002; Ord. No. 08-15, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 2-550. - Compensation. 
    All members of the board shall serve without compensation but, as authorized by the city commission, may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
(Code 1986, § 24.04) 
Sec. 2-551. - Staff. 
    The city manager shall ensure that sufficient secretarial support staff is provided to the board for the execution of its duties and in order to record and transcribe in summary form, subject to board approval, the minutes of all board meetings. The city attorney may serve as legal counsel to the board. 
(Code 1986, § 24.05) 
Sec. 2-552. - Organization and rules. 
(a)  Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)  From among its members the board biannually shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
(c)  The board shall attempt to convene on a regularly scheduled basis at least once each month, and notice of such meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days in advance thereof. All meetings shall be open to the public, and an agenda for each regular meeting shall be available to the public at city hall 48 hours in advance thereof. 
(d)  Special meetings may be called on not less than 24 hours' notice by the chairperson or by written notice signed by four voting members. 
(e)  If a member is absent from two of three consecutive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the board may declare the member's office vacant. 
(Code 1986, § 24.06(a)-(d), (f)) 
Sec. 2-553. - Revenues and budgeting. 
(a)  Not less than 90 days prior to the end of each fiscal year of the Key West Bight Management District, which shall be the same fiscal year as that of the city, the board shall adopt by resolution its proposed budget for the following fiscal year and submit the proposed budget to the city commission. Such proposed budget shall include all anticipated expenditures of the district for all of its projects during the ensuing fiscal year, including operating expenses, capital outlays, materials, labor, equipment, supplies, payments of principal and interest on all outstanding revenue bonds, and sinking fund and reserve requirements, and payment of excess funds into the city's general revenue fund. Such proposed budget shall provide for expenditures only to the extent of funds legally available to the district for such purposes and reasonably anticipated revenues of the district for the ensuing fiscal year from established sources, based upon past experience and reasonable projections thereof, and from new projects or new sources of income of the district. The city commission shall conduct a public hearing with respect thereto and, in that event, the chairperson or his designee and manager of the district shall be present at such public hearing. Following the public hearing by the city commission, the board, at any regular or special meeting prior to the commencement of the next fiscal year, shall adopt by resolution its budget for the ensuing year subject to the same constraints as to the amount of expenditures as set forth in this subsection with respect to the proposed budget of the district. Once adopted, the budget shall not be amended except by request by the district to the city commission and except by giving ten days written notice of the proposed amendment to the city commission and giving public notice of the district's intention to consider amending its budget, which notice shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days prior to the meeting of the city commission at which such proposed amendment is to be finally considered. 
(b)  Within 90 days following the close of each fiscal year, the board shall make a comprehensive report of its operations of each project under its control during the preceding fiscal year, including all matters relating to rates; charges; revenues; expenses of maintenance, repair and operation and of replacements and extensions; principal and interest retirement; and the status of all funds. Copies of such annual reports shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 24.07) 
Sec. 2-554. - Powers and duties; responsibility of city. 
(a)  The board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Oversee the operation and development of an expanded public marina on the Key West Bight property. 
(2)  Facilitate and approve applications for all required permits necessary for redevelopment and/or expansion of the uplands property and marina. 
(3)  Make application to the trustees of the internal improvement trust fund for renewal of all baybottom lease rights and apply for those deemed necessary to carry out marina expansion plans. 
(4)  Identify and recommend grant applications for approval by the city commission. 
(5)  Review and approve the annual budget and business plan prepared by the manager prior to submission for approval or disapproval by the city commission, without line item veto. 
(6)  Approve rental rates and lease terms negotiated by the manager for marina and upland tenants at Key West Bight; all leases shall be consistent with the Charter, this Code and marina bond covenants. 
(7)  Review all conflicts between the manager and tenants; all decisions of the board regarding the terms and management of rental property and administration of leases shall be final. 
(8)  Consider for review and comment only, all matters within the Key West Bight subject to review and/or approval by the community redevelopment agency. 
(b)  On the following matters the board shall submit ordinances and resolutions to the city commission, which shall retain final approval authority on those ordinances and resolutions coming before it: 
(1)  The Key West Bight Management District budget and annual business plan. 
(2)  Architectural concept, design or plans of redevelopment at Key West Bight. 
(3)  Acquisition and/or sale of real property at Key West Bight. 
(4)  The expenditure of funds in excess of $20,000.00. 
(5)  Transfers of funds from one budget category to another in excess of $20,000.00. 
(c)  The city commission shall request voter approval on matters of pledging commercial rents and marina revenues for the financing of improvements, expansion or property acquisition at or around the Key West Bight. The city commission shall have final review over any matter which may affect the tax exempt status of the marina/conservation bond. 
(d)  The city by and through its city manager shall have day-to-day responsibility for the operation of the Key West Bight. The manager of the Key West Bight shall be a city employee, subject to hiring, supervision and termination by the city manager. Additionally, the city manager shall prescribe the duties of the manager upon the advice and consent of the board. 
(e)  In addition to the requirement contained in subsection 2-554(b)(4) above, personal property purchasing and procurement pertaining to the Key West Bight shall be governed by the requirements contained in sections 2-766 through 2-845 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 24.03; Ord. No. 15-08, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 2-555. - Sunset. 
    The Key West Bight Management District and the board created in this division shall not be disbanded or repealed prior to the retirement or defeasance of the 1992 Key West Bight Marina Conservation Bond. 
(Code 1986, § 24.08) 
Sec. 2-556. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to be in conflict with the Charter, this Code or marina bond covenants. 
(Code 1986, § 24.09) 
Secs. 2-557-2-599. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - BAHAMA VILLAGE REDEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-600. - Bahama Village Redevelopment Advisory Committee. 
    There is hereby established the Bahama Village Redevelopment Advisory Committee. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 2-601. - Composition; term; compensation. 
(a)  The committee shall be composed of seven members. Each member shall either reside within the boundary of the district entitled to receive trust funds (Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Area), or be an active member of a social, recreational, religious or similar organization located within such district. An individual not residing within the district, but otherwise qualifying for membership based upon his or her organizational participation, must provide a letter of support from the head of such group. The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint a member to the committee, which appointment shall not be subject to approval by the city commission. The city commission shall strive to obtain broad representation among the members by appointing persons of different incomes, housing circumstances and life and work experiences. 
(b)  The term of the committee member shall be equal and shall run parallel to that of the appointing commission member. The committee member's term shall end at the conclusion of the commission member's term; a reelected commission member may reappoint a committee member. 
(c)  The members of the committee shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 2, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 2-602. - Organization. 
(a)  The committee shall be subject to the uniform procedures for advisory boards, section 2-281 through and including 2-289. 
(b)  The city manager shall ensure that the committee is adequately staffed. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-285, the committee shall meet at least on a quarterly basis and, at the committee's option, more frequently. 
(d)  At least once per quarter, the committee shall transmit to the city commission a written report. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 3, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 2-603. - Duties. 
    The mission and duties of the committee are as follows: 
(a)  To recommend to the Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) projects best suited for the use of redevelopment trust funds. 
(b)  To recommend to the city commission changes to the Bahama Village Redevelopment Plan and city ordinances that would promote the purposes of F.S. § 163.387, and those which would improve the process for reviewing requests for funding. 
(c)  To review applications from individuals and organizations eligible to receive TIF funds and recommend to the CRA those projects they determine by majority vote to deserve consideration by the CRA. Except in circumstances involving a justifiable emergency and those projects under taken prior to the enactment of this ordinance preference should be given to those projects with a contemplated plan of action to ensure the most appropriate and fiscally responsible use of taxpayer funds, rather than to projects seeking reimbursement. 
(d)  To recommend to the Naval Properties Local Redevelopment Authority (LRA) the use of land owned by the LRA, but falling within the boundaries of the CRA, for the benefit of the Bahama Village Community Redevelopment Area. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 4, 11-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-16, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 2-604. - Sunset. 
    The Bahama Village Redevelopment Advisory Committee sunsets upon expiration of trust fund financing. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 2-605. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE COMPLIANCE[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 16-06, adopted May 17, 2016, changed the title of this article from code enforcement to code compliance. 
State Law reference- Local government code enforcement act, F.S. § 162.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-606-2-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL MAGISTRATE PROCEDURE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 16-06, adopted May 17, 2016, changed the title of division 2 from special master procedure to special magistrate procedure. 
State Law reference- Authority, F.S. § 162.03. 

Sec. 2-631. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code inspector means any authorized city agent or employee whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
    Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found through a code compliance special magistrate or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(a)(6); Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 5-17-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.04. 
Sec. 2-632. - Findings and purpose. 
    The city commission has determined that full enforcement of the city codes and ordinances is essential to ensuring the public health, safety and welfare. To accomplish this purpose, the city commission creates the position of code compliance special magistrate for the hearing of all code compliance cases. 
(Code 1986, § 13.01; Ord. No. 16-06, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 2-633. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this division to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating the special magistrate with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in the city where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 3, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.02. 
Sec. 2-634. - Special magistrate. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint one or more special magistrates to hear code compliance cases. The city commission may appoint the number of special magistrates that the city commission determines is necessary. All special magistrates shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed from the position with or without cause by a majority vote of the city commission. The terms and conditions of a special magistrate's appointment, including but not limited to fees and length of the term of appointment, shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  All persons appointed as code compliance special magistrates must have been members of the state bar for five years and have experience either in a judicial or special magistrate capacity or in local government or land use law. A code compliance special magistrate may not hold any other appointive or elective office while serving as special magistrate. 
(c)  The code compliance special magistrate is granted the same powers, duties and authority under F.S. ch. 162, including the authority to impose fines and liens and to order foreclosures of liens as that granted by statute or ordinance to a code compliance board and its chairperson. 
(d)  The special magistrate may also determine a repeat violation, as set forth in section 2-631, and impose fines accordingly where the original finding of violation was made by the code compliance special magistrate. 
(Code 1986, § 13.02; Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 2-635. - Powers and duties of special magistrate. 
    The special magistrate shall have the power to: 
(1)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the police department. 
(2)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(3)  Take testimony under oath. 
(4)  Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Code 1986, § 13.04(a); Ord. No. 16-06, § 5, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.08. 
Sec. 2-636. - Staff support and legal counsel to code compliance. 
(a)  The city manager shall provide appropriate staff support to enable the special magistrate to fulfill his duties as provided in this division. 
(b)  The city attorney's office shall provide legal counsel to city code compliance staff. 
(Code 1986, § 13.04(e)(f); Ord. No. 16-06, § 6, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. 16-20, § 1, 9-20-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-20, § 1, adopted September 20, 2016, amended § 2-636 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-636 was titled "Staff support and legal counsel to special magistrate." 
Sec. 2-637. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes. The special magistrate shall not have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of the codes is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the special magistrate and request a hearing. The special magistrate, through clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-638 to the violator. At the option of the special magistrate, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in section 2-638. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the special magistrate, even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the special magistrate and request a hearing. The special magistrate, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice pursuant to section 2-638. The case may be presented to the special magistrate even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the special magistrate hearing, and the notice shall so state. If the repeat violation has been corrected, the special magistrate retains the right to schedule a hearing to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his rights to this hearing and pay the costs as determined by the special magistrate. 
(d)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the special magistrate and request a hearing. 
(e)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before the special magistrate or court transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code compliance proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code compliance proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code compliance official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
(f)  A failure to make the disclosures described in subsections (e)(1), (2), and (3) of this section before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(a)(2); Ord. No. 16-06, § 6, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.06. 
Sec. 2-638. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this division shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, and at the option of the local government return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this subsection to the owner of the property in question to the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices or to the address listed in the county property appraiser's database. The local government may also provide an additional notice to any other address it may find for the property owner. For property owned by a corporation, notices may be provided by certified mail to the registered agent of the corporation. If any notice sent by certified mail is not signed as received within 30 days after the postmarked date of mailing, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city commission; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, at the option of the special magistrate, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the special magistrate is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(2)  In lieu of publication as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the primary city office. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this division have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Code 1986, § 13.07; Ord. No. 16-06, § 8, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.12. 
Sec. 2-639. - Presentation of city's case. 
    Each case before the special magistrate may, at the option of the administrative staff, be presented by either the office of the city attorney or by a member of the city administrative staff. The attorney representing the city code compliance staff shall not serve both as legal advisor to the special magistrate and as presenter of cases before the special magistrate. 
(Code 1986, § 13.04(b); Ord. No. 16-06, § 9, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. 16-20, § 2, 9-20-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. §§ 162.05(5), 162.07(2). 
Sec. 2-640. - Hearing; testimony. 
    The special magistrate shall hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and minutes shall be taken pursuant to F.S. § 286.011(2). The special magistrate shall take testimony from the code inspector and the alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall govern the proceedings. 
(Code 1986, § 13.04(c); Ord. No. 16-06, § 10, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.07(3). 
Sec. 2-641. - Findings and order. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special magistrate shall issue findings of fact based on the evidence of the record and conclusions of law and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this division. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in section 2-643, the cost of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by such date. 
(b)  A certified copy of such order shall be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator, and if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the special magistrate shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Code 1986, § 13.04(d); Ord. No. 16-06, § 11, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.07(4). 
Sec. 2-642. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed pursuant to F.S. § 162.11. 
(Code 1986, § 13.05; Ord. No. 16-06, § 12, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.11. 
Sec. 2-643. - Fine for noncompliance or repeat violation; costs of repair. 
    The special magistrate, upon notification by the code inspector that a previous order has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine for each day the violation continues past the date set by the special magistrate for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation described in section 2-637(d), the special magistrate shall notify the city commission, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this division. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city commission to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city commission for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this article, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. If, after due notice and hearing, the special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may order the violator to pay a fine as specified in section 2-644. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(b); Ord. No. 16-06, § 13, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09(1). 
Sec. 2-644. - Maximum amount of fines. 
    A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall not exceed $250.00 per day, per violation for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day, per violations for a repeat violation and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to section 2-643. However, if the special magistrate finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(c); Ord. No. 16-06, § 14, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09(2)(a). 
Sec. 2-645. - Determination of fines; reduction of fines; additional fees. 
(a)  In determining the amount of any fine, if any, under this division, the special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation, including, but not limited to, the impact of the violation on life, health or safety issues; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(b)  The special magistrate may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this division pursuant to section 2-682. 
(c)  In addition to such fines, the special magistrate may impose all costs incurred by the city in enforcing its codes against a violator and all costs of repairs incurred by the city in achieving compliance. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(d), (e); Ord. No. 16-06, § 15, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09(2)(b), (c), (d). 
Sec. 2-646. - Lien; enforcement of order. 
(a)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine pursuant to this division may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violator exists or, if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of the state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. Payment of all fines and costs shall be made payable to the City of Key West within 30 days of issuance of the findings and order of the code compliance special magistrate unless a finding of good cause is made by the special magistrate to provide for a longer payment period not to exceed 90 days. Upon expiration of 30 days after issuance of the findings and order by the special magistrate, city staff shall institute lien procedures in accordance with F.S. § 162.09. 
(c)  A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this division runs in favor of the city commission, and the city commission may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this division. 
(d)  After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the special magistrate may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest. No lien created pursuant to this division may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under article X, section 4 of the state constitution. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(f); Ord. No. 09-17, § 1, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 16-06, § 16, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09(3). 
Sec. 2-647. - Continuation of lien; foreclosure. 
    No lien provided for under this division shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced. In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the foreclosure. The city commission shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Code 1986, § 13.06(f)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.11. 
Secs. 2-648-2-675. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITATION PROCEDURE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Citation procedure, F.S. § 162.21. 

Sec. 2-676. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code compliance officer means any designated city employee or agent whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city, including, but not limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, and fire safety inspectors; provided, however, nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize any person designated as a code compliance officer to perform any functions or duties of a law enforcement officer other than as specified in this division. A code compliance officer shall not make physical arrests or take any person into custody and, except for fire inspectors, shall be exempt from requirements relating to the special risk class of the state retirement system, bonding, and the criminal justice standards and training commission, as defined and required by general law. Designation as a code compliance officer does not subject a person to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085-943.255. Nothing in this division amends, alters, or contravenes the provisions of any state-administered retirement system or any state-supported retirement system established by general law. 
    Law enforcement officer means any person who is elected, appointed, or employed full time by any municipality or the state or any political subdivision thereof; who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests; and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. 
(Code 1986, § 13.08; Ord. No. 16-06, § 17, 5-17-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(1), (2). 
Sec. 2-677. - Violation declared civil infraction. 
    It is declared that, subject to the following exceptions, a violation of a duly enacted city code or ordinance is a civil infraction. All such codes and ordinances may be enforced by the citation procedure set forth in this division, except where prohibited by law and with the following additional exceptions: 
(1)  Enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued. For purposes of this division, the term "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73. 
(2)  Enforcement of ordinances enforceable pursuant to general law or ordinance only through criminal prosecution. 
(Code 1986, § 13.09) 
Sec. 2-678. - Authority to issue citations. 
    Any code compliance officer is empowered to issue citations to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted city code provision or ordinance. All city code provisions and ordinances may, at the election of the code compliance officer, be enforced by this division by means of citation to the county court, except where expressly prohibited by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 13.10; Ord. No. 16-06, § 18, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-679. - Violations; procedure. 
(a)  Prior to issuing a citation pursuant to this division, a code compliance officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code provision or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code compliance officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code compliance officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code compliance officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation, and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat violation is found or if the code compliance officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(b)  A code compliance officer shall issue a citation in a form prescribed by the city containing the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the code compliance officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(c)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code compliance officer shall deposit the original and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
(d)  This section is an additional and supplemental means of enforcing those city codes or ordinances referred to in section 2-677. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other lawful means. 
(Code 1986, § 13.11; Ord. No. 16-06, § 19, 5-17-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(3), (4). 
Sec. 2-680. - Civil penalty. 
    A violation of a city code or ordinance in which the code compliance officer has elected to issue a civil citation pursuant to this division shall result in assessment of a civil penalty of $100.00 if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. If the person cited fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation, and in such case judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty, not to exceed $500.00. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code compliance officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(Code 1986, § 13.10; Ord. No. 16-06, § 20, 5-17-2016) 
DIVISION 4. - CODE COMPLIANCE MITIGATION; JURISDICTION 

Sec. 2-681. - Jurisdiction of the code compliance special magistrate. 
    The code compliance special magistrate shall have jurisdiction to hear all requests for mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 09-17, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 2-682. - Mitigation guidelines; court costs. 
(a)  The special magistrate shall not consider any mitigation request until compliance is achieved by the applicant. If compliance is not possible, the special magistrate shall make specific written findings to that effect. 
(b)  The special magistrate shall consider the amount of time in which compliance was achieved by the applicant as follows: 
(1)  If compliance was achieved within 60 days of the imposition of the daily fine, the fine shall not be mitigated or discounted by more than 90 percent. 
(2)  If compliance is achieved within 61 to 120 days of the imposition of the daily fine, the fine shall not be mitigated or discounted by more than 50 percent. 
(3)  If compliance is achieved within 121 to 180 days of the imposition of the daily fine, the fine shall not be mitigated or discounted by more than 20 percent. 
(4)  No mitigation shall be considered if compliance was achieved more than 180 days from the imposition of the daily fine. 
(c)  The special magistrate may consider relevant aggravating factors frustrating compliance in consideration of subsection (b) above. In the event the special magistrate deviates from the guidelines specified in this section, specific written findings shall be entered into the record to that effect. 
(d)  Other factors that may be considered by the special magistrate include: 
(1)  Severity of the underlying violation; 
(2)  Effect the violation has had on the neighbors and neighborhood. 
(e)  The special magistrate shall impose court costs in every case brought to hearing unless it can be demonstrated by the violator that compliance was achieved at a reasonable time prior to hearing and reasonable efforts were made on behalf of the violator to inform the code compliance officer. 
(Ord. No. 09-17, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Secs. 2-683-2-705. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL MATTERS[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); taxation, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, F.S. § 166.101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-706. - Service fee for dishonored check. 
    Any person who causes delivery of any check, draft, or other order for payment to the city, which check, draft, or order is dishonored, shall forthwith pay to the city a service fee up to the maximum amount provided in F.S. § 832.08(5) or five percent of the face amount of the check, draft, or order, whichever is greater. This service fee shall be in addition to any other monies owed and shall be in addition to all other rights of the city and to all other penalties imposed by law. 
(Code 1986, § 1.29) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to adopt provisions, F.S. § 166.251. 
Sec. 2-707. - Move-in assistance program. 
(a)  Purpose. There is hereby established the "move-in assistance program" whose purpose is to assist eligible persons to obtain loans in order to become renters of residential housing in Key West. The community development office of the Key West Housing Authority shall administer this program. It shall implement default and collection standards and underwriting standards. 
(b)  Eligibility requirements. The community development office shall develop a form of application. A person eligible for the move-in assistance program shall have established and provide proof of both residency and employment in Monroe County for not less than 12 consecutive months prior to application. The community development office shall obtain a credit report on all applicants and shall deny an application when the credit rating is less than 650 (as defined by the banking industry), unless the applicant can demonstrate extenuating circumstances acceptable to the community development office. 
(c)  Income eligibility. Income eligibility for the move-in assistance program shall be as provided in the Key West affordable housing ordinance, section 122-1466 et seq. 
(d)  Eligible expenses. The following are the eligible expenses for the move-in assistance program: last month rental payments, security deposits, and water, electric and gas utility deposits. 
(e)  The move-in assistance program shall be administered on a preapproval basis. After a person is preapproved as eligible, he or she may submit a loan request to the community development office. An authorized officer of the community development office shall issue a check payable only to a landlord or utility, as applicable. Prior to the expenditure of program funds, the loan must have the additional approval of the executive director of the Housing Authority. 
(f)  Loans; promissory notes. The maximum amount of any loan under the move-in assistance program shall be $3,500.00. The eligible person shall execute a promissory note for the repayment of the loan. Repayment shall be for a period of not more than three years, bearing interest at the rate of three percent per annum; provided, however, that there shall be no interest charged on any loan whose repayment period is for one year or less. 
(g)  In the event a landlord in receipt of move-in assistance program funds fails to comply with its obligations under chapter 83 of the Florida Statutes, the city of Key West shall have all rights of the tenant in obtaining restitution and/or damages. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 9-21-2004) 
Sec. 2-708. - Homebuyers assistance program. 
(a)  Purpose. There is hereby established the "homebuyers assistance program" whose purpose is to assist eligible workforce persons to obtain loans in order to become homeowners of residential housing. The community development office through the housing authority of the City of Key West shall administer this program. It shall implement underwriting standards and a local housing assistance plan for commission approval. 
(b)  Eligibility requirements. The community development office shall develop a form of application. Eligibility for the homebuyers assistance program shall be pursuant to the city's workforce housing ordinance, section 122-1466 et seq., and the city's adopted local housing assistance plan. 
(c)  [Administration of program.] The homebuyers assistance program shall be administered on a preapproval basis. After a person is preapproved as eligible, he or she will be issued an award letter. An authorized officer of the community development office shall issue a check payable to a closing agent. Prior to the expenditure of program funds, the loan must have the additional approval of the executive director of the housing authority. 
(d)  Loans; promissory notes and mortgage. The maximum amount of any loan under the homebuyers assistance program shall be $20,000.00. The eligible person shall execute a promissory note and mortgage for the repayment of the loan. 
(Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Secs. 2-709-2-735. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Procedure for adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065. 

Sec. 2-736. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Account means a distinct unit used to measure financial activity; also referred to as a "line item." 
    Allocation means an amount of money contained in an account. 
    Balanced budget means the financial condition of the city when revenues equal expenses. 
    Carry forward means the process of moving an approved budgeted obligation (an encumbrance) from one fiscal year to the next to ensure operating continuity. 
    Category means a distinct series of accounts organized generically to facilitate analysis. Categories are also referred to as "object classifications" in the Uniform Accounting System Manual as published by the state. 
    Change means the process of increasing, decreasing or transferring an approved budget allocation. 
    Encumbrance means the commitment of budget allocations for authorized purposes. 
    Expenditure means an expense of the city as recorded by fund and account. 
    Fiscal year means the period beginning October 1 of a calendar year and ending September 30 of the following year. 
    Fund means that series of accounts distinctly organized and recorded, accounted to reflect the operations of an organizational entity. 
    Fund balance means the difference between assets and liabilities. 
    Line item means a distinct unit used to measure financial activity; also referred to as an "account." 
    Revenue means income to the city as recorded by fund and account. 
(Code 1986, § 1.26) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-737. - Organization. 
(a)  The city shall manage its financial resources by means of a budget. The budget shall be organized to reflect the various activities of the municipal government and shall adhere to the Uniform Accounting System Manual of the state. 
(b)  Funds may be established or deleted from time to time by the city manager as he deems necessary and proper. 
(c)  Categories shall consist of the following: revenue, personnel, operating, capital outlay, debt service, grants, and other (the latter to include transfers and reserves.) The city manager, by resolution that is attached to Ordinance No. 98-3 may make changes to categories. 
(Code 1986, § 1.261) 
Sec. 2-738. - Process. 
(a)  City budgets shall be prepared, reviewed and approved in accordance with statutory requirements, including F.S. ch. 200 regarding millage determinations. The city manager shall prepare each budget on a fiscal-year basis. He shall prepare and present to the city commission a balanced budget. 
(b)  The city commission shall review a budget at public workshops and at regular meetings as provided by F.S. § 200.065. The city commission shall adopt the budget by resolution. The ad valorem tax rate shall be adopted by ordinance. Approved budgetary allocations are valid for the fiscal year and will lapse at the conclusion of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1986, § 1.262; Ord. No. 09-18, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 2-739. - Management. 
(a)  The city manager shall cause the budget to be published. 
(b)  The city manager may effect transfers within a category or within a fund without limit, provided that the fund remains in balance. The city manager may effect transfers among categories not to exceed $20,000.00, provided that the fund remains in balance. Transfers among categories in excess of $20,000.00 must be approved by the city commission. The city manager may effect increases to a fund in an amount not to exceed $20,000.00. Increases in excess of $20,000.00 must be approved by the city commission. 
(c)  The city manager shall review actual performance as against the budget on a monthly basis and provide the city commission with a report on budgetary performance after six months of the fiscal year. 
(d)  At the close of the fiscal year, the city manager shall provide a report on budgetary performance to the city commission. He shall also review encumbrances and carry forwards and effect the necessary budgetary changes to the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1986, § 1.263) 
Secs. 2-740-2-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL PROPERTY PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-766. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addenda means written or graphic instruments issued prior to the opening of bids which clarify, correct or change the bidding documents or the contract documents. 
    Brand name or equal specifications means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance or other salient characteristics needed to meet the city's requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogs. 
    Commodities means all personal property, including but not limited to commodities, goods, equipment, material and printing, purchased, leased or otherwise contracted for by the city. 
    Competitive bids and competitive offers mean the solicitation of bids or offers submitted by responsive and qualified bidders or offerors. 
    Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property. 
    Contractor means any person or business having a contract with the city. 
    Contractual services means the rendering by a contractor of its time and effort rather than the furnishing of specific commodities, materials, goods, equipment and other personal property. The term applies only to those services rendered by individuals and firms who are independent contractors. 
    Invitation to bid means a written solicitation for competitive sealed bids. 
    Local preference means a preference given to responsive and responsible bidders meeting the definition of local business pursuant to section 2-798 which permits the award of a bid to a qualified local bidder if within five percent of the lowest bid submitted. 
    Obsolete property means any personal property belonging to the city which may no longer be used for its intended purpose, which has completed its useful life cycle, or whose use has become economically impracticable. 
    Purchasing agent means the principal, public purchasing official for the city who is responsible for the procurement of commodities and contractual services as well as the management and disposal of commodities. 
    Request for proposals means a written solicitation for sealed proposals with the title, date and hour of the public opening designated. 
    Request for qualification means a written solicitation for sealed statements of qualification to be used when the city is seeking professional services to be provided on an ongoing basis. 
    Responsible bidder and responsible offeror mean the person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and the tenacity, perseverance, integrity, experience, ability, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, financial resources and credit which will give a reasonable expectation of good faith performance. 
    Responsive bidder and responsive offeror mean a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid or request for proposals. 
    Sole source means the only known vendor or the only responsible vendor capable of providing commodities or contractual services to the city. 
    Surplus property means any personal property belonging to the city which is capable of being used but is in excess of the normal operating requirements of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 1.264(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-767. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division, to be known as the purchasing and procurement ordinance, is to: 
(1)  Provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in purchasing by the city; 
(2)  Maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement; and 
(3)  Provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Code 1986, § 1.264(a)) 
Sec. 2-768. - Request for qualification. 
    For the purposes of this division, a statement of qualification shall be used to evaluate the educational training and experience of respondents to the request. In all other respects, a request for qualification shall be treated in the same manner as a request for proposals. 
(Code 1986, § 1.264(b)) 
Sec. 2-769. - Request for proposals. 
    For the purposes of this division, a request for proposals may be used when the city is incapable of specifically defining the scope of work for which the commodities or contractual service are required and when the city is requesting that a qualified offeror propose commodities or contractual services to meet the specifications of the solicitation document. A request for proposals shall include but is not limited to general information, functional or general specifications, statement of work, proposal instruction and evaluation criteria. All requests for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and any other evaluation criteria. The city may engage in competitive negotiations with responsible offerors determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for awards for the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of and conformance to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offer. 
(Code 1986, § 1.264(b)) 
Sec. 2-770. - Invitation to bid. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, an invitation to bid shall be a written solicitation for competitive sealed bids with the title, date and hour of the public bid opening designated therein and specifically defining the commodities or contractual services for which bids are sought. 
(b)  The invitation to bid shall be used when the city is capable of specifically defining the scope of work for which a contractual service is required or when the city is capable of establishing precise specifications defining the actual commodities required. 
(c)  The invitation to bid shall include an instruction to bidders; plans, drawings and specifications, if any; bid form; and other required forms and documents to be submitted with the bid. 
(Code 1986, § 1.264(b)) 
Sec. 2-771. - Authority of purchasing agent. 
    Under this division, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Draft and promulgate purchasing procedures subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(2)  Issue quotations, both verbal and written, and solicit invitations to bid and requests for proposals after receipt of evidence of city commission general or specific appropriation of funds to make such expenditure. 
(3)  Purchase commodities and contractual services and award contracts and execute agreements for small purchases without prior approval of the city commission as follows: 
a.  Small purchases. Any commodities purchase or contract not exceeding $20,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section; provided that a purchase order has been obtained. Contracts for construction of municipal public works shall be made in accordance with applicable state laws including F.S. § 180.24, as amended from time to time. Contracts or other purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
1.  Small purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated value is $500.00 or less may be made upon receipt of one documented telephone quote. Two documented phone quotes shall be required for certain commodities when the purchasing agent has agreed with local vendor requests for competitive pricing. The purchasing agent shall maintain a list of such commodities. 
2.  Small purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated value is between $500.01 and $1,000.00 may be made upon receipt of not less than two documented quotes, solicited either by telephone, facsimile, or direct mail. In order to determine a fair and reasonable price, additional quotes may be solicited. The purchasing agent shall adopt, implement and enforce operational procedures for making such small purchases. Such operational procedures shall provide for the goods, commodities, equipment, materials and services being purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended and facilitate an audit of the small purchase made. Such records shall include the name of the business, contact person, dates of inquiry, nature and description of service for which inquiry is being made and amounts quoted with exactly what will be provided for such amount. When fewer than two quotes are available, the department head requesting the purchase must provide written approval to be reviewed and authorized by the purchasing agent and the director of finance. 
3.  Small purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated value is between $1,000.01 and $10,000.00 may be made upon receipt of not less than three quotes, solicited either by facsimile or direct mail. In order to determine a fair and reasonable price, additional quotes may be solicited. The purchasing agent shall adopt, implement and enforce operational procedures for making such small purchases. Such operational procedures shall provide for the goods, commodities, equipment, materials and services being purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended and facilitate an audit of the small purchase made. Such records shall include the name of the business, contact person, dates of inquiry, nature and description of service for which inquiry is being made and amounts quoted with exactly what will be provided for such amount. When fewer than three quotes are available, the department head requesting the purchase must provide written approval to be reviewed and authorized by the city manager. 
4.  Small purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated value is in excess of $10,000.00 but not more than $20,000.00 may be made after a minimum of three different sources of supply have been solicited by a formal written request for quotations. The purchasing agent shall solicit quotes via telephone, followed by direct mail or facsimile, or through a direct mail request to prospective vendors. The names of the businesses submitting quotes and the date and amount of each quote shall be recorded and maintained as public record. The city manager shall approve all purchases made under this subsection and may authorize any deviation from the requirements of this subsection if three quotes are not reasonably available. 
b.  All purchases and awards of contracts in excess of $20,000.00 must be competitively bid per sections 2-796 and 2-826 through 2-844. 
c.  The city manager shall have the authority to sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus and obsolete personal property belonging to the city either by sale, barter or exchange or by sealed bid, public auction, cannibalization, trade-in or any other means of disposal as may be appropriate and in the best interests of the city. Disposal of surplus or obsolete personal property with acquisition prices in excess of $20,000.00 per item shall be made only after approval by the city commission. In addition, the city manager is directed to promulgate procedures for disposal of items with acquisition prices of less than $20,000.00. 
(Code 1986, § 1.265(a)) 
Sec. 2-772. - Authority of city manager. 
    Authority to purchase commodities and contractual services and to award and execute contracts as is deemed to be in the public interest is delegated to the city manager under the conditions set forth in this division. The city manager, in accordance with established purchasing guidelines and governed by the requirements of this division, shall have the authority to purchase commodities and contractual services, to award contracts and to execute agreements for the purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated total cost thereof does not exceed $20,000.00 without prior approval of the city commission. The city manager's authority under this section shall extend to purchases and awards for the city's redevelopment areas. 
(Code 1986, § 1.265(b)) 
Sec. 2-773. - Cone of silence. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, reference to one gender shall include the other, use of the plural shall include the singular, and use of the singular shall include the plural. The following definitions apply unless the context in which the word or phrase is used requires a different definition: 
(1)  Competitive solicitation means a formal process by the City of Key West relating to the acquisition of goods or services, which process is intended to provide an equal and open opportunity to qualified persons and entities to be selected to provide the goods or services. Competitive solicitation shall include request for proposals ("RFP"), request for qualifications ("RFQ"), request for letters of interest ("RFLI"), invitation to bid ("ITB") or any other advertised solicitation. 
(2)  Cone of silence means a period of time during which there is a prohibition on communication regarding a particular competitive solicitation. 
(3)  Evaluation or selection committee means a group of persons appointed or designated by the city to evaluate, rank, select, or make a recommendation regarding a vendor or the vendor's response to the competitive solicitation. A member of such a committee shall be deemed a city official for the purposes of subsection (c) below. 
(4)  Vendor means a person or entity that has entered into or that desires to enter into a contract with the City of Key West or that seeks an award from the city to provide goods, perform a service, render an opinion or advice, or make a recommendation related to a competitive solicitation for compensation or other consideration. 
(5)  Vendor's representative means an owner, individual, employee, partner, officer, or member of the board of directors of a vendor, or a consultant, lobbyist, or actual or potential subcontractor or sub-consultant who acts at the behest of a vendor in communicating regarding a competitive solicitation. 
(b)  Prohibited communications. A cone of silence shall be in effect during the course of a competitive solicitation and prohibit: 
(1)  Any communication regarding a particular competitive solicitation between a potential vendor or vendor's representative and the city's administrative staff including, but not limited to, the city manager and his or her staff; 
(2)  Any communication regarding a particular competitive solicitation between a potential vendor or vendor's representative and the mayor, city commissioners, or their respective staff; 
(3)  Any communication regarding a particular competitive solicitation between a potential vendor or vendor's representative and any member of a city evaluation and/or selection committee therefore; and 
(4)  Any communication regarding a particular competitive solicitation between the mayor, city commissioners, or their respective staff, and a member of a city evaluation and/or selection committee therefore. 
(c)  Permitted communications. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall prohibit: 
(1)  Communication between members of the public who are not vendors or a vendor's representative and any city employee, official or member of the city commission; 
(2)  Communications in writing at any time with any city employee, official or member of the city commission, unless specifically prohibited by the applicable competitive solicitation. 
(A)  However, any written communication must be filed with the city clerk. Any city employee, official or member of the city commission receiving or making any written communication must immediately file it with the city clerk. 
(B)  The city clerk shall include all written communication as part of the agenda item when publishing information related to a particular competitive solicitation; 
(3)  Oral communications at duly noticed pre-bid conferences; 
(4)  Oral presentations before publically noticed evaluation and/or selection committees; 
(5)  Contract discussions during any duly noticed public meeting; 
(6)  Public presentations made to the city commission or advisory body thereof during any duly noticed public meeting; 
(7)  Contract negotiations with city staff following the award of a competitive solicitation by the city commission; or 
(8)  Purchases exempt from the competitive process pursuant to section 2-797 of these Code of Ordinances; 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  The cone of silence shall be imposed upon each competitive solicitation at the time of public notice of such solicitation as provided by section 2-826 of this Code. Public notice of the cone of silence shall be included in the notice of the competitive solicitation. The city manager shall issue a written notice of the release of each competitive solicitation to the affected departments, with a copy thereof to each commission member, and shall include in any public solicitation for goods and services a statement disclosing the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  The cone of silence shall terminate: 
(A)  At the time the city commission or other authorized body makes final award or gives final approval of a contract, rejects all bids or responses to the competitive solicitation, or takes other action which ends the competitive solicitation. 
(B)  At the deadline for submission of responses to the solicitation if only one vendor has responded. 
(3)  Any city employee, official or member of the city commission that is approached concerning a competitive solicitation while the cone of silence is in effect shall notify such individual of the prohibitions contained in this section. While the cone of silence is in effect, any city employee, official or member of the city commission who is the recipient of any oral communication by a potential vendor or vendor's representative in violation of this section shall create a written record of the event. The record shall indicate the date of such communication, the persons with whom such communication occurred, and a general summation of the communication. 
(e)  Violations/penalties and procedures. 
(1)  A sworn complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance may be filed with the city attorney's office. In each such instance, an initial investigation shall be performed to determine the existence of a violation. If a violation is found to exist, the penalties and process shall be as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties described herein and otherwise provided by law, a violation of this ordinance shall render the competitive solicitation void at the discretion of the city commission. 
(3)  Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be prohibited from serving on a City of Key West advisory board, evaluation and/or selection committee. 
(4)  In addition to any other penalty provided by law, violation of any provision of this ordinance by a City of Key West employee shall subject said employee to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(5)  If a vendor is determined to have violated the provisions of this section on two more occasions it shall constitute evidence under City Code section 2-834 that the vendor is not properly qualified to carry out the obligations or to complete the work contemplated by any new competitive solicitation. The city's purchasing agent shall also commence any available debarment from city work proceeding that may be available upon a finding of two or more violations by a vendor of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 19-08, § 1, 3-20-2019) 
Secs. 2-774-2-795. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Competitive Bidding 

Sec. 2-796. - Required. 
    All purchases of commodities and contractual services when the estimated total cost thereof shall exceed $20,000.00 shall be awarded by the city commission through the process of competitive, sealed bidding or competitive request for proposals except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 1.266(a)) 
Sec. 2-797. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the requirements of formal competitive procurement: 
(1)  Sole source procurement. Sole source procurement in accordance with the following: 
a.  All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended, to encourage competition in satisfying the city's need, and shall not be unduly restrictive. Brand name specifications are restrictive of competition and shall be used only as specifically provided in section 2-844. 
b.  A contract may be awarded without competition when the department head makes a written determination and the purchasing agent verifies that, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, there is only one source for the required commodity or contractual service. The city manager shall conduct negotiations as appropriate as to price, delivery and terms. A record of sole source procurement shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, amount and type of each contract; a list of the commodity or contractual service procured under each contract; and the identification number of each contract file. 
c.  All sole source procurement where the cost of the commodities or contractual services exceeds $20,000.00 shall be authorized by the city commission. 
(2)  Emergency procurement. The city manager may make emergency procurement of commodities or contractual services where the cost exceeds $20,000.00 when there exists a clear and present threat to public health, property, welfare, safety or other substantial loss to the city, including cases where a natural disaster has occurred, is occurring, or is imminently threatening. However, such emergency procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of the emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the commodity or contractual service procured under the contract, and the number of the purchase order, if any. All emergency procurement in excess of $20,000.00 shall be ratified by the city commission at the next scheduled city commission meeting. 
(3)  Purchases and acquisitions under contracts of federal government and the state or its political subdivisions. All purchases of commodities or contractual services under the provisions of local, state and federal purchasing contracts shall be exempt from the competitive procurement requirements, provided that the following criteria are all satisfied: 
a.  The terms and conditions of the original contract by the federal, state or local government, other than the city, are satisfactory to the city and such terms and conditions are expressly extended to other municipalities pursuant to the bid documents or by the original successful bidder. 
b.  The purchasing agent has performed an informal solicitation to determine if the prices of the original contract are fair and reasonable and to ensure local vendors have an opportunity to compete. 
c.  The city commission authorizes such procurement when the cost of the commodities or contractual services exceeds $20,000.00. 
(4)  Exempt contractual services. Exempt contractual services not subject to the competitive procurement requirement are as follows: 
a.  Legal services including paralegal, expert witnesses, appraisal services and court reporters. Prior to engaging legal services estimated to have a cost in excess of $20,000.00, the city attorney shall notify the city manager and the city commission. 
b.  If in the opinion of the city manager exceptional circumstances exist to exempt a purchase from the competitive bid requirements of this subdivision for the best interests of the city, he shall place a resolution before the city commission for approval of such exemption. 
(Code 1986, § 1.266(b)) 
Sec. 2-798. - Local business enterprise preference. 
(a)  Definition. A business shall be considered a local business enterprise if it meets all of the following requirements: a business with its principle address as registered with the Florida Department of State located within 30 miles of the boundaries of the city, listed with the chief licensing official as having a business tax receipt with its principle address within 30 miles of the boundaries of the city for at least one year immediately prior to the issuance of the solicitation; maintains a workforce of at least 50 percent of its employees from the city or within 30 miles of its boundaries, and having paid all current license taxes, and any other fees due the city at least 24 hours prior to the publication (construed as 7:00 a.m. of the date of publication in the relevant newspaper) of the call for bids or request for proposals. Post office box numbers may not be used to establish status as a local business enterprise. If a business is a joint venture, it is sufficient for qualification as a local business enterprise if at least one of the joint venturers meets the test set forth in this subsection, and the combined local workforce of the joint venture is maintained at a level of at least 50 percent of the total number of employees engaged in the venture. At least one member, director or principle of the entity desiring to qualify as a local business enterprise shall reside within 30 miles of the boundaries of the City of Key West as indicated by a Florida driver's license or Florida identification card. In the event a business meets all the requirements enumerated above with the exception of having its principle address as registered with the Florida Department of State located within 30 miles of the boundaries of the city, it shall be sufficient to qualify as a local business enterprise if it has maintained an office within 30 miles of the boundaries of the City of Key West for the past five years, during which period of time it has regularly and continuously conducted business from such location. 
(b)  Preference. In the purchase of or the contract for goods, services, or construction of capital improvements, the city commission or, in the case of purchases and contracts which are not required to be approved by the city commission, the city finance department may give a preference to a responsive and responsible local business enterprise as specified herein. Any required notice of bid or request for proposals for matters subject to the local preference provided for in this section shall contain a provision notifying prospective bidders or responders of the applicability of the local preference. 
    Except where otherwise provided by this Code, federal or state law or other funding source restrictions, purchases of goods, general services, or professional services by the city may give preference to local businesses in the following manner: 
(1)  Under a competitive bid solicitation, when a responsive, responsible nonlocal business submits the lowest price bid, and the bid submitted by one or more responsive, responsible local businesses is within five percent of the price submitted by the nonlocal business, then the local business with the apparent lowest bid offer (i.e., lowest local bidder) may have the opportunity to submit an offer to match the price(s) offered by the lowest, qualified and responsive nonlocal bidder within three working days of a notice of intent to award. If the lowest local bidder submits a bid that fully matches the lowest bid from the lowest nonlocal bidder tendered previously, then the award shall be made to such local bidder. If the lowest local bidder declines or is unable to match the lowest nonlocal bid price(s), then the award shall be made to the nonlocal business. 
(2)  For requests for proposals in which objective factors are used to evaluate the responses from vendors and are assigned point totals, if, upon the completion of final rankings (technical and price combined, if applicable) by a selection committee or the city commission, a qualified and responsive nonlocal business is the highest ranked proposer and the ranking of a qualified and responsive local business is within five percent of the ranking obtained by the qualified and responsive nonlocal business, the highest ranked qualified and responsive local business shall have the opportunity to submit an offer to match the price offered by the highest ranked qualified and responsive nonlocal business within three working days of a notice of intent to award. If such highest ranked local business submits a price that fully matches the price of such highest ranked qualified and responsive nonlocal business, or the original price of the highest ranked local business is equal to or less than that of such highest ranked nonlocal business, then such local business shall proceed to negotiations with the city. If the highest ranked qualified and responsive local business declines or is unable to match the price of the highest ranked qualified and responsive nonlocal business, then the city shall proceed to negotiate with such highest ranked nonlocal business. 
(c)  Exceptions. The local business enterprise preference provided for by this section shall not be applied where the application of the preference would conflict with a statute, administrative rule, or the terms of any grant funding the purchase or contract; or in the procurement of services described in section 2-797(4). 
(d)  Certification of eligibility. Under any such applicable solicitation, bidders/proposers desiring to receive local preference will be invited and required to affirmatively state and provide documentation as set forth in the solicitation in support of their status as a local business. Any bidder who fails to submit sufficient documentation with their bid or proposal, or who is not prequalified as a local business enterprise pursuant to procedures to be implemented by the city manager, shall not be granted local preference consideration for the purposes of that specific award. 
(e)  Waiver of the application of local preference. The application of local preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which the city commission is the awarding authority may be waived upon written recommendation of the city manager and approval of the city commission. 
(f)  Comparison of qualifications. The preferences established herein in no way prohibit the right of the city to compare quality of materials proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms or corporations submitting bids or proposals. Further, the preferences established herein in no way prohibit the right of the city from giving any further preference permitted by law instead of or in addition to the preferences granted herein. 
(g)  Change orders. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-845, in the event a local bidder is awarded a contract pursuant to this section, all requests for change orders increasing the cost of the project must be approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 1.266(c); Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 12-3-2009) 
Sec. 2-799. - Requirements for city contractors to provide equal benefits for domestic partners. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Benefits means the following plan, program or policy provided or offered by a contractor to its employees as part of the employer's total compensation package: sick leave, bereavement leave, family medical leave, and health benefits. 
(2)  Bid shall mean a competitive bid procedure established by the city through the issuance of an invitation to bid, request for proposals, request for qualifications, or request for letters of interest. 
(3)  Cash equivalent means the amount of money paid to an employee with a domestic partner in lieu of providing benefits to the employee's domestic partner. The cash equivalent is equal to the employer's direct expense of providing benefits to an employee for his or her spouse. 
The cash equivalent of the following benefits apply: 
a.  For bereavement leave, cash payment for the number of days that would be allowed as paid time off for the death of a spouse. Cash payment would be in the form of the wages of the domestic partner employee for the number of days allowed. 
b.  For health benefits, the cost to the contractor of the contractor's share of the single monthly premiums that are being paid for the domestic partner employee, to be paid on a regular basis while the domestic partner employee maintains such insurance in force for himself or herself. 
c.  For family medical leave, cash payment for the number of days that would be allowed as time off for an employee to care for a spouse who has a serious health condition. Cash payment would be in the form of the wages of the domestic partner employee for the number of days allowed. 
(4)  Contract means any written agreement, purchase order, standing order or similar instrument entered into pursuant to the award of a bid whereby the city is committed to expend or does expend funds in return for work, labor, professional services, consulting services, supplies, equipment, materials, construction, construction-related services or any combination of the foregoing. 
(5)  Contractor means any person or persons, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other form of doing business, that is awarded a bid and enters into a covered contract with the city, and which maintains five or more full-time employees. 
(6)  Covered contract means a contract between the city and a contractor awarded subsequent to the date when this section becomes effective valued at over $20,000.00. 
(7)  Domestic partner shall mean any two adults of the same or different sex, who have registered as domestic partners with a governmental body pursuant to state or local law authorizing such registration, or with an internal registry maintained by the employer of at least one of the domestic partners. A contractor may institute an internal registry to allow for the provision of equal benefits to employees with domestic partners who do not register their partnerships pursuant to a governmental body authorizing such registration, or who are located in a jurisdiction where no such governmental domestic partnership registry exists. A contractor that institutes such registry shall not impose criteria for registration that are more stringent than those required for domestic partnership registration by the City of Key West pursuant to chapter 38, article V, of the Key West Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Equal benefits means the equality of benefits between employees with spouses and employees with domestic partners, and/or between spouses of employees and domestic partners of employees. 
(b)  Equal benefits requirements. 
(1)  Except where otherwise exempt or prohibited by law, a contractor awarded a covered contract pursuant to a bid process shall provide benefits to domestic partners of its employees on the same basis as it provides benefits to employees' spouses. 
(2)  All bid requests for covered contracts which are issued on or after the effective date of this section shall include the requirement to provide equal benefits in the procurement specifications in accordance with this section. 
(3)  The city shall not enter into any covered contract unless the contractor certifies that such contractor does not discriminate in the provision of benefits between employees with domestic partners and employees with spouses and/or between the domestic partners and spouses of such employees. 
(4)  Such certification shall be in writing and shall be signed by an authorized officer of the contractor and delivered, along with a description of the contractor's employee benefits plan, to the city's procurement director prior to entering into such covered contract. 
(5)  The city manager or his/her designee shall reject a contractor's certification of compliance if he/she determines that such contractor discriminates in the provision of benefits or if the city manager or designee determines that the certification was created, or is being used for the purpose of evading the requirements of this section. 
(6)  The contractor shall provide the city manager or his/her designee, access to its records for the purpose of audits and/or investigations to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon request shall provide evidence that the contractor is in compliance with the provisions of this section upon each new bid, contract renewal, or when the city manager has received a complaint or has reason to believe the contractor may not be in compliance with the provisions of this section. This shall include, but not be limited to, providing the city manager or his/her designee with certified copies of all of the contractor's records pertaining to its benefits policies and its employment policies and practices. 
(7)  The contractor may not set up or use its contracting entity for the purpose of evading the requirements imposed by this section. 
(c)  Mandatory contract provisions pertaining to equal benefits. Unless otherwise exempt, every covered contract shall contain language that obligates the contractor to comply with the applicable provisions of this section. The language shall include provisions for the following: 
(1)  During the performance of the covered contract, the contractor certifies and represents that it will comply with this section. 
(2)  The failure of the contractor to comply with this section will be deemed to be a material breach of the covered contract. 
(3)  If the contractor fails to comply with this section, the city may terminate the covered contract and all monies due or to become due under the covered contract may be retained by the city. The city may also pursue any and all other remedies at law or in equity for any breach. 
(4)  If the city manager or his designee determines that a contractor has set up or used its contracting entity for the purpose of evading the requirements of this section, the city may terminate the covered contract. 
(d)  Enforcement. If the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The failure to comply may be deemed to be a material breach of the covered contract; or 
(2)  The city may terminate the covered contract; or 
(3)  Monies due or to become due under the covered contract may be retained by the city until compliance is achieved; or 
(4)  The city may also pursue any and all other remedies at law or in equity for any breach. 
(5)  Failure to comply with this section may also subject the contractor to the procedures set forth in division 5 [sic] of this article, entitled "Debarment of contractors from city work." 
(e)  Exceptions and waivers. The provisions of this section shall not apply where: 
(1)  The contractor does not provide benefits to employees' spouses. 
(2)  The contractor is a religious organization, association, society or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society. 
(3)  The contractor is a governmental entity. 
(4)  The sale or lease of city property. 
(5)  The provision of this section would violate grant requirement, the laws, rules or regulations of federal or state law (for example, the acquisition services procured pursuant to F.S. § 287.055 known as the "Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act"). 
(6)  Provided that the contractor does not discriminate in the provision of benefits, a contractor may also comply with this section by providing an employee with the cash equivalent of such benefits, if the city manager or his/her designee determines that either: 
a.  The contractor has made a reasonable yet unsuccessful effort to provide equal benefits. The contractor shall provide the city manager or his/her designee with sufficient proof of such inability to provide such benefit or benefits which shall include the measures taken to provide such benefit or benefits and the cash equivalent proposed, along with its certificate of compliance, as is required under this section. 
(7)  The city commission waives compliance of this section in the best interest of the city, including, but not limited to, the following circumstances: 
a.  The covered contract is necessary to respond to an emergency. 
b.  Where only one bid response is received. 
c.  Where more than one bid response is received, but the bids demonstrate that none of the bidders can comply with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  City's authority to cancel contract. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the city's authority to cancel or terminate a contract, deny or withdraw approval to perform a subcontract or provide supplies, issue a nonresponsibility finding, issue a nonresponsiveness finding, deny a person or entity prequalification, or otherwise deny a person or entity city business. 
(g)  Timing of application. This section shall be applicable only to covered contracts awarded pursuant to bids which are after the date when this section becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 2-22-2012) 
Secs. 2-800-2-825. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Procedures 

Sec. 2-826. - Public notice. 
    Public notice of the invitation to bid, request for qualifications, or request for proposals pursuant to this division shall be given not less than ten calendar days prior to the date set forth in the notice for the opening of bids or proposals. Such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall state the place, date and time of the bid or proposal opening. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(a)) 
Sec. 2-827. - Submission of bids, requests for qualifications and proposals. 
    Bids, requests for qualifications, and requests for proposals pursuant to this division shall be submitted in a sealed envelope which shall be clearly identified as a bid or proposal on the exterior of the envelope and delivered to the office of the city clerk. All bids and proposals shall contain a noncollusive affidavit and a public entity crimes form sworn to and executed by the bidder or offeror and acknowledged before a notary public with the notary seal affixed on the document. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(b)) 
Sec. 2-828. - Bid or proposal security. 
    Bid or proposal security shall be required for all city construction projects when the total contract price is estimated by the purchasing agent to exceed $10,000.00. In all other cases, the city reserves the right to require bid or proposal security when deemed necessary by the purchasing agent. Bid or proposal security shall be by cash, by certified or cashier's check, by a bid bond or an irrevocable letter of credit made payable to the city and provided by a surety company authorized to do business as a surety in the state in an amount not less than five percent of the amount of the bid or proposal. The bid or proposal security of unsuccessful bidders or offerors will be returned within a reasonable time after the bid or proposal opening. The bid or proposal security of the successful bidder or offeror will be retained until such bidder or offeror has executed the contract and furnished the required certificate of insurance and payment and performance bonds. If the successful bidder or offeror fails to furnish the required certificate of insurance and payment and performance bonds or fails to execute and deliver the contract to the office of the city clerk within the time specified in the instructions to bidders or offerors, the city may annul the notice of award and the entire sum of the bid or proposal security shall be forfeited. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(c)) 
Sec. 2-829. - Bid opening. 
(a)  Bids made pursuant to this division shall be opened publicly by the city clerk and shall be witnessed by bidders, designated staff, and all interested persons as space allows at the time and place designated in the public notice of the invitation to bid. 
(b)  Bids shall be read aloud and a tabulation of all bids received shall be made available for public inspection after the opening of the bid. 
(c)  No late bids shall be accepted or opened if received after the date and time specified in the public bid notice. All late bids shall be returned, unopened, to the bidder or offeror. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(d)) 
Sec. 2-830. - Proposal or qualification opening. 
    When the request for proposals or qualifications procedure is utilized as provided in this division, the proposals shall be opened by the city clerk at the time and place designated in the public notice of the request for proposals. A register of proposals shall be prepared and maintained by the city clerk containing the name of each offeror. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(e)) 
Sec. 2-831. - Modification and withdrawal of bids. 
    Bids made pursuant to this division may be modified or withdrawn by an appropriate document duly executed and delivered to the office of the city clerk at any time prior to the deadline for submitting bids. A request for withdrawal and modification must be in writing and signed by a person duly authorized to do so, and, where signed by a deputy or subordinate, the principal's proper written authority to such deputy or subordinate must accompany the request for withdrawal or modification. After expiration of the period for receipt of bids, no bid may be withdrawn or modified. If, within 24 hours after bids are opened, any bidder files a duly signed written notice with the city, through the office of the city clerk, and within five calendar days thereafter demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city, by clear and convincing evidence, that there was a material and substantial mistake in the preparation of the bid or that the mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident, the bidder may withdraw its bid. Thereafter, the bidder will be disqualified from further bidding on the subject contract. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(f)) 
Sec. 2-832. - Modification to solicitation documents. 
    For the purposes of this division, any modification of the invitation to bid or the request for proposals made prior to the opening of the responses to those solicitation documents shall be by addenda provided in writing to the same businesses to which the original solicitation documents were mailed or otherwise provided. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(g)) 
Sec. 2-833. - Documents become city property. 
    All bid documents and all accompanying documentation received from offerors in response to the invitation to bid, request for proposal, or request for qualifications pursuant to this division shall become the property of the city and will not be returned to the bidders. If a contract is awarded, all documentation produced as part of the contract shall become the exclusive property of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(h)) 
Sec. 2-834. - Rejection of bids, statement of qualifications or requests for proposals. 
    The city may reject any bid, request for proposal, or statement of qualifications made pursuant to this division for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If the evidence submitted by the bidder or offeror or if the investigation of such bidder or offeror fails to satisfy the city that such bidder or offeror is properly qualified to carry out the obligations and to complete the work contemplated therein. 
(2)  If there is reason to believe collusion exists among bidders or offerors. 
(3)  If the bid or proposal is not responsive, not properly delivered, not properly signed or is unsigned, shows serious omissions, alterations in form, additions not called for, conditions or unauthorized alterations, or irregularities of any kind. The city reserves the right to waive such technical errors as may be deemed in the best interest of the city. 
(4)  If determined that acceptance of a bid is not in the best interest of the city, all bids may be rejected for convenience. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(i)) 
Sec. 2-835. - Award of contract. 
(a)  Generally. Pursuant to this division, the contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation to bid except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere will be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with the other documents related to the transaction. 
(c)  Tie bids. The procedure for tie bids shall be as follows: 
(1)  If two or more bidders are tied, the tie may be broken and the successful bidder selected by the following criteria presented in order of importance and consideration: 
a.  Quality of the items or services bid, if such quality is ascertainable. 
b.  Delivery time if provided in the bid by the bidders. 
c.  Certification of a drug-free workplace program which meets criteria established in F.S. § 287.087, as amended from time to time. 
d.  Location of the vendor with the following award preferences: 
1.  A city vendor. 
2.  A county vendor. 
3.  A state vendor. 
(2)  If the criteria in this subsection are impossible to determine with any reasonableness or do not resolve the issue, the award will be given to that bidder whose bid was received earliest in time by the city as indicated by the time written upon the bid envelope of each bidder. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(j)) 
Sec. 2-836. - Request for proposals procedure. 
    Pursuant to this division, the award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors and criteria set forth in the request for proposals. The city's contract files shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(k)) 
Sec. 2-837. - Request for qualifications procedure. 
    Pursuant to this division, the award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose statement of qualifications is determined in writing to be the most qualified, taking into consideration evaluation factors and criteria set forth in the request for qualifications. The city's records shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(l)) 
Sec. 2-838. - Award determination or rejection. 
    The award determination or rejection made pursuant to this division shall be made by the city commission when formal competitive procurement is required. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(m)) 
Sec. 2-839. - Payment and performance bonds. 
    When a contract is awarded for the construction of a public building, for the prosecution and completion of a public work or for repairs upon a public building, or other public work as provided in F.S. § 255.05, as amended from time to time, or when the purchasing agent deems it to be reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city, the following bonds shall be executed and delivered to the city clerk and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
(1)  Performance bond. A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract and conditioned upon the contractor performing the contract in the time and manner prescribed in the contract; and 
(2)  Payment bond. A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract and conditioned upon the contractor promptly making payments to all persons who supply labor, materials or commodities used directly or indirectly in the performance of the work provided for in the contract. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(n)) 
Sec. 2-840. - Insurance. 
    The successful offeror under this division shall be required to obtain, at his own expense, all minimum insurance coverage required under the terms of the bid documents and contract and to submit at a minimum copies of all insurance certificates to the city clerk and to the city risk management coordinator. No work under the contract may be commenced until the required insurance has been obtained and proof of such insurance has been approved by the risk management coordinator. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(o)) 
Sec. 2-841. - Contracts for professional services. 
    All contracts for professional services, as that term is defined in the Consultants Competitive Negotiations Act, F.S. § 287.055, as amended from time to time, shall be awarded in accordance with the procedures set forth in that act and any city purchasing procedures adopted in furtherance of that act. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(p)) 
Sec. 2-842. - Supplier's list. 
    The purchasing agent will solicit sealed bids and proposals from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested that their names be added to a supplier's list and who have indicated the types of commodities and contractual services they can provide. The purchasing agent will maintain this listing, which will be organized by the trade or profession indicated by the supplier. When commodities or contractual services are needed, the city will send invitations to bid or request for proposals to those on the supplier's list who have made known to the city that they can supply those types of commodities and contractual services. Solicitation shall be made by sending the listed suppliers a copy of the appropriate newspaper notice or other such notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(q)) 
Sec. 2-843. - Brand name or equal specifications. 
(a)  Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent determines in writing that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the city's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; 
(4)  Existing maintenance supply or repair parts inventory require a certain manufacturer or brand name; or 
(5)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the city's best interests. 
(b)  Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate at least three, or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" references and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(c)  Required characteristics. Unless the purchasing agent determines in writing that the essential characteristics of the brand names included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade, brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, functional, or performance characteristics which are required. 
(d)  Nonrestrictive use of brand name or equal specifications. Where a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(r)) 
Sec. 2-844. - Brand name specifications. 
(a)  Use. Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product competition, it may be used only when the purchasing agent makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item will satisfy the city's needs. 
(b)  Competition. The purchasing agent shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under the sole source procurement provisions of section 2-797. 
(Code 1986, § 1.267(s)) 
Sec. 2-845. - Change orders. 
(a)  Upon the award of any contract for the construction of any public service building or capital improvement project, the city manager shall have the authority to approve change orders without prior city commission action in an amount not to exceed five cumulative percent of the contract price or $25,000.00, whichever is less. A change order in excess of such limitations shall be approved by the city commission. The cumulative total of all change orders of a project shall be considered in determining approval procedures. In an emergency in a construction contract where life, property or city funds are at risk, the city manager may approve a change order in excess of five cumulative percent of the contract price or $25,000.00. The city manager's approval shall be in writing. The finance department shall issue an amended purchase order. At its next scheduled meeting, the city commission shall ratify by resolution the emergency change order. 
(b)  Whenever the city commission shall consider the awarding of a bid for a construction project, the city manager shall provide to the city commission the change order history of the bidder with the city, and the city commission may take into consideration such history in determining whether to award or deny the bid. 
(Code 1986, § 1.269) 
Secs. 2-846-2-870. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-871. - Background check of persons awarded lease of city-owned property, concession or franchise. 
(a)  The police department shall promptly conduct a background check, using appropriate law enforcement procedures, of all persons who are being recommended for: 
(1)  The award of a lease of city-owned property with annual rentals that will exceed $100,000.00 and all extensions or renewals thereof; 
(2)  The award of a sublease of city-owned property, where the master lease with the city has a total annual rental in excess of $100,000.00 and all extensions or renewals thereof; and 
(3)  The award of a concession or franchise agreement by the city, regardless of amount, and all extensions or renewals thereof. 
(b)  If any such person is found by the police department to have been convicted of a felony within the past five years or found to have been convicted of a public entity crime and is then listed on the convicted vendor list, as established in F.S. § 287.133, the proposed lease or sublease, concession or franchise agreement or any extension or renewal thereof with such person shall not be executed by the city or, if it has been executed, it shall be subject to revocation and be voidable by the city commission after notice and hearing. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the application of F.S. § 287.133 as it relates to other city contracts not covered by this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, any person negotiating with the city for a lease, lease extension or lease renewal of city-owned property shall be prohibited from subleasing such property without first notifying the city manager in writing for the purpose of instituting a background check of each proposed sublessee. The person shall be further prohibited from entering into any subleases of city-owned property with any person who has been convicted of a felony within the past five years or who has been convicted of a public entity crime and who is then on the convicted vendor list under F.S. § 287.133. Any sublease entered into in violation of this section shall be subject to revocation and shall be voidable by the city commission after notice and a hearing. 
(d)  Every person applying for a lease, a lease renewal or a sublease of city-owned property or a concession or franchise agreement shall submit to the city, together with the application, a sworn disclosure statement, on a form to be provided by the city, that contains the following financial information for the immediately prior two calendar years: a statement attesting to the applicant's net worth, assets and liabilities, annual gross income, and primary source of such income. In addition to such disclosures, a private corporation shall also submit to the city a certified copy of its articles of incorporation and a list of all current shareholders, senior officers and board of directors; a partnership shall submit a copy of the partnership agreement and a list of all current partners; any other business entity shall submit a copy of its organizational documents, together with a list of all current principals; and a publicly held corporation shall submit a copy of its annual report and proxy statement for the prior two years. The city shall consider financial information for each applicant as a factor in making its award determination. The respective lease, sublease, concession or franchise agreement of any person who intentionally or knowingly supplies false or misleading information or who omits material information on the disclosure form under this section shall be subject to revocation and shall be voidable by the city commission after notice and a hearing. 
(e)  All persons subject to a background check under this section shall pay to the city a nonrefundable administrative fee of $100.00 each for the purpose of defraying the city's administrative cost of conducting the background check. 
(f)  All information produced under this section shall be subject to the public records law and its exceptions. 
(Code 1986, § 1.31) 
Sec. 2-872. - Audits and inspections. 
(a)  In addition to other periodic reviews, all city leases, franchises, concessions and other agreements wherein percentage revenues are collected shall be audited at least once every three years by an external certified public accountant utilizing generally accepted account principles (GAAP) and in such a manner as directed by the city manager. 
(b)  All city leases, franchises, concessions and agreements entered into after the effective date of this ordinance shall provide for such audits without cost or expenses to the city. 
(c)  Any individual or organization that receives grant funds or subsidies from the city shall permit inspection of its books and records upon demand by the city as a precondition to the receipt of such funding. The city may also conduct program results audits to determine whether the desired results or benefits are being achieved and whether objectives of funding established by the city are being met. 
(Ord. No. 10-09, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 2-873-2-900. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION 

Sec. 2-901. - Improved and unimproved property. 
    In order for the city to acquire real property, be it improved or unimproved, the city commission must approve the acquisition by a vote taken at a regular or special meeting after a public hearing on the matter. For the purposes of this section, the term "acquisition" shall mean purchase, dedication, or lease when the total cost of the lease by the city as lessee exceeds $20,000.00. The city manager shall have the authority to approve a lease of property by the city as lessee having a total value of less than $20,000.00. 
(Code 1986, § 1.268) 
Secs. 2-902-2-930. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REAL PROPERTY DISPOSITION[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Charter reference- Conveyance of city-owned real property, referendum required, § 7.03. 

Sec. 2-931. - Supplement to Charter. 
    The procedures in this division shall be construed as complementary to, and not in derogation of, any provision of the Charter. No city lease may be renegotiated and executed to circumvent a requirement of referendum. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(f)) 
Sec. 2-932. - Scope. 
    The city shall sell any real property and improvements thereon owned by the city or any city agency only according to the procedures provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)) 
Sec. 2-933. - Appraisal. 
    Before offering any lands for sale, the city commission or any city agency shall have appraisals made by two individuals licensed to and having the appropriate experience to make such appraisals. Each appraisal shall include an estimate of the land's value based on the sale or rental of comparable lands and based on the highest and best use and may include other approaches to value as the appraiser deems appropriate. If there is substantial difference in the results of the two appraisals, the city shall obtain a third appraisal. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)(1)) 
Sec. 2-934. - Advertisement. 
    After the city commission receives the appraisals as provided in section 2-934, it shall, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, make known its intention to offer such lands for sale. The advertisement shall include a legal description of the lands being offered and the various estimates of value reached by each of the appraisers. It shall specify a date to receive bids for the lands, which date shall be not less than 60 days after the date of advertisement. The advertisement shall give notice that the appraisal costs shall be paid by the successful bidder at the time of agreement. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)(2)) 
Sec. 2-935. - Bids. 
    After publication of the advertisement as provided in section 2-934, any person may file with the city commission a bid or written proposal to purchase the lands. A bid bond in the amount of five percent of the bid price must accompany each bid for the property. The bond may be in the form of cash, certified check, money order or other negotiable instrument. All bids shall be opened in the presence of the city commission at city hall, on the date specified in the public notice. Any person may be present for the opening of bids. The highest qualified and responsible bidder shall be accepted, except for reasons which shall be stated upon the city commission meeting record. A bid may be rejected for failure to file a bid bond. All bids may be rejected. Bid bonds will be returned to unsuccessful bidders within five days of the bid opening. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)(3)) 
Sec. 2-936. - Sale. 
    The city commission shall sell the advertised lands only in accordance with the Charter and with this division. The successful bidder shall have 30 calendar days from the date of bid acceptance by the city commission during which to deliver the balance of the purchase price plus appropriate closing costs to the city or its escrow agent for closing. Should the successful bidder fail to deliver such funds within 30 calendar days, the bid bond shall be forfeited to the city without recourse, and the city commission may elect to accept the next highest bidder or may elect to readvertise for bids. If the city commission elects to accept the next highest bidder, that bidder will be required to file a bid bond in the amount provided in section 2-935 within five days of selection and deliver the balance of the purchase price plus appropriate closing costs to the city or its escrow agent for closing within 30 calendar days. If the next highest bidder fails to meet the requirements, the process may be repeated as necessary, or the city commission may readvertise for bids. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)(4)) 
Sec. 2-937. - Record. 
    The city commission shall maintain a record of all proceedings under this division, which shall be a public record, subject to inspection as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(a)(5)) 
Sec. 2-938. - Easements. 
(a)  The city may grant an easement over any lands or interest therein owned by the city or any city agency. Where the granting of an easement over city-owned real property is proposed, it shall be noticed by both of the following methods, and such advertisement and notice shall state the address of the subject property and shall contain a survey depicting the property and encroachment: 
(1)  One publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 14 days in advance of city commission consideration of the item; and 
(2)  a. 
Certified mail, return receipt requested, to owners of real property adjacent to the proposed easement area on both sides, front and rear, whether or not separated therefrom by a street, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way, and to any other owners of real property within 50 feet of the proposed easement area; or 
b.  Hand delivery of notice to all parties specified in subsection (a)(2)a of this section. Proof of delivery shall be sworn statement of the applicant. 
Notice under subsections (a)(2)a and (a)(2)b of this section shall be mailed or hand delivered at least 14 days in advance of city commission consideration of the item. The applicant shall pay a fee defraying the cost of notice and advertisement in an amount to be determined by the city clerk. 
(b)  If the city grants an applicant's request for easement over any lands owned by the city or any city agency, the applicant shall pay an annual fee to the city. The annual fee shall be prorated based on the effective date of the easement. The applicant shall pay the fee each subsequent year the easement is in effect, as follows: 
(1)  Each easement granted by the city for the use of less than 20 square feet of city property, $200.00. 
(2)  Each easement granted by the city for the use of 20 square feet to 100 square feet of city property, $300.00. 
(3)  Each easement granted by the city for the use of more than 100 square feet of property, $400.00. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(b)) 
Sec. 2-939. - Licenses. 
(a)  The city may grant a revocable license for a nonpermanent use of city property. A revocable license shall be revocable at the will of the city. 
(b)  A nonpermanent use may include but not be limited to planters, awnings, trash receptacles, planted areas, benches, flagpoles, guardrails, ramps and light fixtures, but shall not include buildings or accessory structures affixed to real property. 
(c)  Except for the procedure specified for awnings described in paragraph (e) below, the same notice requirements pertaining to applications for easement in section 2-938(a)(1) and (2) shall apply to applications for a revocable license. 
(d)  Except for a license issued in accordance with paragraph (e) below, if the city grants an applicant's request for a license, the applicant shall pay an annual fee to the city in the amount of $200.00. This fee shall be prorated based on the effective date of the license. The applicant shall pay the fee each subsequent year the license is in effect. 
(e)  The chief building official is authorized to issue a revocable license which allows a nonpermanent use of city airspace for an awning under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has obtained, or will obtain contemporaneously with the request for a nonpermanent use of city airspace, a properly issued building permit for such awning; and 
(2)  The applicant shall obtain HARC approval where applicable; and 
(3)  Unless the circumstances dictate that stricter standards are applicable under the Florida Building Code, the awning may extend across the front of a building and may only project a maximum of two-thirds of the width of a sidewalk, or, to within 18 inches of the face of the curb, whichever is less. There shall be a minimum eight feet of clearance between the lowest point or projection of the awning and a sidewalk or public travelway immediately below. Any valance attached to an awning shall not project above the top surface of the awning. In no event shall a permit be issued that will adversely impact vehicular or pedestrian traffic and determined by the chief building official in conjunction with the city engineering department; and 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall furnish the chief building official with a signed and notarized statement that the permittee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any claims for damages to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit; and 
(5)  Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public liability and property damage insurance protecting the city from all claims and damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from the existence of the awning. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage respectively, per occurrence. Such insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing therein and shall name as additional insureds the city, its officers and employees and shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled without 45 days' written notice to the chief building official, sent via certified mail; and 
(6)  If found to be necessary by the city for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, awnings shall be immediately removed upon the request of the city and in the event an awning is not removed or due to an emergency the city finds it necessary to act immediately, the city may remove same and shall not be responsible for damage incurred due to such removal. The costs incurred by the city associated with any such removal shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(c); Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 7-3-2007) 
Sec. 2-940. - Summary procedure. 
(a)  Pursuant to this division, the city may process an application for easement by summary procedure if the easement application meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The easement pertains to the main building of the property. 
(2)  The requested easement is for less than a total of 20 square feet. 
(3)  The city's development review committee recommends granting the easement without condition. 
(4)  The request is noticed and advertised as described in section 2-938(a)(1) and (2), except that notice and advertisement may be made at any time, and the city thereafter receives no substantial objection to the request. 
(b)  The city may process an application for a revocable license by summary procedure if the revocable license satisfies the requirements of subsections (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(d)) 
Sec. 2-941. - Leases. 
(a)  Without referendum, the city as lessor may lease real property and improvements thereon in the city for a term of up to and including ten years and, in the Caroline Street Corridor and Bahama Village Redevelopment Area and among those properties excessed by the United States Navy during the local redevelopment authority process, for a term of up to and including 20 years. In all redevelopment areas, leasing by the city or its redevelopment agency shall be conducted in accordance with procedures of notice and solicitation as determined in state statutes. The renegotiation of a lease of an existing tenant prior to its expiration is deemed not a disposition of property pursuant to F.S. § 163.380(1) and (4). All leases of the Key West Bight existing as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 98-7 (March 3, 1998) are ratified and found to be in substantial compliance with law and ordinance. 
(b)  With respect to leases of the city as lessor in areas of the city other than its redevelopment areas, the city shall enter into negotiations with an existing tenant for a new lease if the tenant desires lease renewal. At the commencement of renewal negotiations, the city manager shall provide public notice thereof by newspaper advertisement. These negotiations may commence not sooner than three years prior to expiration, but not later than one year prior to expiration; provided, however, that any existing tenant that has invested at least $500,000.00 in building, structural, and/or site improvements in the immediately preceding 24 months and proposes to invest at least $500,000.00 in future building, structural, and/or other site improvements to be completed within 24 months from the execution of the lease renewal/amendment as a condition of the proposed lease renewal shall be exempt from these time limitations. Any new lease must be approved by the city commission, after public notice, not later than 60 days after the expiration of the existing lease. If lease negotiations for the renewal with the existing tenant are not completed or if the existing tenant desires not to renew, the city shall advertise for requests for proposals pursuant to sections 2-826 through 2-844. 
(c)  All other city leases must be advertised for requests for proposals unless: (i) the city commission finds that the best use of the property would be achieved without resort to the bidding process; or (ii) the city manager recommends waiver in consideration of the economic interests of the city. In order for the city to lease property below market rate in any circumstance, a public benefit must be shown on the record, and the lease must be approved by a supermajority vote of the city commission. 
(d)  Whenever the city commission is to consider a lease renewal, the city manager shall submit to the city commission a report on total lease payments over the term of the lease and a history of the city's or CRA's leasing experience with the tenant, including a chronicle of lease violations and payment delinquencies, if any. 
(Code 1986, § 1.27(e); Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 10-8-2003; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 7-6-2005; Ord. No. 18-12, § 1, 6-19-2018) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; amusement rides, § 42-7. 

ARTICLE I. - STREET PERFORMERS AND STREET ARTISTS 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    Art shall mean painting, sketching, photography, palm weaving, crafts and sculpture and other mediums that are established and recognized in the artistic community, including by professional institutions such as museums and art galleries. 
    Animal shall mean any living or nonliving warm or cold-blooded creature including, but not limited to: reptiles, amphibians, arachnids, birds, or mammals. 
    Artisan and Performer Corridor shall mean those portions of public sidewalk on Duval Street from Front Street to Petronia Street including all intersecting streets up to, but not including, Whitehead Street and Simonton Street, and the 1400 block of Duval Street; including that portion of South Beach pier up to the Emma Cates Memorial, as described in attached "Exhibit A" to Ord. No. 11-07 and Exhibit A1. 
    Duval Street Corridor Cultural District shall mean those portions of public sidewalk on Duval Street from Petronia Street to South Street including all portions of the concrete pier commonly referred to as the South Beach Pier from the Emma Cates Memorial to the Atlantic Ocean as depicted in the attached "Exhibit C1", including all intersecting streets up to, but not including, Whitehead Street and Simonton Street and incorporated as described in "Exhibit C" to Ord. No. 11-07. 
    Historic District shall mean all property located within the following zoning districts of Key West: HRO, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, HRCC-3, HRCC-4, HMDR, HHDR, HNC-1, HNC-2, HNC-3, HCT, HCL, HPS, HPS-1 and HPRD. 
    Street performance (or street performer) shall mean the following activities (or one who engages in them): acting, singing, playing a musical instrument, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing, comedy, acrobatics, puppetry, joke telling, character impersonation and other similar types of public performance done for the purpose of public entertainment or amusement. 
    Vending of art (or art vendor) shall mean the following activities (or one who engages in it): the creation, display and/or sale of art that is created only by the permit holder. An art vendor shall not include a person who creates a work of art while in a public area, but has no intention to display for sale or sell the work of art in that area at any point in time. 
    Weapons shall mean any dirk, knife with a blade longer than two inches, scissors or shears with a blade longer than four inches, metallic knuckles, slingshot, billie, tear gas gun, chemical weapon or device, machete, axe, plastic gun or blunt-bladed table knife or other deadly weapon, excluding firearms which are governed by F.S. ch. 790, that is not otherwise regulated and approved by the Cultural Preservation Society for performances only at Mallory Square sunset celebration. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 12-28, § 1, 9-5-2012) 
Sec. 6-2. - Permit required; application; appeal; fees. 
(a)  A permit system for street performers and street artists is hereby established. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any street performance or art vending on public property in the Historic District within the area defined in section 6-1 as the Artisan and Performer Corridor without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. This ordinance shall not apply to impromptu behavior by persons not holding themselves out as public performers. 
(b)  The city through its licensing division shall issue street performer permits (Permit "A") and art vending permits (Permit "B") for use in the area defined in section 6-1 as the Artisan and Performer Corridor. Each Permit "A" and "B" shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Those permits which have not been paid for in full and picked up at the licensing department within 14 days of notification that the permit is ready shall be forfeited. 
(c)  The licensing division shall establish a standard application form for "A" and "B" permits. This application form shall include, but not be limited to: 
(i)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(ii)  A photograph of the applicant; 
(iii)  A declaration under penalty of perjury that the applicant for a "B" permit shall vend art that is only of his or her own original creation; 
(iv)  A hold-harmless agreement releasing the city and its employees from all claims and actions arising out of the street performance or art vending on public property; and 
(v)  A description of the performance or the art. 
All applications to the licensing division must be made in person by the applicant; 
(vi)  Permittee shall furnish and maintain public liability and property damage insurance providing coverage for all claims and damage to property or bodily injury, including death which may arise from street performances or art vending on city rights-of-way under this ordinance. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than $300,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage respectively, per occurrence. The city shall be named as an additional insured. All policies required under this ordinance shall provide such policies may not be terminated or cancelled without 30 days' written notice sent via certified mail to the licensing official for the City of Key West. Performers are permitted to submit a group policy provided that the individual members possess coverage consistent with this section. 
(vii)  Applications for a Permit "B" shall also include a valid sales tax receipt issued by the State of Florida. 
(d)  A permit is nontransferable. 
(e)  A person whose permit application is denied for any reason may appeal to the circuit court. 
(f)  There shall be a limitation of five permits issued for palm weaving per year to be determined by lottery system established by the licensing department. All other requirements under chapter 110 for palm weavers must be complied with. Coconut fruits are expressly excluded from this permitting section. 
(g)  There shall be a fee of $150.00 collected at the time of permit application for either Permit "A" or "B". 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 2, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 11-07, §§ 2, 10, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 6-3. - Locations. 
(a)  The following locations in the Historic District shall not be used by street performers or street artists permitted under this ordinance: 
i.  Mallory Square. 
ii.  Wall Street. 
iii.  In front of or abutting a federal, state or local government building. 
iv.  In front of or abutting a church, synagogue or other place of worship. 
v.  In front of or abutting a theatre. 
vi.  The Key West Bight Harborwalk. 
vii.  The Truman Waterfront property. 
viii.  The area commonly known as the Southernmost Point extending from the center of the intersection of South and Duval Streets westward to the Southernmost Point monument then continuing northward to center of the intersection of United and Whitehead Streets. 
ix.  The area defined in section 6-1 as the Duval Street Corridor Cultural District. 
x.  Whitehead Street from Front Street to Eaton Street. 
xi.  The area commonly known as Clinton Square including those portions of Whitehead, Greene and Front Streets. 
(b)  The use of a location on public property by a permit holder is on a daily, first-come, first-served basis. No permit holder shall make efforts to reserve a location; and each permit holder shall abandon a location at the end of his or her working day, including the removal of all personal property of the permit holder. 
(c)  The White Street Pier shall not be used by street performers or street artists. 
(d)  A license holder cannot establish themselves within 20 feet of the closest intersection or within ten feet of another permit holder. Street performers may combine performances subject to the limitation as set forth in subsection 6-4(k). 
(e)  A permit holder within this article shall establish themselves in an area that is at least five feet from the adjacent property line and at least 12 inches from the adjacent street curb as described in attached "Exhibit B" to Ord. No. 11-07. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 3, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 11-07, § 3, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 6-4. - Permit regulations; prohibitions. 
(a)  Throughout the period of time the permit holder is located on public property and engaged in performance or vending art, he or she shall maintain the permitted area, within a radius of ten feet, free of trash and debris and deposit the trash and debris in proper receptacles. 
(b)  A performer or art vendor shall not create noise that violates the Key West sound control ordinance set forth in chapter 26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  A performer or art vendor shall not create an undue interference with the passage of the public through a public area. If a performer or vendor attracts a crowd sufficient to obstruct the public way, a police or code enforcement officer may disperse the crowd that is creating the obstruction. The officer may ask the performer or vendor temporarily to suspend a performance or vending activity or to leave the location when such action is necessary to protect the public safety or public order. 
(d)  A performer may request donations of money or property at a performance. Art vendors holding a Permit "B" shall present a valid State of Florida sales tax receipt at the time of application. Art vendors may offer for sale their own original art (or a reproduction thereof so long as it is identified as a reproduction), provided that the display of the art is contained in an area within the immediate reach of the art vendor. 
(e)  No performer or art vendor shall create a fire hazard or use fire or a weapon as defined in section 6-1 in a performance or creation of art or crafts. 
(f)  No performer or art vendor shall engage in the application of tattoos or body piercing. 
(g)  No performer or art vendor shall include obscenity in a performance or vending activity. 
(h)  No performer or art vendor shall engage in harassment or coercion of passersby. 
(i)  Spray painting shall be permitted, so long as the artist provides ground cover, a wind screen, and confines the spray painting to an area not greater than five feet by five feet; and otherwise ensures that the spray paint shall not damage or implicate property not involved in the subject art. 
(j)  No food or drink, whether made by a permit holder or otherwise, shall be permitted to be displayed or offered for sale. 
(k)  No tables, lounge chairs, push carts or mobile display racks, including all accoutrements, shall be placed on public property other than one display that is no larger than six feet high, four feet wide and four feet deep including all attachments for either Permit "A" or Permit "B" holders. One small chair or stool shall be allowed; a portrait artist may provide a folding chair for the customer which shall be stored when not in use. Permit holders shall not occupy an area larger than 25 square feet. 
(l)  No performer or art vendor shall block access to an entrance to a building, bicycle rack, or to a trash receptacle. 
(m)  No performer or art vendor shall interfere with a motorist, either regarding the passage of a vehicle or the sight of its driver. 
(n)  A permit holder shall not engage in fraudulent practices or solicitations, including, but not limited to, misrepresentation about any sale or solicitation, misrepresentation about the nature and type of any organization with which the permit holder is associated, misrepresentation or concealment of any material fact in the application process, or misrepresentation regarding any art being vended. 
(o)  No performer or art vendor shall engage in off-premises canvassing as set forth in chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances; provided, however that an art vendor may distribute a catalogue of his or her work. 
(p)  No performer or art vendor shall connect to electric outlets or power sources owned by the city or on private property, and must provide his or her own safe power sources, if any are required. Extension cords that traverse the city right-of-way are prohibited. 
(q)  Permit "A" holders are permitted to have one animal as part of their performance. Such animal is limited to a domesticated dog, domesticated cat, a bird with a wingspan no larger than 36 inches or tortoise with a shell no longer than 36 inches. 
(r)  Persons operating under Permit "B" shall not engage in performances of any kind, except for the creation of an original work of art. 
(s)  The licensing division may promulgate administrative rules to effectuate this section. 
(t)  No permit holder may actually or constructively possess any alcoholic beverages, nor be under the influence of same while conducting their business or performance. 
(u)  Palm fronds used by a permit holder shall be limited in length to three feet. 
(v)  Any permit holder who is a minor as defined in subsection 42-12(a) of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West shall abide by the provisions of subsection 42-12(b) and shall have a parent or legal guardian with them at all times while performing any activity under this chapter. 
(w)  Amplification in any form is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 4, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 11-07, § 4, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 6-5. - Display of permits, prices. 
(a)  Permits "A" and "B," as applicable, shall be displayed at the performance or art vending location at all times. The permit must contain a photograph of the permit holder. The permit shall be clearly visible. 
(b)  Holders of permit "B" who are vending art shall display the sales price for each work of art for sale. The sales price either may be affixed to the work of art or be on a temporary sign whose dimensions shall not exceed 81/2 by 11 inches. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 5, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 06-03, § 2, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 6-6. - Events. 
(a)  If in the opinion of the city manager, a special event or major festival approved by the city commission will cause extraordinary sidewalk congestion, then the city manager may suspend permits issued under this article during the period of the festival. The city manager may contract with a sponsor of a special event to allow additional street performers and art vendors in the public right-of-way during the special event. 
(b)  Nothing in this article is intended to govern the "Sunset Celebration" at Mallory Square, sponsored by the Cultural Preservation Society. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 6, 1-4-2005) 
Sec. 6-7. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit obtained through fraud or through material misrepresentation on the permit holder's application is deemed void ab initio. The city manager shall revoke the permit. Prior to revocation, the city manager or his designee shall provide the permit holder notice and an informal opportunity to be heard on the decision to revoke. 
(b)  If a permit holder is found by the code enforcement special master or the county court to have violated the regulations set forth in this article two times within a three-year period, then the city manager may revoke the permit. Permits whose insurance is cancelled prior to the expiration of the insurance policy will be subject to revocation. Prior to revocation, the city manager or his designee shall provide the permit holder notice and an informal opportunity to be heard on the decision to revoke. 
(c)  Any revocation of a permit under subsections (a) or (b) shall be for the duration of the current permitting period and for the next subsequent permitting period. 
(d)  The decision of the city manager or his designee, special magistrate or county court judge to revoke a permit, or any disciplinary action or fine under this section shall be provided in writing to the permit holder. The revocation decision shall constitute final administrative agency action and shall be appealable directly to circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 7, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 11-07, § 5, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 6-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 11-07, adopted April 5, 2011, deleted § 6-8, which pertained to fees for street performers or artists, and derived from Ord. No. 05-02, adopted Jan. 4, 2005. See § 6-2 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 6-9. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person charged with violating sections 6-1 through and including 6-8 hereof shall be subject to prosecution and fine under the civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680, or section 1-15 of the Key West Code of Ordinances or brought before the special magistrate under F.S. ch. 162. 
(b)  A street performer or street artist who is located in whole or in part on private property without the consent of the private property owner is subject to prosecution for trespass, F.S. ch. 810. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 9, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 05-20, § 2, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 11-07, § 7, 4-5-2011) 
Secs. 6-10-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-26. - Payment for city services. 
(a)  The organizer or sponsor of any festival, street fair, fair, carnival, athletic event, contest, competition, parade, fundraiser, rally, boat or car race or other special event which requires city authorization, whether by administrative permit or city commission approval, and which requires the provision of additional or extraordinary support services by police, fire, administrative, or other city departments in order to maintain order or safety or to escort participants shall pay to the city the cost of such services. A down payment of ten percent of the costs, as estimated by the city manager, shall be made to the city either by certified check or credit card at least ten days prior to the event. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish a cost schedule for additional or extraordinary support services for the events referred to in subsection (a) of this section, which schedule shall be subject to approval of the city commission. The city manager is authorized to provide reasonable terms for time and manner of payment. If the event sponsor fails to pay the full costs at the time determined by the city manager or, if no such deadline is established, then within 30 days after the event the city may impose an interest charge on the amount due at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(c)  The city commission may grant special exceptions to this section for cause shown upon the public record. 
(d)  The first $1,000.00 of costs as specified in subsection (a) of this section may be waived for any organizer or sponsor which has qualified as a tax-exempt nonprofit organization according to state or federal law. Acceptance of this waiver by such sponsor shall render the event a public accommodation subject to the human rights provision of the section 38-225. 
(e)  Any nonprofit organization accepting the waiver provided for by subsection (d) of this section shall, within 90 days following the special event, submit to the city commission an accounting of expenses and revenues incurred and generated during the event. 
(Code 1986, § 1.30; Ord. No. 02-29, § 1, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 6-27. - Food, beverage and merchandise booths. 
    No booth or stall set up for a special event and serving any amount or type of food and/or beverage, or selling merchandise, shall be placed directly in front of, or within five feet of the property line of, a restaurant or a bar or a retail store (selling primarily the same or similar merchandise), unless the owner of the restaurant, the bar or the store consents. This section shall not apply to major festivals as defined in section 6-58. 
(Ord. No. 02-29, § 2, 11-19-2002) 
Secs. 6-28-6-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREET CLOSURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 

Sec. 6-56. - Application. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 6-58, at least 60 days prior to a proposed special event that will result in the closing of a public street, the sponsor shall submit an application to the city manager. An application may be made either by a tax-exempt nonprofit organization (nonprofit) or jointly by a nonprofit and a private person or business entity. 
(b)  If the city manager approves the application, he shall then schedule it for consideration by the city commission. However, if the special event proposes to close only one block, is intended to end prior to 9:00 p.m. on any day of the year, and does not seek either a cost waiver or a noise exemption, the city manager may give final approval to the application. 
(c)  Each application shall include the name of a sponsor's contact person and that person's 24-hour telephone number(s), in case of emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 1.301(a); Ord. No. 02-29, § 3, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 6-57. - Donation of percentage of revenue to nonprofit organization. 
    When a sponsor proposes a special event that will cause the closing of a city street or other public right-of-way, the sponsor must donate at least 25 percent of the sponsor's gross revenues or $1,000.00, whichever is greater, to at least one nonprofit organization. The sponsor must designate the nonprofit organization(s) on the application for the event. Each named nonprofit organization must provide the city manager with a letter of assent. Within 30 days after the event, the sponsor shall report to the city manager the amount of the contribution received by the nonprofit organization(s). 
(Code 1986, § 1.301(b); Ord. No. 02-29, § 4, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 04-08, § 1, 5-18-2004) 
Sec. 6-58. - Major festival. 
(a)  A major festival is a special event of regional impact. Major festivals are: Fantasy Fest, Hemingway Days, Goombay Festival, Conch Republic Celebration, the Poker Run, the Valentine's Day event for Wesley House, the Red Ribbon event at Mangoes, and such other special events as may be added or subtracted by resolution of the city commission. Private persons or business entities who sponsor major festivals are not required to provide funds to a nonprofit organization per section 6-57. An application for a major festival must be received in the city manager's office at least six months in advance of the scheduled event. 
(b)  A business that seeks to sell alcoholic beverages at a major festival pursuant to an APS state license, and which is not a bar or restaurant or other concern that sells alcoholic beverages in the ordinary course of its business, must obtain the written approval of the major festival sponsor and provide such approval to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 1.301(c); Ord. No. 02-29, § 5, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 6-59. - Denial of application. 
    The city commission reserves the right to exercise its legislative discretion to deny an application under this division. This section shall not apply to limit applications for special events sponsored by governmental agencies. 
(Code 1986, § 1.301(d)) 
Sec. 6-60. - Payment of extraordinary costs for overflow of people. 
    Where a person has not applied for a special event permit and an event at its location spills into a street, causing the police department to close all or a portion of the street, the person sponsoring the event shall pay all such extraordinary service costs incurred by the city. On each anniversary of this occurrence, if the person can reasonably anticipate an overflow of people into the street, a special event permit must be applied for consistent with this division. A violation of this section may be grounds for revocation of a business tax receipt. 
(Code 1986, § 1.301(e); Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 6-61. - Temporary bathroom facilities. 
    Whenever the sponsor of a special event provides temporary bathroom facilities on the public right-of-way, at least five percent of those facilities or one of those facilities, whichever is the greater number, shall be accessible to persons with physical disability. 
(Ord. No. 02-29, § 6, 11-19-2002) 
Secs. 6-62-6-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 6-86. - Permit. 
    An application for a special event permit to depart from the requirements of sections 26-192 and 26-194 may be made to the city commission at least 30 days before the scheduled event. No permit under this division may be granted for a special event whose duration is more than two consecutive days, unless specifically exempted by the city commission. An application for a permit under this division shall not be made for a special event within 60 days of another special event at one location. The application shall be submitted in accordance with the "Temporary Waiver" requirements of Key West Code of Ordinances section 26-199. 
(Code 1986, § 55.06(a); Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 6-87. - Appeal of denial. 
    A decision to deny a special event permit shall be appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 55.06(b)) 
Secs. 6-88-6-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERTAINMENT AND ANIMAL-DRIVEN VEHICLES; ENTERTAINMENT EQUIPMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal-driven vehicle means a vehicle used for transporting passengers and which is propelled by animal power. 
    Bicycle tour means an organized group of people traveling on bicycles guided by a tour leader for the purpose of sightseeing. 
    Driver means the person who possesses a valid state driver's license, or chauffeur's license if required by state law, and who propels, drives, or directs an entertainment vehicle. 
    Driver permit means the permit which each driver must obtain under division 3 of article II of chapter 78. 
    Entertainment equipment means sporting goods rented or leased to customers for the purpose of locomotion, excluding bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, motorscooters equipped with a saddle and all water sports equipment. This definition includes, but is not limited to, roller skates, roller blades, scooters without a saddle (whether or not motorized), and skateboards. 
    Motorized entertainment vehicle means a motorized vehicle other than a taxicab, moped, motorcycle, motorscooter with a saddle, tour bus, sightseeing vehicle, city bus, or city-franchised vehicle, used in a business for the purpose of transporting passengers and for which a fare or fee is paid as consideration for such transportation. 
    Multi-person human powered entertainment vehicle shall mean a three- or four-wheel human powered vehicle with or without a driver capable of carrying three or more persons used for commercial purposes. Such a vehicle shall be considered an entertainment vehicle for the purpose of regulation under this chapter and chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Nonmotorized entertainment vehicle means a vehicle other than a city-franchised vehicle or two-wheeled bicycle used in a business for the purpose of transporting passengers and which is propelled by human power. 
    Operator means the operator of the entertainment vehicle or equipment business. 
    Owner means one who has legal title or right to an entertainment vehicle or equipment business. 
    Permit means the entertainment vehicle or equipment permit which is required for operation of the business. 
    Recreational rental vehicle shall mean a moped, motorized scooter, an "animal-driven vehicle," a "bicycle tour," a "motorized entertainment vehicle," a "multi-person human powered entertainment vehicle," or a "nonmotorized entertainment vehicle" as defined by the Code of Ordinances, for which a permit is required. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled device by which any person may be transported or drawn upon any public road. 
    Vehicle identification decal shall mean a plastic or paper backed decal or sticker provided by the City of Key West, with assigned vehicle identification number required for each recreational rental vehicle licensed to a particular site. The vehicle identification decal shall be permanently affixed to the front of the vehicle for easy identification by city licensing and code compliance personnel. 
    Vehicle identification number shall mean either the vehicle identification number assigned to a motorized vehicle by the State of Florida, or in the case of a nonmotorized vehicle, a multi-number symbol, indicated on a decal or sticker provided by and assigned by the City of Key West to the owner of the entertainment vehicle or equipment business. 
(Code 1986, § 110.01; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 8-20-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-117. - Animal-driven entertainment vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall offer for use or use any animal-driven entertainment vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers upon a public street or right-of-way. Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 110.11) 
Secs. 6-118-6-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 6-146. - Required. 
    No person shall offer for use or use any entertainment vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers upon a public street or right-of-way or rent or lease entertainment equipment, unless the person holds a valid entertainment vehicle or equipment permit and fully conforms to the terms of this article. Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 110.06) 
Sec. 6-147. - Application. 
(a)  An operator shall apply to the licensing office of the building and zoning department for a permit to operate an entertainment vehicle or equipment business by submitting an application, which shall include the following information as applicable: 
(1)  The number, type, make, model and other information which describes each type of vehicle to be operated; provided, however, that the total number of motorized entertainment vehicles shall not exceed five and that the total number of entertainment vehicles shall not exceed 30. In addition, no one operator may hold more than 12 of the available nonmotorized entertainment vehicle permits. 
(2)  A description of the entertainment equipment inventory, including number of items or sets. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the operator (if other than an individual, the names and addresses of each principal and of the registered agent) and the business location of the operation. 
(4)  A list of all other locales in which the operator is engaged in or associated with an entertainment vehicle or equipment business, and the name and business address of that business. 
(5)  If applicable, the location at which the entertainment vehicles or equipment will be loaded and unloaded. 
(6)  A properly zoned location, requiring no variance or special exception, of the storage facility for the entertainment vehicles or equipment when not in use. 
(7)  The days and hours of operation. 
(8)  The fare to be charged per passenger per ride or other fare schedule, or the rental or lease rates to be charged for equipment. 
(b)  A nonrefundable filing fee of $150.00 shall accompany each application. 
(c)  The licensing office shall send a copy of each completed application to the police department, planning department, and city manager's office for review. The police and planning departments shall submit, within 30 days, to the licensing office a written evaluation of the application, including proposed conditions of approval, based upon consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposed operation's effect upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow over the proposed route and the impact upon affected commercial or residential areas, also taking into consideration existing entertainment vehicle or equipment operations in the same area. 
(2)  Any other public health, safety or welfare concern. 
(d)  The licensing office shall advise the city manager of the staff evaluations and recommended conditions. The city manager shall thereafter present the application and recommendations to the city commission. After hearing, the city commission shall either: 
(1)  Disapprove the application; 
(2)  Approve the application unconditionally; or 
(3)  Approve the application subject to compliance with stated conditions. Such conditions may include but are not limited to a restriction on the hours or days of operation or any other condition which is consistent with protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any conditions shall be typed on the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 110.02) 
Sec. 6-148. - Relation to occupational licensing. 
    A valid entertainment vehicle or equipment permit shall be construed as satisfying, for the named holder thereof and for the uses provided in this article, the business tax receipt requirements of article IV of chapter 66. The permit shall not, however, be considered to be a business tax receipt or be equivalent to such license nor to entitle the operator to rights provided in F.S. ch. 205. 
(Code 1986, § 110.05; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 6-149. - Requirements prior to beginning operation. 
    After city commission approval has been received pursuant to this division, the operator must meet the following requirements prior to beginning operations: 
(1)  Insurance. For each entertainment vehicle there shall be maintained a policy of liability insurance in a sum of not less than $50,000.00 for injury or death to any one person and not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence and not less than $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one incident. All such insurance policies shall be written by companies authorized to transact business in the state. The city must be named as an additional insured on the face of the insurance certificate. All such policies shall be kept in full force and effect at all times any entertainment vehicle is operated or entertainment equipment is rented or leased within the city. 
(2)  All other normal licensing requirements, including proof of a sales tax registration, a lease, and a commercial solid waste account, shall be met. 
(3)  Payment of a fee in the amount of $187.50 per vehicle to be used in the operation, whether or not each vehicle is in use at all times, or $250.00 per entertainment equipment business is required. 
(4)  For each entertainment vehicle license issued under this division, the licensing division shall issue a corresponding decal that shall be affixed to the vehicle as designated by the licensing official. 
(Code 1986, § 110.03; Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 2-18-2004) 
Sec. 6-150. - Transferability. 
    The entertainment vehicle or equipment permit is nontransferable except to an immediate family member and shall be used only by the applicant in whose name it is issued. An immediate family member is defined as a parent, sibling, child or spouse of a permit holder. Any permit transfer other than provided in this section shall render the permit void and ineffective. Any business sale, assignment, whether voluntary or involuntary, or transfer of over 50 percent of the shares of any corporate permit holder shall be construed as a transfer and shall render the permit void and ineffective. 
(Code 1986, § 110.04) 
Sec. 6-151. - Conditions of use. 
(a)  The original or a copy of the permit, as well as fares corresponding to those listed on the application, shall be posted on each motorized and nonmotorized entertainment vehicle at all times. 
(b)  All drivers must be 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  No operator or driver shall: 
(1)  Operate an entertainment vehicle in such a manner that would jeopardize the safety of a passenger transported therein or of the general public. 
(2)  Operate an entertainment vehicle in such a way as to intentionally impede vehicular traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(3)  Park, stand or stop the entertainment vehicle in a manner which violates any city ordinance or state law or disrupts the flow of vehicular traffic on a public street or in a manner which may impede the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Operate an entertainment vehicle in disregard of any traffic control device. 
(5)  Obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic by unnecessarily weaving or changing lanes of travel. 
(6)  Operate an entertainment vehicle in the wrong direction on a one-way street. 
(7)  Operate an entertainment vehicle in disregard of any applicable state traffic law. 
(8)  Operate an entertainment vehicle with more than three passengers, but such number shall not include the driver. 
(9)  Solicit passengers for fares. 
(10)  Charge in excess of the fares stated in the application. 
(11)  Drive abreast of another vehicle except when passing. 
(12)  Fail to drive to the righthand side of the road or traffic lane. 
(13)  Fail to use traffic hand signals. 
(14)  Stop or stand on Duval Street, except where lawfully parked or standing in a parking space or loading zone or at a traffic signal. 
(15)  Drive on North Roosevelt Boulevard. 
(16)  Fail to yield to traffic in a lawful manner. Where possible without danger and where lawful, drivers shall use loading zones and similar street features to allow other traffic to pass. 
(17)  Drive or park on a sidewalk. 
(d)  The name, address, and phone number of the permit holder shall be displayed on signage on the side or back of each motorized and nonmotorized entertainment vehicle or on the vehicle itself, in block letters at least two inches in height. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 110.07) 
Sec. 6-152. - Renewal. 
(a)  The holder of an entertainment vehicle or equipment permit may obtain a renewal of the permit each year on or prior to October 1 by applying to the licensing office and submitting the following information: 
(1)  Any change in the operator information listed on the original or any subsequent renewal application. 
(2)  Evidence of insurance. 
(3)  A renewal fee of $187.50 per vehicle or $250.00 per entertainment equipment business if paid prior to October 1, with a penalty of $25.00 if paid after October 1. 
(4)  Any other applicable requirements. 
(b)  Any entertainment vehicle or equipment permit not renewed within 30 days of its expiration on September 30 shall be void and of no further use or effect whatsoever. At any time that the number of outstanding entertainment vehicles permitted falls below 20, the city manager shall within 30 days of availability distribute, on a random basis among any applicants, a sufficient number of permits to ensure that the total number of outstanding entertainment vehicles permitted equals 20. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 110.08; Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 2-18-2004) 
Sec. 6-153. - Modification of operation; fares. 
(a)  After a minimum of six months has passed from the date a permit was initially issued pursuant to this division, an operator may request permission to modify the operation as to the particular inventory or vehicles used, loading and storage location, days and hours of operation, and permit conditions. The operator shall be subject to the same application procedure applicable to initial applications. 
(b)  Fares shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 110.09; Ord. No. 04-04, § 3, 2-18-2004) 
Sec. 6-154. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  An entertainment vehicle or equipment permit may be suspended or revoked on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation of a material statement contained in the license application. 
(2)  Failure by an operator to comply with any of the sections of this article, conditions of an approved application, or both. 
(3)  Conduct by an operator in connection with the licensed business in a manner which creates a public nuisance or endangers the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Upon one judicial finding of a violation of this article or other pertinent federal, state, or local law by a person holding a valid entertainment vehicle or equipment permit, the city manager shall, after conforming with subsection (c) of this section, issue a written warning, and upon a second such judicial finding impose a determinate suspension of the entertainment vehicle permit or revoke the entertainment vehicle permit. Judicial findings of violation shall include nolo contendere pleas and convictions, whether or not adjudication is withheld. 
(c)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (b) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford to the permit holder notice of the violation charged and a reasonable, informal opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the permit holder's past record of compliance with this article and related laws; and 
(3)  Consider the degree of risk to the public health, safety, and peace arising from the violation in evidence. 
(d)  The city manager's decision shall be rendered in writing and shall include notice to the operator of a right to appeal the decision to the city commission within ten days thereof. Appeals not filed in writing with the city clerk within the period shall be deemed waived and shall not be heard by the city commission. 
(e)  Any entertainment vehicle or equipment permit revoked by the city manager pursuant to this section shall immediately be void and of no further use and effect to any person, including during the pendency of any appeal. 
(Code 1986, § 110.10) 
Secs. 6-155-6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - KEY WEST BOTANICAL GARDEN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 06-11, adopted June 6, 2006, added a new Art. IV to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-200. - Botanical garden. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Key West Botanical Garden, located on 12.35 acres at 5210 College Road, Key West. 
(b)  The botanical garden shall be operated under lease on a not-for-profit basis. In the event the city of Key West shall determine to sell or otherwise convey the property underlying the botanical garden, the purchaser shall operate the garden consistent with grants obtained by the city for the initial purchase of the "Botanical Garden Addition." Revenues generated from the botanical garden shall be invested in the continued operation, maintenance and development of the garden. 
(c)  The prohibition of section 18-87(a) of the Code of Ordinances shall not apply to the sale, possession or drinking of alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the botanical garden. This exception shall apply during special events only. 
(d)  The responsibilities of the Key West Tree Commission with respect to the botanical garden, as set forth in chapter 110 of the Code of Ordinances, are hereby delegated to a committee that shall serve as a liaison between the tree commission and the botanical garden operator. The committee shall make all permitting decisions with regard to botanical garden applications for planting, transplanting and removal of trees. The committee shall be established and defined in the lease between the city and the operator of the botanical garden. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (d), the operator of the botanical garden remains subject to the regulations for the management and maintenance of its trees and vegetation, as set forth in chapter 110 and other applicable regulations of the City of Key West. At a minimum, the operator shall employ the arboricultural standards described in chapter 110 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  The botanical garden shall be open to the public. The operator of the garden shall establish hours of operation that balance public access with the protection of the vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 2, 6-6-2006) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Entertainment and animal-driven vehicles, § 6-116 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; animals on beaches located on city property, § 26-66; sound control of animals, § 26-197. 
State Law reference- Animal care and control, F.S. ch. 828. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Short title; authority and purpose. 
    This chapter shall be referred to as the "City of Key West Animal Control Ordinance" and is enacted under the powers of the city commission to regulate animals and animal owners and keepers in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 53.01) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any living dumb creature other than poultry. 
    Animal at large means any animal, other than a cat, which is not under the control, custody, charge or possession of the owner or other responsible person in attendance, by leash, chain, effective voice command of no more than 20 feet, a tether of no less than ten feet, a secure fence or other means of confinement or restraint. 
    Animal control officer means any person who is authorized by employment or appointment to investigate, on public or private property, civil infractions relating to animal control or cruelty and to issue citations as provided in F.S. § 828.27. An animal control officer is not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. The term "officer" additionally means any law enforcement officer defined in F.S. § 943.10, and any veterinarian defined in F.S. § 474.202. 
    Citation means a written notice as provided in section 10-43 issued to a person by an officer, that the officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted ordinance and that the county court will hear the charge. 
    Commercial kennel or cattery means a facility which offers the services of a kennel or cattery for a profit. 
    Dangerous animal means any animal which has attacked without provocation a person or another animal, or which has been trained to attack on command. 
    Department manager means the animal control supervisor authorized by this chapter. 
    Domesticated animal means any species of animal accustomed to living in or about the habitation of man and is dependent upon man for food and shelter, including but not limited to dogs, cats, swine, cattle, horses, sheep and goats. 
    Effective voice command means voice control within 20 feet by a competent person which at all times prevents the animal subject to the voice control from running at large or otherwise violating this chapter. 
    Fierce animal means any animal not dangerous or vicious but which frequently shows aggressive tendencies. 
    Keeper means any person possessing or having custody of an animal. 
    Kennel and cattery mean a facility other than a veterinarian hospital or facility which provides service to owners of animals, including but not limited to the following: boarding, care and grooming, breeding, stud services, or sales of offspring or adult animals. 
    Leash means a cord, strap or other like apparatus that is attached to an animal in an effort to control the movement of the animal by the holder thereof. 
    License certificate means a rabies vaccination and license certification issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    License tag means a rabies vaccination and license tag issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Licensed veterinarian means a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state. 
    Neutered and spayed mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction by surgical alteration, implantation of a device or other physical means, or permanently incapable of reproduction because of physiological sterility, but only where the neutered or spayed condition has been certified by a veterinarian licensed in any state. 
    Notice means a notice to appear. 
    Nuisance means the following: 
(1)  An animal or poultry that howls, barks, meows, caws, crows, shrieks, squawks, or makes other bothersome noises, for continued duration, or upon three or more occasions cumulatively during any nine-hour period from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., so as to disturb, across a residential or commercial property line, the reasonable peace and quietude of any person; or 
(2)  Any animal that causes a disturbance to the peace or causes injury or threat of injury to persons or property by its conduct or behavior, including but not limited to habitual or repeated destruction, desecration or soiling of any public or private property; habitual chasing of persons, cars or other vehicles; or running at large. 
    Owner means any person owning an animal or any person who feeds or shelters an animal or permits it to remain on the person's property for 30 days or more. In any prosecution under this chapter where it is found that an animal is in the custody or control of a minor, it shall be presumed that the owner of such animal is the parent or legal guardian of such minor. 
    Poultry means chickens, ducks, or geese. 
    Quarantine means strict confinement by leash, closed cage, paddock, or in any other manner and in a place as approved by the county health officer of all animals specified in the order. 
    Right-of-way means any public street, sidewalk, other public walkway or public square. 
    Service animal means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability. 
    Tether means a rope or chain fastened to an animal and a stationary object to keep the animal within a certain boundary. 
    Vicious animal means any animal which has made two or more unprovoked attacks on persons or animals, or an animal which has inflicted serious bodily harm on a person or an animal. 
    Wild animals means those species of animals that are not included in the definition of domesticated animal. 
(Code 1986, § 53.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-3. - Construction of chapter. 
    The sections of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to effect the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.22) 
Sec. 10-4. - Running at large generally. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of an animal other than a domestic cat willfully or negligently to allow the animal to run at large on any public property or on any private property of another without permission of the property owner. Any owner or keeper of an animal other than a domestic cat must leash the animal in any city park where posted. Posting of a particular park shall be determined by the city manager upon the advice of the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of a diseased animal, including a diseased cat, to allow the animal to run at large. 
(c)  Any animal under the close supervision of its owner or keeper or otherwise engaged in an organized animal exhibition, field trial, competition, legal sport or training for these activities shall not be deemed an animal at large. Any dog under the close supervision of its owner or keeper located on the sandy area at the end of Vernon Street known as Vernon Street Beach shall not be deemed an animal at large. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(a)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Fierce, vicious or dangerous animals at large or unsecured. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of an animal declared by the department manager to be fierce, vicious or dangerous either willfully or negligently to allow the animal to run at large or to fail to secure, restrain or confine the animal as ordered by the department pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(b)) 
Sec. 10-6. - Confinement of female dog or cat in heat. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or keeper to permit a female dog or cat in heat (estrus) to be upon the streets or in any public place. The owner or keeper of a female dog or cat in heat shall confine the animal so as to make it inaccessible to any male dog or cat except for controlled and intentional breeding purposes. Confinement solely by a leash, chain or other similar restraint or within a fence, open kennel, open cage or run may be, but is not be presumed to be, in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(c)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Nuisance animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any animal owner or keeper to allow, either willfully or negligently, an animal to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(d)) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-31 et seq. 
Sec. 10-8. - Removal of dog feces. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a dog owner or keeper to permit the dog, either willfully or negligently, to defecate upon: 
(1)  Any public park, ball field, beach or school ground, other than in an area designated for that purpose; 
(2)  Any private property without the permission of the property owner; or 
(3)  Any public right-of-way. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a service animal when the animal is performing service animal duties. Where this section is violated, the owner or keeper shall immediately remove any feces deposited by the dog in a sanitary manner. Removal of the feces in a sealed container shall constitute prima facie compliance with this section. Failure immediately to remove the feces in a sanitary manner shall constitute an additional violation of this section and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1-15. Evidence of a violation of this section need not be seized. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any interlocal agreement between the county and the city under this chapter, a code enforcement officer has the authority to issue citations for violations of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(e), (h)) 
Sec. 10-9. - Transporting animal in open vehicle. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of an animal to transport the animal in the rear of an open truck or other open vehicle unless such animal is tethered in such a fashion that it cannot fall from the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(f)) 
Sec. 10-10. - Ventilation for animal enclosed in vehicle. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner or keeper to enclose any animal in a vehicle without provision for adequate ventilation for the animal. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any interlocal agreement between the county and the city under this chapter, a code enforcement officer has the authority to issue citations for violations of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 53.07(g), (h)) 
Sec. 10-11. - Keeping fowl or wildlife. 
    The city shall not accept or be responsible for the keeping of any nondomesticated fowl or wildlife. Live poultry may be kept by any person in the city, provided that such poultry is kept in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  All live poultry shall be kept in screened coops or pens which are maintained in a sanitary condition free from odors and free from fly breeding. 
(2)  All food used for poultry shall be kept in a suitable container with a tightfitting cover so as to be inaccessible to rats. 
(3)  All poultry droppings shall be removed from the coops or pens at least every 24 hours, tightly wrapped, and disposed of as provided by sections of this Code regarding disposal of solid waste. Droppings shall not be used for fertilizer. 
(Code 1986, § 53.17) 
Sec. 10-12. - Exemptions. 
    The vaccination and licensing sections of this chapter shall not apply to greyhounds kept, maintained or brought into the city for the purposes of racing at licensed greyhound tracks or to dogs used as part of entertainment acts when properly controlled or when dogs remain in the city for a period of less than 30 days. At any time that such racing greyhounds or dogs used as part of entertainment acts cease to be so employed and the animals have been present in the city for 30 days or more, the vaccination and licensing sections of this chapter shall apply. 
(Code 1986, § 53.18) 
Sec. 10-13. - Livestock. 
    No livestock, such as cows, goats, sheep or pigs, shall be kept either penned or loose in any zone where not otherwise permitted in the city. Animals considered wild shall not be kept in any residential zone in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 53.21) 
Sec. 10-14. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  Established. The area comprising the territorial city limits is established as a sanctuary and preserve for all birds. 
(b)  Destruction of birds. It shall be unlawful for any person to harm or in any manner destroy birds within the city limits; provided, however, the city manager is authorized to issue a permit for the destruction of birds that become obnoxious or destructive. 
(c)  Erection of signs. Appropriate signs of a permanent nature and of a design approved by the city commission shall be furnished, placed and maintained at the principal entrances to the city limits by the Monroe County Audubon Society, without cost to the city. The location of such signs shall be determined with the advice and consent of the city and state highway authorities. Such signs shall read: "City of Key West, Bird Sanctuary." 
(Code 1986, §§ 53.23-53.25; Ord. No. 11-19, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 10-15. - Luring, enticing, seizing, molesting or teasing animal. 
    It is unlawful for any person to entice or lure any animal out of an enclosure or off the property of its owner or keeper or to seize, molest or tease any animal while the animal is held or controlled by its owner or keeper or while the animal is on the property of its owner or keeper. 
(Code 1986, § 53.11) 
Sec. 10-16. - Number restricted. 
    No person may keep more than four domestic animals on any premises, unless the animals are six months or younger, without operating a duly licensed kennel or pet shop. However, exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the city commission, with any conditions deemed appropriate, for premises upon which are kept domestic animals of historical, social, or tourism significance. Any number of nonpoultry birds may be kept as long as they are adequately and humanely cared for and their noise does not reasonably intrude into the domain of other persons. 
(Code 1986, § 53.16) 
Secs. 10-17-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-41. - Rules and regulations to implement chapter. 
    The city commission, if operating its own animal control program, may enact reasonable rules and regulations to implement and carry out this chapter, including but not limited to the right to regulate or exempt certain animals from this chapter and the right to regulate the numbers and types of animals and the conditions under which they may be maintained in residentially zoned areas. 
(Code 1986, § 53.20) 
Sec. 10-42. - Contract with humane organizations. 
    The city commission, by resolution, may contract with any private nongovernmental humane organization for the operation of animal shelter facilities and of this chapter, according to the sections of this Code concerning city contracts. 
(Code 1986, § 53.19) 
Sec. 10-43. - Enforcement; fines. 
(a)  Violations observed. Upon observing a violation of this chapter, the department manager or an animal control officer or any other law enforcement officer may either: 
(1)  Issue a citation to the owner or keeper of the animal, which shall contain the following: 
a.  The date and time of the issuance of the citation; 
b.  The name and address of the person cited; 
c.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
d.  The facts constituting probable cause for the issuance of the citation; 
e.  The ordinance violated; 
f.  The name and authority of the officer issuing the citation; 
g.  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation; 
h.  A statement of the maximum civil penalty, not to exceed $500.00, which may be imposed if the person cited contests the citation and is determined to have committed the violation; 
i.  A statement of the civil penalty payable if the person cited does not contest the citation; 
j.  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty of $500.00. Any person willfully refusing to sign and accept a citation issued by an officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or a fine not to exceed $500.00 in addition to the civil penalty; or 
(2)  Impound the animal which is the subject of the violation and commence prosecution of the offense pursuant to F.S. § 828.27(1)(f). 
(b)  Complaints of violations not observed. Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by three or more competent persons residing in separate dwellings, where all such affidavits are made under oath before an individual authorized to take acknowledgments, setting forth the nature and date of the act, the owner or keeper of the animal, the address of the owner or keeper, and a description of the animal, the department manager or a sworn animal control officer or other law enforcement officer shall investigate the complaint to determine whether there is probable cause to believe a violation of this chapter has occurred. If probable cause exists, the department manager or a sworn animal control officer shall commence prosecution of the offense pursuant to F.S. § 828.27(1)(f). 
(c)  Punishment. Upon conviction, any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided by law. Each day during which the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(1)  Violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction. The maximum civil penalty shall not exceed $500.00. Court costs, surcharges and other special charges shall be deducted by the clerk of the circuit court in the same manner and amounts as provided for class 1 noncriminal violations. 
(2)  If the party cited does not contest the citation, the penalty given shall be equal to 50 percent of the penalty deemed appropriate by the court. 
(d)  Order to show cause. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the department. This order shall require such person to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation has not been taken. If any person who is issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that person may be held in contempt of court. 
(Code 1986, § 53.12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 828.27. 
Secs. 10-44-10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-196 et seq. 

Sec. 10-71. - Designation of department manager. 
    The city manager is authorized to designate a suitable person as animal control supervisor, called the department manager, to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(a)) 
Sec. 10-72. - Duties generally. 
(a)  The department manager may catch, seize or pick up the following: 
(1)  Any stray animal. 
(2)  Any animal at large. 
(3)  Any fierce, vicious or dangerous animal not properly restrained or secured by the owner or keeper. 
(4)  Any animal carrying or believed to be carrying rabies or other infectious or contagious diseases. 
(5)  Any animal that is a nuisance. 
(6)  Any dog not licensed and inoculated as required by law. 
(7)  Any sick or injured animal for which the owner or keeper cannot be found after reasonable effort to do so, or for which the owner or keeper is unable or unwilling to provide proper care. 
(8)  Any other animal authorized by this chapter and state statute to be impounded, caught, seized or picked up. 
(b)  The department manager shall impound or otherwise dispose of such animals as provided under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(b)) 
Sec. 10-73. - Investigation of complaints or violations. 
    The department manager shall investigate complaints or actions allegedly in violation of this chapter and shall issue citations demanding that the violations cease or be corrected. Those animal control officers authorized to issue citations pursuant to F.S. § 828.27 have authority under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(c)) 
Sec. 10-74. - Right of entry. 
    Pursuant to law, the department manager may enter public or unfenced private property within the city, except residential buildings, to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(d)) 
Sec. 10-75. - Declaration of fierce, dangerous or vicious animals. 
    The department manager may declare an animal to be a fierce animal, a dangerous animal or a vicious animal, as defined by section 10-2, and may order the owner of such animal to secure, restrain and confine it in a reasonable manner specified by the department manager. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(e)) 
Sec. 10-76. - Delegation of functions to county. 
    The city may delegate the functions in this division by interlocal agreement to the county and shall make arrangements for any payment to the county which is agreed upon. 
(Code 1986, § 53.04(f)) 
Secs. 10-77-10-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-106. - Restraint of dogs in unfenced yards. 
    A property owner or tenant shall restrain any dog in his or her unfenced yard in such a manner that the dog cannot attack or charge a pedestrian. The restraint on the dog shall prevent it from approaching within at least five feet of a sidewalk (or other right-of-way in the absence of a sidewalk). 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 2-5-2002) 
Secs. 10-107-10-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 10-136. - Required for dogs. 
(a)  Any person who owns or keeps in the city a dog six months of age or older shall cause the dog to be licensed annually. A license shall consist of a rabies vaccination, license certificate and license tag for the dog's collar. 
(b)  License certificates and license tags may be issued only by the department manager and licensed veterinarians and shall be valid for one year. No other license certificate or license tag shall be valid in the city. 
(c)  A license certificate and license tag issued for one dog is only valid for the dog licensed and is not transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(a)) 
Sec. 10-137. - Design and issuance of certificates and tags to veterinarians. 
    The department manager shall design the license certificate and license tag and shall issue license certificates and license tags to licensed veterinarians. The department manager shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for collection of license fees. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(b)) 
Sec. 10-138. - Fees. 
    The city commission shall establish by resolution the fees to be charged for the license certificate and license tag. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(c)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Exemption from payment of fee for service animals. 
    A city resident who owns a service animal properly trained and actually being used to assist a disabled person may obtain from the department manager a license at no charge upon presentation of proof of such animal use. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(d)) 
Sec. 10-140. - Kennels and catteries. 
    By resolution, the city commission may provide regulations for kennels and catteries, including provisions for registration, revocation of registration, discounted animal license fees, exemption from license tag requirements, methods of confinement, inspections, and other necessary requirements. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(e)) 
Sec. 10-141. - Retention of part of fee by veterinarians. 
    The city commission may, by resolution, authorize veterinarians to retain a specified portion of the license fee for each license issued as reimbursement for the cost of issuing the license. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(f)) 
Sec. 10-142. - Lost or destroyed tags. 
    If a license tag is lost or destroyed, a replacement shall be issued by the department manager or licensed veterinarian upon presentation of the corresponding license certificate and payment of the appropriate fee. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(g)) 
Sec. 10-143. - Removal of tag. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove the license tag of any licensed animal within the city except when: 
(1)  The animal is participating in any organized exhibition, field trial or competition or is in training for these events or is engaged in a legal sport under supervision of its owner or keeper or is undergoing grooming; 
(2)  The dog is confined in a licensed kennel, grooming facility, veterinary hospital, or department pound facility, in which case the license tag number shall be recorded and readily identifiable with the dog to which it belongs; if the dog is not licensed, the facility shall clearly indicate it on the facility's records; 
(3)  A licensed veterinarian orders in writing that the license tag and collar be removed for reasons of the animal's health, in which case the animal shall be confined within an enclosed building or kennel at all times until the veterinarian permits the collar and tags again to be placed on the animal; or 
(4)  The animal is being voluntarily confined within an enclosed building or kennel. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(h)) 
Sec. 10-144. - Effect on new residents. 
    Persons newly residing in the city shall comply with the licensing sections of this division within 30 days of the change of residence. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(i)) 
Sec. 10-145. - Use or possession of stolen, counterfeit or forged certificate, tag, form or other document. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess a stolen, counterfeit or forged license certificate or license tag, vaccination certificate, inoculation deterrent form or other documentation required by or issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(j)) 
Sec. 10-146. - Refusal to show certificate, tag or other documents. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dog to refuse to show upon demand by the department manager the license certificate or license tag or other documents required by and issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.06(k)) 
Secs. 10-147-10-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-176. - Authority to operate and maintain pound. 
    The city may purchase, lease or construct and may operate and maintain city pounds or subpounds to retain animals at large; any fierce, vicious or dangerous animals not properly secured or restrained by the owner or keeper; animals that are nuisances; animals having or believed to have rabies or other infectious or contagious diseases; dogs not licensed and inoculated as required by this chapter; or any animal otherwise in violation of this chapter or in violation of the provisions of state statute. Additionally or alternatively, the city may delegate such functions through interlocal agreement to the county and shall make arrangements for any payment to the county which is agreed upon. 
(Code 1986, § 53.03(a)) 
Sec. 10-177. - Fees. 
    Reasonable fees may be charged for impounding animals under this chapter. The owner or keeper of an impounded animal shall pay the fees and execute a sworn statement of ownership or responsibility as a condition precedent to release of an impounded animal. Fees collected shall be deposited in the general revenue fund of the city, for conveyance in part or in whole to other authority if an interlocal agreement so dictates, and all expenses of administering this chapter shall be paid from that fund. The city commission shall promulgate by resolution all charges to be paid under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.03(b)) 
Sec. 10-178. - Release of unvaccinated or unlicensed dog. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 10-177, a dog or cat which is not inoculated against rabies or which is not licensed shall not be released from a pound facility until provisions have been made to properly inoculate and license the animal. 
(b)  The department manager shall charge the owner the applicable fee for vaccination or licensing. When an impounded animal is not claimed within a reasonable period of time, as determined by resolution, the department manager may transfer custody or ownership of the animal to a humane agency or a new owner or may destroy the animal and dispose of its remains. In either event, the owner or keeper will not be entitled to compensation. 
(Code 1986, §§ 53.03(c), 53.14(b)) 
Sec. 10-179. - Surrender of animal to department manager; interference with department manager in performance of duty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender an animal upon lawful demand by the department manager. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to attempt to take any animal from the custody of the department manager or to attempt to take any animal from a pound without permission of the department manager in the performance of his duties under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.13) 
Sec. 10-180. - Impoundment authorized. 
    Any dog found without a current tag or any animal found in violation of this chapter may be caught by an authorized department employee or an authorized employee of the Humane Society authorized by the city or anyone acting under its direction and impounded at a place maintained or designated for that purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 53.15(a)) 
Sec. 10-181. - Seizure of animals by property owners or tenants. 
    The city commission finds and declares that problems of animal overpopulation in the city require not only the resources of the staff, but also the aid and assistance of private deputies. Therefore: 
(1)  It is lawful for a property owner or tenant to seize in a humane manner any dog, cat or other animal running at large on his property in violation of sections 10-4 through 10-7. Where such seizure is made, the property owner or tenant shall immediately deliver the animal to the department manager. The property owner or tenant shall treat the animal humanely and shall exercise utmost care to ensure the animal's safety and well-being. 
(2)  The department manager may impound any animal delivered by its owner or by a property owner or tenant pursuant to subsection (1) of this section and may release or dispose of the animal pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Any person who seizes an animal pursuant to this section shall exercise utmost care to treat the animal humanely and to avoid any injury, sickness, hunger or any other ailment or affliction whatsoever in both the seizure of the animal and the delivery of the animal to the department manager. Any person unable to comply with the foregoing for any reason shall not seize and deliver any animal. Any person who does injure or maim any animal or who does subject an animal to hunger, sickness, or any other ailment or affliction, either intentionally or negligently, in the exercise of the person's authority under this section, is in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties in section 10-43. 
(Code 1986, § 53.10) 
Sec. 10-182. - Seizure and disposal of nuisance animals; disposal of impounded animals. 
(a)  When a court of competent jurisdiction adjudges an animal a nuisance under this chapter or other law, the department manager may seize the animal and offer it for adoption or may destroy it in a humane manner. The department manager may likewise offer for adoption, destroy or otherwise dispose of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter where: 
(1)  No owner exists; 
(2)  An owner is not identified within five working days after attempts by the city or county department manager to do so; 
(3)  The owner exists but cannot be contacted after reasonable attempts by the department manager to do so for a reasonable period of time; or 
(4)  An owner has been contacted but has by his actions, failure to act, or statements indicated an intent to abandon the animal. 
(b)  The department manager shall make every reasonable effort to identify and notify the owner or keeper of the impoundment of his animal pursuant to this chapter, and such efforts shall be made for a reasonable period of time as determined by resolution. However, where the department manager complies fully and makes every reasonable effort based on the situation to identify and notify such owner or keeper and where such efforts fail, resulting in the adoption or destruction or other disposal of the animal, the department manager shall be deemed to have complied fully with due process of law, and no owner or keeper shall be entitled to any compensation for loss of the animal. 
(Code 1986, § 53.08) 
Sec. 10-183. - Confinement of fierce, dangerous or vicious animals. 
    Upon complaint, the department manager shall investigate whether an animal is fierce, dangerous or vicious as defined in section 10-2. If the department manager finds that such animal is a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal, he shall notify the owner or keeper in writing, stating all the facts known to him, and shall order the owner or keeper to confine the animal to a substantial enclosure or to chain it securely to the owner's property or otherwise to control it in a reasonable manner specified by the department manager. The owner or keeper shall immediately comply with the department manager's written order; failure to comply constitutes a violation of this chapter and subjects the owner or keeper to the penalties in this chapter and subjects the animal to seizure under division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 53.09) 
Sec. 10-184. - Confinement of injured animals or animals believed to carry infectious or contagious disease; disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  The department manager may impound any animal believed to be carrying an infectious or contagious disease or any injured animal and may retain the services of a licensed veterinarian to treat it. The department manager may accept a sick or injured animal upon delivery. When a sick or injured animal is owned and the owner is identified, such owner shall be liable for payment of veterinary expenses or reimbursement of the department's expenses in treating the animal. At the discretion of the department manager, a sick or injured animal may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of and its remains disposed of without compensation to the owner or keeper, provided that the department manager shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner or keeper that the animal is impounded. 
(b)  When an animal dies, the owner or keeper of the animal shall dispose of the remains immediately. When the department manager discovers a dead animal, he shall notify the owner or keeper, if known, and shall order the owner or keeper to dispose of the remains immediately. If the owner or keeper notified fails to comply within 24 hours, the department manager shall cause the remains to be disposed of and shall bill the animal owner or keeper, as appropriate, for the costs of disposal. Such animal owner or keeper may further be held in violation of this chapter and punished as provided in this chapter. The department manager shall dispose of the remains of an animal which has died on public property, but only where an owner or keeper cannot be notified. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to limit or contravene the provisions of F.S. § 823.041. 
(Code 1986, § 53.14(b), (c)) 
Sec. 10-185. - Disposal of unredeemed animals; release of animals. 
(a)  After a period of confinement of five days, those impounded animals not claimed may be disposed of through an approved humane agency or otherwise in a humane manner. 
(b)  An animal shall be released to its owner on presentation of proof of ownership and after proper inoculation, licensing and payment of fees. 
(Code 1986, § 53.15(b)) 
Sec. 10-186. - Adoption of unclaimed animals. 
    The fee for the adoption of an unclaimed animal shall be as adopted by resolution plus the cost required by state statutes to qualify the animal for adoption. 
(Code 1986, § 53.15(c)) 
Secs. 10-187-10-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccination required, F.S. § 828.30. 

Sec. 10-216. - Vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets. 
(a)  Any city resident who owns or keeps a dog, cat or ferret four months or older shall cause the dog, cat or ferret to be vaccinated effectively against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The resident person, owner or keeper of the dog, cat or ferret must comply with the provisions of F.S. § 828.30. Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a rabies vaccination certificate signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccination or a rabies vaccination tag issued by the department manager and attached to the animal's collar. No other vaccination certificate or tag shall be valid in the city. A license certificate and license tag issued for one animal is only valid for the animal licensed and is not transferable. 
(b)  Any nonresident who brings a dog, cat or ferret four months of age or older into the city with the intent to reside within the city permanently or temporarily for a minimum of six months shall obtain a license certificate and a license tag from the department manager or a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of arrival. The owner must prove ownership of the animal. 
(c)  Rabies vaccination is excused only if the owner or keeper can prove that the dog, cat or ferret has been vaccinated against rabies within the past six months by a veterinarian licensed to practice in any state, or if a licensed veterinarian has examined the animal and certifies in writing that a vaccination would be injurious to the animal's health because of its age, infirmity, disability, illness or other medical considerations. In the latter case, the animal shall be kept in an enclosed building or kennel until the veterinarian can safely vaccinate the animal. 
(Code 1986, § 53.05) 
Sec. 10-217. - Quarantine of biting domesticated animal. 
    When a domesticated animal has bitten a person or another animal or is believed to have bitten a person or another animal or is suspected by the department manager to have rabies, it shall be quarantined by a licensed veterinarian under the supervision of the department manager, or the animal may be held in quarantine at a pound facility. The quarantine shall be for a reasonable period of time, as determined by the department manager. 
(Code 1986, § 53.14(a)) 
Sec. 10-218. - Destruction of biting wild animals. 
    Any wild animal that bites or otherwise exposes a human to rabies shall be immediately killed and tested for rabies unless the county health officer determines the circumstances warrant an exception. 
(Code 1986, § 53.14(d)) 
Secs. 10-219-10-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEA TURTLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Protection of sea turtles, F.S. § 370.12(1). 

Sec. 10-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjacent waters means the waters abutting a nesting area and extending 300 feet to either side of it and out to the limits of the city's property line. 
    Artificial light or artificial lighting means the light emanating from any manmade or man-controlled device. 
    Beach means the zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean low water line to the place where there is a marked change in the material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegetation, usually the effective limit of storm waves. 
    Bug-type bulb means any yellow-colored incandescent lightbulb that is marketed as being specifically treated in such a way so as to reduce the attraction of bugs to the light. 
    Cumulatively illuminated means illuminated by numerous artificial light sources that as a group illuminate any portion of the beach. 
    Daylight hours means the locally effective time period between sunrise and sunset. 
    Hatchling means any species of marine turtle, within or outside of a nest, that has recently hatched from an egg. 
    Indirectly illuminated means illuminated as the result of the glowing element, lamp, globe or reflector of an artificial light source, which source is not directly visible to an observer on the beach. 
    Jurisdictional boundaries means the area on contiguous land within 300 feet of an identified or potential nesting area. 
    Mechanical beach cleaning means any mechanical means by which debris, including but not restricted to trash, litter, seaweed or seagrass wrack, is removed from the beach. 
    Nest means the area in and around a place in which sea turtle eggs are naturally deposited or relocated beneath the sediments of the beach. 
    Nesting area means both identified nesting areas and potential nesting areas. 
    Nesting area, identified, means any area where sea turtles have been or are currently nesting and the adjacent beach or other intertidal areas used for access by the turtles. 
    Nesting area, potential, means any area where sea turtle crawls have been observed that has suitable substrate for digging a nest which is accessible to the sea turtle. 
    Nesting season means the period from April 15 through October 31 of each year. 
    Permitted agent of the state means any qualified individual, group or organization possessing a permit from the state department of environmental protection to conduct activities related to sea turtle protection and conservation. 
    Sea turtle means any specimen belonging to the species Caretta caretta (loggerhead turtle), Chelonia mydas (green turtle), Dermochelys coriacea (leatherback turtle), Eretmochelys imbricata (hawksbill turtle) or any other marine turtle using city beaches as a nesting habitat. 
    Suitable substrate means any unconsolidated sediments of at least one foot in depth. 
    Tinted glass means any glass treated to achieve an industry approved, inside-to-outside light transmittance value of 45 percent or less. Such transmittance is measured as the percentage of visible light that is transmitted through the glass. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-247. - Prohibiting storage or placement of material in nesting area. 
    The storage or placement of any material, including but not limited to construction material, riprap, trash and debris, mulch or landscaping material, fill, vehicles, or boats, that has potential to impede movement of sea turtle hatchlings or adults between ocean and nesting areas or that may cover existing nests sites is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(b)) 
Sec. 10-248. - Standards for exterior artificial lighting. 
(a)  To prevent exterior artificial lighting from illuminating the jurisdictional boundaries or adjacent waters during the sea turtle nesting season, the following measures shall be taken to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of existing exterior artificial light. Existing exterior artificial light fixtures within direct line of sight of the beach shall be designed, positioned modified or removed so that: 
(1)  The point source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not directly visible from the beach; 
(2)  The area within the jurisdictional boundaries is not directly or indirectly illuminated; and 
(3)  The area within the jurisdictional boundaries is not cumulatively illuminated. 
(b)  Measures including, but not limited to, the following shall be taken to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of existing artificial beachfront lighting through appropriate design: 
(1)  Positioning of fixtures so that the point source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is eliminated or is no longer visible from the beach. 
(2)  Replacement of fixtures having an exposed light source with fixtures containing recessed light sources or shields. 
(3)  Replacement of traditional lightbulbs with yellow bug-type bulbs not exceeding 50 watts or low-pressure sodium vapor lamps. 
(4)  Replacement of nondirectional fixtures with completely shielded directional fixtures that point down and away from the beach. 
(5)  Replacement of fixtures having transparent or translucent coverings with fixtures having opaque shields covering an arc of at least 180 degrees and extending an appropriate distance below the bottom edge of the fixture on the seaward side so that the light source or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not visible from the beach. 
(6)  Replacement of pole lamps with low-profile, low-level luminaries no higher than 48 inches off the ground, such as low-mounted wall fixtures, low bollards and ground level fixtures, so that the light source or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not visible from the beach. 
(7)  Replacement of incandescent, fluorescent and high-intensity lighting with the lowest wattage low-pressure sodium vapor lighting possible for the specific application. 
(8)  Planting or improvement of landscape vegetative buffers in compliance with the city's land development regulations between the light source and the beach to screen light from the beach. 
(9)  Construction of ground level barriers in compliance with the city's land development regulations to shield light sources from the beach. 
(10)  Limitation of exterior lights used expressly for safety or security purposes. 
(11)  Permanent removal of all floodlights, uplights or spotlights used for decorative or accent purposes. 
(12)  Permanent removal or disabling of any fixture which cannot be brought into compliance with this article. 
(13)  Shielding or modification of any existing lighted sign pursuant to the land development regulations such that it is not directly visible from the beach. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(c)) 
Sec. 10-249. - Standards for interior artificial lighting. 
    To prevent interior artificial lighting from illuminating the jurisdictional boundaries or adjacent waters during the sea turtle nesting season, measures including but not limited to the following shall be taken to reduce or eliminate the negative effects on interior light emanating from doors and windows within line of sight of the beach: 
(1)  Use of window treatments such as blackout draperies, shade screens or blinds to shield interior lights from the beach. 
(2)  Application of window tint or film that meets the standards for tinted glass. 
(3)  The turning off of all unnecessary interior lights. 
(4)  Arrangement of lamps and other moveable light fixtures away from windows. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(d)) 
Sec. 10-250. - Standards for mechanical beach cleaning. 
    All mechanical beach cleaning activities designed to remove debris from the beach through the use of motorized vehicles or other mechanical means shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Timing. Beach cleaning shall be confined to daylight hours during the sea turtle nesting season. 
(2)  Mode of operations. During the sea turtle nesting season: 
a.  Beach cleaning operations shall be limited to the area seaward of the strand line (previous high tide mark). 
b.  Lightweight motorized vehicles having wide, low-profile, low-pressure tires or hand raking shall be used to conduct beach cleaning operations. 
c.  Devices used for removing debris from the beach shall be designed and/or operated such that they do not penetrate the beach substrate by more than two inches. 
d.  Operators shall be educated to identify a sea turtle crawl (turtle tracks), recognize and avoid a sea turtle nest, and report nests and/or crawls to a permitted agent of the state. 
(3)  Coordination of beach cleaning operations with state-sanctioned scientific studies. All beach cleaning operations shall be coordinated through the state to ensure that these operations do not interfere with state-sanctioned scientific studies or surveys of sea turtle nesting activities. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(e)) 
Sec. 10-251. - Protection from predation. 
    No predatory pets or pets likely to have a potential for being disruptive or damaging to nesting sea turtles, hatchlings or nests shall be allowed to roam loose and unsupervised within the jurisdictional boundaries during the nesting season. Such pets include, but are not limited to, dogs, cats, snakes, lizards or iguanas, ferrets and pigs. Feeding of raccoons, opossums and other wild animals within the jurisdictional boundaries shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(f)) 
Sec. 10-252. - Education program. 
    The city manager shall develop a sea turtle protection education program for the benefit of the public. The program shall include an education-based response by the city toward any person who is found to be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(g)) 
Sec. 10-253. - Cooperation from electric system. 
    The city manager is authorized to transmit a copy of this article to the city electric system and to strive to obtain its cooperation in the performance of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 53.26(h)) 
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-254. - Definitions. 
    Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Animal rescue organization means humane society or other duly incorporated or organized nonprofit organization operated as a bona fide charitable organization under Section 501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code, which organization is devoted to the rescue, care and/or adoption of stray, abandoned, injured or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
    Animal shelter means a municipal or related public animal shelter or duly incorporated or organized nonprofit organization operated as a bona fide charitable organization under Section 501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code devoted to the rescue, care and/or adoption of stray, abandoned, injured or surrendered animals, and which does not breed animals. 
    Cat means an animal of any age of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
    Certificate of source means a document from the source or county animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, non-profit rescue organization or hobby breeder declaring the source of origin of a pet on the premises to be sold or transferred or offered for sale or transfer. A certificate of source shall include at a minimum: 
(a)  A brief description of the pet (dog, cat, rabbit, ferret, or guinea pig), the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the source of the pet; 
(b)  Shall be signed by the pet store certifying the accuracy of the certificate; and 
(c)  Shall be signed by the purchaser or transferee of the pet acknowledging receipt of the certificate of source. 
    Dog means an animal of any age of the Canidae family of the Carnivora. 
    Ferret means an animal of any age with the scientific name of Mustela Putorius Furo. 
    Guinea Pig means an animal of any age with the scientific name of Cavia Porcellus. 
    Hobby breeder means any person or entity that causes or allows the breeding or studding of a pet, as defined herein, resulting in no more than a total of one (1) litter per calendar year whether or not the animals in such litter are offered for sale or other transfer. 
    Owner means and includes any person feeding, owning, harboring or keeping any animal within the territorial limits of the city. 
    Pet means a dog, cat, rabbit, ferret, or guinea pig. 
    Pet mill means a facility where pets are bred for the purpose of selling them and where any two (2) of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  More than twenty (20) dogs under the age of twelve (12) weeks or more than twenty (20) cats under the age of sixteen (16) weeks are kept at a single time; 
(2)  No genetic or heredity health testing appropriate for the breed of pet is conducted; 
(3)  No long-term [over one (1) year] guarantees are honored; 
(4)  A single female pet is bred every cycle; 
(5)  A single female pet is bred more than twice in one calendar year; 
(6)  There are no records of the pets' parents; 
(7)  More than eight pets are kept in a single cage or kennel area. 
    Pet store means any retail establishment open to the public that sells or transfers, or offers for sale or transfer, pets, regardless of the age of the pet. 
    Pet store operator means a person who owns or operates a pet store. 
    Rabbit means an animal of any age with the scientific name of Oryctolagus Cuniculus. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-255. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Sale or transfer of pets. No pet store shall display, sell, trade, deliver, barter, lease, rent, auction, give away, transfer, offer for sale or transfer, or otherwise dispose of pets on or after the effective date of this section unless the pet store is exempt under [section] 10-256. 
(b)  Pet Mills. No pet mills shall be permitted to operate in the City of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 2, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-256. - Exemptions. 
    The prohibitions contained in section 10-255 shall not apply to: 
(a)  An animal shelter. 
(b)  An animal rescue organization. 
(c)  An animal shelter or animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store or other retail store. 
(d)  Pet stores that possess an active City of Key West local business tax receipt on the effective date of this ordinance shall have thirty (30) days therefrom to comply with the certificate of source in section 10-257. 
(e)  A hobby breeder as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 3, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-257. - Certificate of source. 
    A pet store that obtains pets from a permitted source shall post conspicuously on the cage of each pet a signed certificate of source which shall specify at minimum: 
(a)  A description of the pet including species breed, sex, color, and distinctive markings, physical condition and health, and age (if known); and 
(b)  The name and address of the source from which the pet was obtained and date thereof; 
(c)  For each pet receiving medical care while in the custody or control of the pet dealer or pet shop, the type of service rendered, date, and veterinarian's name. 
(d)  A copy of the certificate of source shall be signed by and provided to the purchaser or transferee of any pet at the time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 4, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-258. - Penalty. 
    Violations of section 10-255 and 10-257 shall be punishable by section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-13, § 5, 8-16-2016) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Contractors examining board, § 2-316 et seq.; contractors, § 18-116 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90; historic preservation, ch. 102; performance standards, ch. 106; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110; signs, ch. 114; posting advertisement on unoccupied buildings or temporary structures, § 114-3; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122; nonconformities, § 122-26 et seq.; restrictions on buildings and structures, including entryways, § 122-1078. 
State Law reference- Building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Payment of fees, assessments and service charges required prior to issuance of permit, approval, development order, variance or certificate. 
    The city and its agencies, departments, boards and authorities shall not issue any permit, approval, development order, variance, or certificate on any lot or parcel of property in the city until all fees, fines, charges and assessments of any nature due or accruing to the city have been paid on the subject parcel or lot. 
(Code 1986, § 31.002; Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 14-2. - Applicable fees. 
    Certain fees are applicable to all articles of Chapter 14 or otherwise have broad application. Accordingly, the office of the chief building official shall charge and collect for the following services at the following rates: 
Administrative Fees 
(a)  Inspection after normal business hours, with three-hour minimum and a partial hour shall be rounded up, per hour ..... $70.00 
(b)  Time-specific inspections schedule during normal working hours, per inspection ..... 70.00 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. If necessary for inspector to return for inspection of a building or structure: 
(1)  First re-inspection ..... $25.00 
(2)  Second re-inspection ..... $50.00 
(3)  Three or more re-inspections, each ..... $100.00 
(d)  Requested courtesy inspection, each ..... $70.00 
(e)  Permit extension of an active permit only for 180-days without inspection approval ..... $70.00 
(f)  Reinstatement of expired permit for purpose of final inspection, each ..... $100.00 
(g)  Replacement permit card ..... $25.00 
(h)  Change of contractor ..... $100.00 
(i)  Permit application review/processing fee: 0.1% of contract price with a minimum fee of $10.00 per application. 
Florida DBPR surcharge is 1.5% of total permitting fee, minimum ..... $2.00 
Florida DEO surcharge is 1.5% of total permitting fee, minimum ..... $2.00 
(j)  City education fee for the training and recertification of building department staff pursuant to Florida Statutes, per permit ..... $2.00 
(k)  Certificate of Completion ..... $100.00 
(l)  Certificate of Occupancy: 
(1)  Residential, each ..... $100.00 
(2)  Commercial, each ..... $200.00 
(m)  Conditional Certificate of Occupancy, per any portion of 90-day period ..... $250.00 
(n)  FEMA/Floodplain Administrator Reviews: 
(1)  Mitigation for One- and Two-family dwellings ..... $40.00 
(2)  Mitigation for commercial buildings ..... $100.00 
(3)  Environmental review ..... $40.00 
(o)  Fire Marshal review of all commercial projects: 0.05% of the contract price with a minimum fee of $75.00 per application. 
Permit Fees. The permit fee schedule is established under authority of F.S. 553.80: 
Building 
(1)  New buildings (including balconies, porches, additions, garages and accessory buildings): 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $18.00 
(b)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(2)  New structures other than buildings (including water towers, radio towers, water plants, bridges, cisterns, seawalls, docks and boat davits): 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(b)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(3)  Repairs or remodeling to building or structures as listed in (1) and (2): 
(a)  Less than $1,000.00 contract price ..... No permit required 
(b)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(c)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(4)  Outdoor Features: Docks, decks, excavation, filling, awnings and removable canopies, hurricane shutters, wood lattice and screening, excavation: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(b)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(5)  Site work (including driveways, patios, parking lots and sidewalks): 
(a)  For each 1,000 square feet or fractional part thereof ..... $18.00 
(b)  Coating of asphalt: for each 10,000 square feet or fractional part thereof ..... $15.00 
(c)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(6)  Fences (including wood, chain link and concrete block): 
(a)  For the first 100 linear feet or fractional part thereof ..... $75.00 
(b)  For each additional linear foot after first 100 ..... $0.50 
(7)  Roofing (includes repairs and new roofs): 
(a)  For each 100 square feet or fractional part thereof ..... $12.00 
(b)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(8)  Swimming pools/spas/hot tubs: 
(a)  Residential, each, flat fee ..... $250.00 
(b)  Commercial, each, flat fee ..... $550.00 
(c)  Spa/hot tub (up to 64 square feet) ..... $75.00 
(d)  Repairs, resurfacing ..... $100.00 
(e)  Pool decks, for each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(9)  Temporary tent, structure or occupancy (temporary permit only, issued for 30-day period) ..... $60.00 
(10)  Moving building; for each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(11)  Demolition of buildings; for each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(12)  Tanks (gasoline, water, etc., all materials), including anchoring pads: 
(a)  For each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof ..... $7.00 
(b)  Minimum fee, per tank ..... $60.00 
(13)  Signs: 
(a)  For each 50 square feet of each sign face or fractional part thereof ..... $35.00 
(b)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(14)  Mobile home installation: 
(a)  Tie-down inspection for insurance purposes only ..... $60.00 
(b)  Tie-downs, blocking, sewer connection, water connection, and electrical connection ..... $150.00 
(15)  Temporary trailer (construction and/or sales); maximum of 180 days (each) ..... $250.00 
Mechanical 
(1)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(2)  Air Conditioning and/or Heat Pump Systems: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(b)  For additional ductwork openings in remodel, per opening ..... $10.00 
(3)  Hoods (including grease ducts): 
(a)  Residential (flat fee) ..... $50.00 
(b)  Commercial per $1,000.00 of contract price or fractional part thereof ..... $24.00 
(4)  Refrigeration, walk-ins and reach-ins: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(5)  Miscellaneous or not listed: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
Electrical 
(1)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(2)  Site work: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24. 00 
(3)  Residential new and old work, service, feeders, added circuits, etc.: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract pr ice or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(4)  Residential Construction Temporary ..... $60.00 
(5)  Residential low voltage security/fire alarm systems: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(6)  Residential 90-day service releases prior to final approval/occupancy ..... $100.00 
(7)  Commercial new and old work, service, feeders, added circuits, etc.: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(8)  Commercial Construction Temporary ..... $120.00 
(9)  Commercial low voltage security/fire alarm systems: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $30.00 
(10)  Commercial 90-day service releases prior to final approval/occupancy ..... $200.00 
(11)  Alternative or emergency power systems: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
Plumbinq 
(1)  Minimum fee ..... $60.00 
(2)  Site work, grease interceptors, oil separators, etc.: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(3)  Irrigation systems: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $12.00 
(4)  Sewer, Building interior lines and connections: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(5)  Potable water, backflow preventers, fixtures, water connections for new construction or rework existing: 
(a)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $24.00 
(6)  Fire Suppression Systems: 
(a)  Fire Sprinkler System: Sprinkler heads, Fittings, Standpipes, etc.: 
(1)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $30.00 
(b)  Underground Fire Main: 
(1)  For each $1,000.00 of contract price or fraction thereof ..... $30.00 
After-the-Fact Penalty 
In the event that any work for which a permit is required is commenced or is in process prior to the issuance of a permit by the building department, then the fees specified for such work shall be increased. The payment of a penalty fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of any applicable code. 
Penalty fees: 
(a)  First $5,000.00 contract price: $250.00 
(b)  > $5,000.00 contract price: Double the normal fee 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 14-3-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 14-31. - Adopted construction codes. 
    The most current editions as adopted by the State of Florida Building Commission of the Florida Building Code, Building; the Florida Building Code, Plumbing; the Florida Building Code, Mechanical; the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; the Florida Building Code, Existing Building; the Florida Building Code, Residential, NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code; the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation, and the Florida Building Code, Accessibility are hereby adopted and made a part of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 31.003; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-32. - Conflicts. 
    If any conflict occurs between the provisions of the building codes adopted in section 14-31 and the applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the more strict code shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1986, § 31.004) 
Sec. 14-33. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the codes adopted in section 14-31, it shall be construed to mean the City of Key West, Florida. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the codes adopted in section 14-31, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city. 
(Code 1986, § 31.005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-34. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the codes adopted by section 14-31 and specific amendments thereto shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 31.006) 
Sec. 14-35. - Amendments to building code. 
    The Florida Building Code adopted by the provisions of section 14-31 is amended in the following respects: 
Sec. 104.10.1, Florida Building Code, Building 
Add a new Sec. 104.10.1 as follows: 
104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall coordinate with the Floodplain Administrator to review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117. 
Sec. 107.6.1, Florida Building Code, Building 
Add a new Sec. 107.6.1 as follows: 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
Sec. 117, Florida Building Code, Building 
Add a new Sec. 117 as follows: 
117 VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
Sec. 1612.2, Florida Building Code, Building 
Amend Sec. 1612.2 as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the five-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to 1986. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
1612.5 Flood hazard documentation. The following documentation shall be signed and sealed by a land surveyor and mapper licensed by the State of Florida, and shall be submitted to and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator: 
1.  For construction in flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action: 
1.1.  A FEMA Elevation Certificate completed by a Florida licensed professional land surveyor, showing the lowest floor, including basement, as required by the foundation inspection and the final inspection in Section 110.3. 
1.2.  For fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation where provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet the minimum requirements in Section 2.6.2.1, ASCE 24, construction documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with Section 2.6.2.2 of ASCE 24, with an engineer's certification. 
1.3.  For dry, floodproofed, nonresidential buildings, construction documents shall include a statement that the dry floodproofing is in accordance with ASCE 24. 
2.  For construction in flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave action: 
2.1.  A FEMA Elevation Certificate completed by a Florida licensed professional land surveyor and mapper, showing the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member as required by the foundation inspection and the final inspection in Section 110.3. 
2.2.  A city V-Zone Certification completed by a professional engineer. 
2.3.  Construction documents shall include a statement that the building is designed in accordance with ASCE 24, including that the pile or column foundation and building or structure to be attached thereto is designed to be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building components, and other load requirements of Chapter 16. 
2.4.  For breakaway walls designed to resist a nominal load of less than 10 psf (0.48 kN/m 2 ) or more than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m 2 ), construction documents shall include a statement that the breakaway wall is designed in accordance with ASCE 24. 
The Florida Building Code, Existing Building is hereby amended by the following technical amendment. 
Sec. 202, SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(Code 1986, § 31.007; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-36. - Chief building official's office created, duties. 
(a)  The office of the chief building official of the city is created. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief building official to: 
(1)  Inspect all construction, mechanical, electric and plumbing that is under city jurisdiction. 
(2)  Enforce all of the laws, rules and regulations relating thereto. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the building plans examiners, building inspectors and inspections required to be made by the building inspectors shall be as assigned by the chief building official. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the chief building official in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 31.008; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 
Sec. 14-37. - Building permits; professional plans; display of permits; address; exceptions. 
(a)  Building permit required; display. Building permits shall be procured from the chief building official before performance of any work or construction of any character, whether permanent or temporary. Within 48 hours after it is issued, the applicant must cause the permit to be posted and displayed at the work site so that it is readily visible from an adjacent public street throughout the term of the work. No work shall be performed unless a proper permit is so posted. 
    Inspections may not be performed if the permit is not posted and address numbers are not a minimum of 4" high and clearly visible from the street. 
Exception 1: Total contract price less than $1,000.00 per FBC Sect. 105.2.2 Minor Repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the chief building official without a building permit, provided the repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangements of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; additionally, ordinary minor repairs shall not include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical circuit wiring systems or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety, and such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
Any new electrical circuits or wiring will require a permit. 
Any new plumbing fixtures or piping will require a permit. 
Exception 2: Painting, both interior and exterior, residential or commercial does not require a permit. Tile repair or installation, floor covering, including carpet, laminate, resilient, and wood, both residential and commercial, do not require a permit. 
Work that falls under the $1,000.00 threshold for a building permit may be performed only by the property owner or a licensed contractor. Unlicensed workers, including 'handymen' are not allowed to conduct any type of work to a residential or commercial structure. 
(b)  Professional plans required. Professional plans shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Plans for work requiring a building permit shall be submitted in multiple sets, as determined by the chief building official, to the chief building official and shall be prepared by, and bear the seal of, an architect or structural engineer duly registered in the state, except if the work is by the owner-occupant upon a one- or two-family residence, and the work is cosmetic, nonstructural repair, alteration or addition. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, plans for work which requires a building permit and which involves mechanical, plumbing or electrical repairs, alterations or additions shall be prepared by and shall bear the impress seal of an engineer duly registered in the state, as reasonably required in the interest of health and safety by the chief building official. 
(3)  The chief building official may waive the requirements in [subsection] (b)(1) and/or (2) by special permission. 
(Code 1986, § 31.010; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-38. - Minimum floor elevation. 
(a)  The floor of any habitable residential or commercial building which is erected at any location in the city shall be at least one foot above the crown of the closest street and in no instance less than the Floodplain requirements found in Chapter 34, Floods. 
(b)  A total height certificate measured from the crown of the street to the rooftop or ridge shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy on a new structure or addition. 
(Code 1986, § 31.011; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-39. - Hurricane requirements. 
(a)  A reinforced cast-in-place concrete tie beam shall be placed around the perimeter at each floor and roof level on bearing walls of masonry units. Reinforcing shall not be less than four no. 5 reinforcing bars with no. 3 stirrups at a minimum of 12 inches on-center spacing. Beam size shall not be less than eight inches in width and 12 inches in depth. 
(b)  In hollow masonry unit construction, all corners shall be cast-in-place concrete and reinforced with five no. 5 reinforcing bars with no. 3 ties at 12 inches on-center spacing poured solid with concrete. One no. 5 reinforcing bar shall be placed in the voids at the sides of all doors and window openings in hollow masonry units and filled with cast-in-place concrete. Such reinforcing shall be properly tied into the foundation system. 
(c)  Hurricane strapping or engineered equivalent shall be required from rooftop to foundation creating a complete path of uplift resistance. 
(d)  Structural design by a Florida Registered Architect or Professional Engineer complying with the FBC will be accepted as compliant with (a), (b) or (c). 
(Code 1986, § 31.012(b), (c); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-40. - Permits in historic districts. 
(a)  Requirements. No building or work permit required by this Code for work in the historic zoning districts of the city or in tidal waters contiguous to and within 600 feet of the historic zoning districts shall be issued until a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by vote of the historic architectural review commission (HARC), attested by signature of its presiding member, and until the chief building official finds that the building or work permit conforms to all laws and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Contents. All permits issued by the city shall show the nature and extent of the intended work in detail sufficient to demonstrate that the project is consistent with all city laws and regulations and of HARC. 
(c)  [Scope, etc.] Building permit application shall be identical in scope, description and elevation views of the HARC project. 
(d)  Stop work order; penalty. The chief building official is authorized to post a signed and dated notice to stop work on any site on which work is being performed in violation of the city laws and regulations or of HARC. Any person shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-15 if the person: 
(1)  Performs work with actual or constructive knowledge that the work site has been posted by such notice, which notice has not been withdrawn by a dated, signed order of the chief building official; or 
(2)  Removes, defaces, conceals or alters such notice to stop work, without a dated, signed authorization of the chief building official. 
    Where such offenses are of a continuing nature, no two separate offenses shall be charged against the same person within any one-hour period. 
(Code 1986, §§ 31.013, 31.014, 31.016; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-41. - Cistern safety program. 
(a)  The chief building official is hereby authorized to provide a cistern safety program to regulate existing in-ground cisterns, abandoned wells more than eight inches (8") in diameter, septic tanks and other in-ground tank structures. 
(1)  Records indicate that there may be many in-ground cisterns that are abandoned or in dilapidated condition. The cistern safety program requires: 
(2)  Permit applications at no cost for five-year permits that will regulate minimum safety standards for those in-ground structures over 20 years old. 
(3)  The application must include an accurate site plan showing the location and depth of the in-ground structure. 
(4)  If the in-ground structure is to be demolished a no cost inspection by the building department will be required to verify that the bottom has been broken up to prevent water accumulation and the cavity has been filled in with pea rock or sand. 
(5)  If the in-ground structure is to be kept and maintained, then a Florida Professional Engineer will have to inspect the structural integrity of the structure and cover and provide a sealed and signed letter affirming the structural integrity along with a photograph of the cover. 
(6)  The city permit must be renewed every five years for those in-ground structures that have not been demolished. The above steps must be repeated in order to renew the permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-42. - Construction site requirements. 
    A set of permit plans must be maintained on the project site. It must be a stamped-approved set issued as the field copy for inspections. Permits issued without approved plans should have the contractor's agent on-site to answer inspector questions. If approved plans are damaged or lost replacement approved plans must be obtained before work may receive inspection approval. Revision to the approved plans/permit is required when construction deviates from the approved plans or to the work description on the permit. No construction may be concealed until it has received inspection approval. 
(a)  Construction rough-in inspections of mechanical, electrical and plumbing must be approved before scheduling the building inspection. 
(b)  Inspections must be scheduled not less than the weekday before. 
(c)  A functional restroom or portable toilet facility shall be on-site in accordance with the FBC Plumbing Code. 
    Stop work order; penalty. The chief building official is authorized to post a signed and dated 'notice to stop work' on any site on which work is being performed in violation of the city laws and regulations or of HARC. Any person shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-15 if the person: 
(a)  Performs work with actual or constructive knowledge that the work site has been posted by such notice, which notice has not been withdrawn by a dated, signed order of the chief building official; or 
(b)  Removes, defaces, conceals or alters such notice to stop work, without a dated, signed authorization of the chief building official. 
    Where such offenses are of a continuing nature, no two separate offenses shall be charged against the same person within any one-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 14-43-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE AND UNSANITARY BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure or part thereof not a dwelling as defined in this section. 
    Dwelling means any structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    Official means the city's chief building official. 
    Owner-occupant means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagor of record. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling or building and any who are in possession thereof. 
    Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, the county or the state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings or buildings in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 31.017(a); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-67. - Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code adopted. 
    The 1985 edition of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as adopted by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is adopted and made a part of the Code of Ordinances for the purpose of regulating nuisances, dwellings unfit for habitation, and dangerous buildings and providing for the abatement of such conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 31.017(b)) 
Sec. 14-68. - Duties of official. 
(a)  The powers conferred upon the chief building official by this article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred upon the chief building official by any other section of this Code or city ordinance. 
(b)  The chief building official shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the chief building official shall have the following powers, in addition to others granted, to: 
(1)  Investigate dwelling and building conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation and which buildings are dangerous, being guided in such examination of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this article. 
(2)  Administer oaths, affirmations and examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)  Enter upon and within premises, dwellings and buildings for the purposes of making examinations and investigations, provided that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(5)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 1986, § 31.021; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-69. - Examination of dwellings and buildings. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief building official to diligently examine all dwellings and buildings located in the city for the purpose of locating and taking action with respect to such dwellings and buildings as appear to be unfit for human habitation and such buildings as appear to be dangerous. 
(Code 1986, § 31.022; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-70. - Reports required of employees of fire, police and health departments. 
    The employees of the fire department, police department and health department shall make a report in writing to the chief building official of every building or structure which is, may be, or is suspected of being unfit for human habitation or a dangerous building within the terms of this article. Such report shall be delivered to the chief building official within 48 hours of the discovery of such building or dwelling by the employee of the fire, police or health department. 
(Code 1986, § 31.032; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-71. - Conditions rendering dwelling unfit or building dangerous. 
    The chief building official shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation or a building is dangerous if he finds that any of the following conditions exist in such dwelling: 
(1)  Interior walls or other vertical structural members which list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Supporting members which show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings which show 50 percent or more of damage or deterioration. 
(3)  Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purposes used. 
(4)  Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as endangers the lives, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in the city. 
(5)  Dilapidation, decay, insanitation or disrepair which is likely to cause sickness or disease or to work injury to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people of the city. 
(6)  Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic. 
(7)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities. 
(8)  Such lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities as endanger the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other city residents. 
(9)  Violation of any provision of the building regulations or fire prevention laws or ordinances of the state or city. 
(10)  Any room, except a bathroom, with window area less than one-tenth of the floor area or with window area of one-tenth or more of the floor area, but which window area cannot be opened so that the openings will equal as much as 1/20 of the floor area. 
(11)  A bathroom which does not have at least one outside window which can be opened or does not have other means of adequate ventilation. 
(12)  Such relationship to adjoining buildings or dwellings that light or air is inadequate or that a fire hazard exists. 
(Code 1986, § 31.023; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-72. - Minimum facilities. 
(a)  A dwelling shall be construed by the chief building official to be unfit for human habitation or a dangerous building, and he shall so find, if the dwelling does not have minimum facilities consisting of the following: 
(1)  Inside running water and an installed kitchen sink. 
(2)  Inside bathing facilities which shall consist of an installed tub or shower. 
(3)  An installed water closet. If the water closet is built on a porch, it shall be enclosed for privacy and from the weather, with running water. 
(4)  Installed electric lighting facilities. 
(5)  Screens provided to effectively cover all outside openings such as windows, doors, etc., with mesh of such fineness as is ordinarily used in dwelling units to prevent the entrance of flies, mosquitoes and other similar pests. 
(b)  All of the minimum requirements in subsection (a) of this section shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 31.024; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-73. - Dangerous buildings. 
    It is found as a fact that there exist in the city buildings which are dangerous due to dilapidation; due to defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; due to lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; and due to other conditions rendering such buildings unsafe, insanitary or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare, of the city residents. 
(Code 1986, § 31.020) 
Sec. 14-74. - Nuisances. 
    Any building, part of any building, charred parts or remains of any building, or any structure or debris which may be on any premises within the city limits and that may be dangerous to the safety of the people of the city or to adjacent property or that may be a fire menace or that may be injurious to the health of the people or against the sanitary regulations of the city or of the state or the state board of health is declared a nuisance and shall be abated in the manner as provided in division 1 of article II of chapter 26. 
(Code 1986, § 31.018) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-31 et seq. 
Sec. 14-75. - Existence of dwellings unfit for habitation. 
    It is found as a fact that there exist in the city dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation; due to defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; due to lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or insanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare, of the city residents. 
(Code 1986, § 31.019) 
Sec. 14-76. - Notification of demolition in historic district. 
(a)  If the owner-occupant, agent or person in control of a contributing building in the city historic district seeks to obtain a permit for the demolition of the building or if a building in the historic district is condemned by the chief building official, it is incumbent upon and required of the chief building official not to issue such permit for demolition or proceed with the condemnation of such building until the chief building official gives written notice to the Historic Florida Keys Foundation, Inc., and Old Island Restoration Foundation, Inc., that such building is sought to be voluntarily demolished or that such building has been condemned and will be demolished under the authority and direction of the city commission, and the chief building official shall publish notice of the proposed demolition in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  Upon giving notice to the corporations named in subsection (a) of this section, the corporations or any of them shall have 30 days to advise the chief building official, in writing, that the corporation intends to negotiate with the owner-occupant, agent or person in control seeking to obtain a permit to demolish the building or the owner-occupant, agent or person in control of the building condemned and offer assistance to the owner-occupant, agent or person in control in the protection of the building for the purpose of removing the building, if voluntarily sought to be demolished, or restoring the building, if condemned, to meet the minimum requirements of the city building code. Upon such notification from the corporation, the chief building official shall not issue a permit for demolition or proceed with condemnation of such building for a period of 30 days. 
(c)  If the corporations show no interest in the building at the expiration of the 30 days, the chief building official shall either issue the permit to demolish the building or proceed with the condemnation of the building, if so condemned. 
(Code 1986, § 31.041; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 14-77-14-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DETERMINATIONS AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-106. - Issuance of complaint; hearing. 
    Whenever a petition is filed with the chief building official by a public authority or whenever it appears to the chief building official, on his own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or any building is dangerous, the chief building official shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner-occupant of and parties in interest in such dwelling or building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the chief building official at a place therein fixed within the city, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint. The owner-occupant and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building official. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(a); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-107. - Order to repair, alter or improve building. 
    If, after such notice and hearing as provided in section 14-106, the chief building official determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation or the building under consideration is dangerous, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination. The chief building official shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner-occupant thereof an order requiring the owner-occupant, within the time specified therein, to repair, alter or improve such building so as to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation, or it shall require the owner-occupant within the specified time therein to repair, alter or improve such building so as to render it safe or to vacate and close the building for any and every use. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(b); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-108. - Noncompliance by owner-occupant of dwelling. 
    If the owner-occupant of a dwelling fails to comply with the order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling as provided in this division, the chief building official may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed. The chief building official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following statement: 
This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(c); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-109. - Noncompliance by owner-occupant of building. 
    If the owner-occupant of a building fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close a building as provided in this division, the chief building official may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed. The building official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following statement: 
This building is dangerous. It is hereby closed and its use is prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(d); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-110. - Failure to comply with order to remove or demolish. 
    If the owner-occupant fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling or building, the chief building official may cause such dwelling or building to be removed or demolished. The duties of the chief building official set forth in sections 14-108, 14-109 and this section shall not be exercised until the city commission shall have ordered the chief building official to proceed to effectuate the purposes of this article with respect to the particular property which the chief building official shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or dangerous and which property shall be described in an ordinance or a resolution of the commission. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(e); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-111. - Costs. 
    The amount of the cost of such repair, alteration, or improvement or vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the chief building official pursuant to this division shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such cost shall be placed upon the city's tax books against the property and may be collected and such lien may be foreclosed, in the same manner as taxes and tax liens are collected and foreclosed, or by suit, as the city may determine. If the dwelling or building is removed or demolished by the chief building official, he shall sell the materials of such dwelling or building and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the registry of the county circuit court by the chief building official, to be secured in such a manner as may be directed by such court and disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(f); Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-112. - Validity of proceedings. 
    Failure on the part of any owner-occupant or party in interest to receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice or order provided for in this division shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner-occupant or party in interest or any other person. 
(Code 1986, § 31.027(g)) 
Sec. 14-113. - Emergency cases. 
    In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person or to the safety of other property, unless a dwelling unfit for human habitation or a dangerous building is immediately repaired, demolished or vacated, the chief building official shall cause the immediate repair or demolition of such dwelling or building. The cost of such repair or demolition shall be recovered and collected as is provided in section 14-111 or the chief building official may revoke the certificate of occupancy and order vacation of the premises until necessary repairs, etc., render the premises fit for use or habitation. 
(Code 1986, § 31.028; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-114. - Service and filing of complaints, notices and orders. 
(a)  Complaints, notices or orders issued by the building official pursuant to this division shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail. If the whereabouts of any person is unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the chief building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the chief building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, the serving of such complaint, notice or order upon such person may be made by publishing the notice once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published in the city, service being deemed complete upon the date of the last publication. A copy of any notice, complaint or order served by publication shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, complaint or order on or before the date of the last publication. 
(b)  A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed by the chief building official in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court as in cases of lis pendens notice as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 31.029; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-115. - Unauthorized removal of complaints, notices or orders. 
    No person without the written consent of the chief building official shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in accordance with sections 14-108 and 14-109. 
(Code 1986, § 31.030; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-116. - Failure to comply with order. 
    If any order issued and served in accordance with this division is not complied with within the time specified therein, the dwelling or building with respect to which the order has been issued is declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge of the issuance of such order to occupy, as a human habitation, or to use such dwelling or building or any part thereof or to suffer or permit the dwelling or building or any part thereof to be occupied as a human habitation or used therefor. 
(Code 1986, § 31.031) 
Sec. 14-117. - Receiving rentals after finding unfit. 
    When the chief building official finds that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation within the meaning of this article and has notified the owner-occupant to such effect and the time limit set by the chief building official for the correction of defects of vacating the dwelling has expired, no person shall receive rentals for or offer for rent or occupy such dwelling unit as a human habitation. 
(Code 1986, § 31.025; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 14-118-14-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 

Sec. 14-146. - Requests for permission. 
(a)  Requests for permission to move any and all buildings from their existing location to some other location within the city limits shall be submitted to the chief building official. 
(b)  A request for permission to move any building from its existing location to some other location within the city limits shall be accompanied by plans showing proposed improvements to the building and contemplated improvements upon the building and location at its new proposed site. In addition to submission of proposed plans, every request for permission to move a building as contemplated in this article shall be accompanied by a performance bond in such amount as is deemed reasonable in the circumstances by the chief building official. 
(Code 1986, § 31.042; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-147. - Notice, commission approval. 
    After the application for the moving of any building or structure has been filed, the chief building official shall supply to the city clerk the necessary information to cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of local circulation that a hearing will be held by the city commission to consider such application. The cost of publishing the notice shall be paid by the applicant. The notice shall be published at least six days prior to the date of the hearing. After the application has been so advertised, it shall then be submitted to the city commission, together with a plot plan and two elevations disclosing the appearance of the building after the building is moved and constructed and renovation has been completed, for the city commission's approval. 
(Code 1986, § 31.043; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-148. - Failure to obtain permit. 
    Any person who shall move a building or structure within or into the city without first obtaining a permit shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 31.044) 
Sec. 14-149. - Compliance with zoning requirements. 
    In no case shall any building or structure be moved within the city limits or moved into the city limits to any restricted area wherein and whereby the building or structure would violate any restrictions of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 31.045) 
Sec. 14-150. - Insurance coverage. 
    Before any permit shall be issued allowing the moving of any building or structure, the applicant shall secure and obtain a liability insurance policy protecting the legal liability of the city to pay all claims for personal injury or death resulting therefrom and property damage on account of accidents which may arise out of or in connection with such moving. The minimum limits of such policies shall not be less than $1 million each occurrence with respect to general liability and $1 million combined single limit with respect to automobile liability, with an additional follow-form umbrella of not less than $3 million each occurrence to be written in excess of both the general and auto liability policies. The City shall be named as an additional insured on both the general and auto liability policies, shall be provided with waivers of subrogation on both policies, and shall be given not less than 30 days' prior notice of any material change or cancellation to any policy. 
(Code 1986, § 31.046; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-151. - Protection of public. 
    Any house or structure being moved that is left in the city streets after dark shall have displayed thereon a red light at each corner and one in the middle. 
(Code 1986, § 31.047) 
Sec. 14-152. - Prevention of damage to streets and sidewalks. 
    In the moving of a building or structure in the city, trucks, trailers or dollies must have rubber tires, or in lieu thereof planks of sufficient width and thickness must be laid on the streets and sidewalks to prevent any damage. 
(Code 1986, § 31.048) 
Sec. 14-153. - Notice to utility companies. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the contractor or firm moving any building or structure to inform the appropriate officials of the city electric system and the police department of the time the building is to be moved and the route to be involved in such moving. 
(Code 1986, § 31.049) 
Secs. 14-154-14-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOATING HOMES 

Sec. 14-181. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Floating home means any structure designed to be waterborne and which is used primarily as a dwelling, but not including vessels used primarily as mobile waterborne vessels for transportation. 
    Vessel, Houseboat, etc. means: 
(1)  Proper current registration documents issued by a valid governmental agency within the United States. 
(2)  Marine power for navigational purposes. 
(3)  A control center located forward on the vessel that provides fully operational steering and throttle control of the vessel during navigation. 
(4)  All legally required navigational lights, aides, and equipment as proscribed by the relevant governmental agency appropriate for the size and type of vessel. 
(Code 1986, § 31.051; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-182. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to bring floating homes within the scope of the regulatory scheme applicable to landbased dwellings, making modifications necessary to accommodate the unique features of floating homes. 
(Code 1986, § 31.050) 
Sec. 14-183. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 31.062) 
Sec. 14-184. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No floating home shall be occupied as a dwelling unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the chief building official. Cooking and sleeping facilities within a floating home shall be prima facie evidence that it is occupied as a dwelling. The chief building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy when the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1)  Compliance with structural requirements. 
(2)  Compliance with minimum housing standards. 
(3)  Compliance with moorage requirements. 
(4)  Payment of the certificate fee. 
    However, a certificate of occupancy shall not be granted unless the planning department issues a determination of eligibility under the city's rate of growth ordinance (ROGO). 
(b)  The initial fee for certification shall be $25.00. The fee for recertification of a floating home moved to another moorage berth shall be $10.00. 
(c)  Certification shall be valid until revoked and may be revoked by the building official for violation of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 31.052; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-185. - Compartmentation and flotation devices. 
(a)  Compartmentation of devices. Watertight pontoons, floats, hulls or other devices used to keep the floating home afloat shall be fitted with transverse or longitudinal watertight bulkheads which provide compartmentation sufficient to keep the fully loaded floating home afloat with positive stability with any one compartment flooded. This subsection may be waived by the chief building official upon certification by a competent architect or engineer familiar with such devices that design, materials and construction of the hull or other floatation device is such that the possibility of rupture is extremely remote. 
(b)  Construction generally. Flotation devices shall be structurally sound and securely fastened to the floating home superstructure. Flotation devices shall be constructed so that access to each compartment is readily available from the first floor level of the completed floating home. The external surfaces of all flotation devices shall be watertight and thoroughly protected from corrosion from saltwater, solvents and weather. 
(c)  Bilge pump. Where permanent-type flotation such as Styrofoam or plastic foam is not provided, an adequate portable bilge pump shall be maintained in proper working order. 
(d)  Holding tank. Flotation and decking shall provide access to the sewage pump. 
(e)  Material. All material, such as decking, siding and subflooring, which is subjected to moisture or water splash shall be of a type not adversely affected by moisture or shall be treated. 
(Code 1986, § 31.053; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-186. - Electrical wiring and service. 
(a)  Scope. This section covers the electric conductors and equipment installed within or on floating homes and the conductors that connect floating homes to the supply of electricity. 
(b)  Branch circuits, feeders and calculations. Branch circuits, feeders and calculations shall correspond to requirements for a single unit of a multifamily dwelling and shall comply with the building code in effect in this city. 
(c)  Services. Services shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Service equipment shall be placed ashore and shall comply with the electrical code and the building code in all applicable respects. The power supply from the dock or shore to a floating home shall be cord type S-SO or ST, installed in compliance with the electrical code with one conductor in the cord for grounding only, in addition to the neutral conductor. 
(2)  Individual cord overcurrent protection shall not exceed 50 amperes. Not more than two cords may be installed to supply one vessel. Cords shall be fitted with an approved separable connector at the shore end and directly connected at the vessel distribution panel. The cord shall be supported with a corrosion-resistant, mesh-type strain relief device at the vessel end. 
(d)  Grounding. The neutral terminal block of the vessel's distribution panel shall not be grounded to the metal parts of the vessel. The grounding conductor of the supply cord shall be terminated on a grounding bus in the distribution panel. The hull, if metal, and electrical equipment metallic piping, exposed metal structural members, metal railing, ladders, etc., shall be effectively bonded to the ground bus. If the hull is built of material other than metal, a ground electrode of corrosion-resistant metal shall be so located as to be in contact with the water and shall be connected with no. 6 AWG copper wire to the ground bus. The electrode shall be of bronze or brass and not smaller than one-quarter inch in diameter and 18 inches in length. 
(e)  Wiring methods. Installation in wood frame construction shall be in accordance with the electrical code and the building code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.054; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74. 
Sec. 14-187. - Plumbing. 
    The plumbing of all floating homes shall comply with the requirements of the plumbing code adopted by the city in section 14-356, except as follows: plastic piping, A.B.C. drainage, waste and vent piping and PVC drainage, waste and vent piping conforming to the product and installation standards of the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials will be permitted as an alternate method of construction when first approved by the chief building official. Plastic pipe in floating homes or other structures shall be limited to that part within the walls of the floating home or other structure. 
(Code 1986, § 31.055; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-188. - Inboard sewage device. 
    An approved sewage receiving tank and ejection device shall be installed aboard every floating home or other floating structure. The device shall consist of an approved tank with a liquid capacity of not less than 30 gallons nor more than 40 gallons and shall be equipped with a 11/2-inch or larger discharge line and a one-half-horsepower pump. The inboard sewage device shall be connected to an approved moorage sewage collection system or shall have the capability of being pumped out into a sewage tank truck. 
(Code 1986, § 31.056) 
Sec. 14-189. - Fuel gas piping. 
    All gas piping installed in a floating home or in any other floating structure shall be installed in accordance with the building code with the following exception: exposed piping. All gas piping installed in a floating home or other floating structure which is exposed to corrosion shall be provided with an approved protective coating or shall be galvanized and painted. 
(Code 1986, § 31.057) 
Sec. 14-190. - Building heights. 
    The building height of a floating home shall not exceed two stories, and the total height measured from the first deck to the highest point on the roof ridge or gable shall not exceed 22 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 31.058) 
Sec. 14-191. - Exit facilities. 
    The facilities of all exits of a floating home shall comply with the requirements for dwellings as set forth in the building code except as follows: exterior exits. Stairways or ramps from the floating home to the mooring deck or float shall be at least 36 inches in width and shall be provided with guardrails on both sides. 
(Code 1986, § 31.059) 
Sec. 14-192. - Guardrails. 
(a)  Guardrails at least 36 inches in height shall be provided in the floating home in the following locations: 
(1)  Both sides of all exterior stairways and ramps. 
(2)  All edges of occupied roof areas. 
(3)  Edges of all decks not encompassed by the exterior walls of the floating home superstructure. 
(b)  Guardrails shall be designed to withstand a lateral load of 200 pounds per foot applied at the top of the rail. In open-type railings, intermediate members shall not be spaced more than nine inches apart. 
(Code 1986, § 31.060; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-193. - Moorage standards; parking; density of land site. 
(a)  Moorage berths for floating homes shall be connected to a public street by land or by walkway not less than four feet wide. Walkways and berths shall be illuminated at an average intensity of two footcandles. 
(b)  One off-street parking space shall be available for the exclusive use of the occupants of each filled moorage berth. 
(c)  Floating home moorages shall not cause the density limitation applicable to the land site to which the moorage is connected to be exceeded. 
(Code 1986, § 31.061) 
Secs. 14-194-14-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRICITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-221. - Interference with chief building official. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the chief building official in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 31.068; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-222. - Duty to inspect. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief building official to: 
(1)  Inspect all the wiring, apparatus and equipment and installations for light, heat or power within the city limits; 
(2)  Enforce all the laws, rules and regulations relating thereto; 
(3)  Exercise a general supervision over all electrical work in the city; and 
(4)  Enforce all the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.064; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-223. - Temporary service. 
    A 30-day temporary electrical service connection may be granted by the chief building official if the wiring installation, apparatus or equipment is found to be in a safe operating condition and provided an urgent necessity for electric current exists. Under these circumstances, an application for temporary service shall be filed with and approved by the chief building official. 
(Code 1986, § 31.065; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-224. - Dangerous conditions. 
    The chief building official is empowered to inspect or reinspect any wiring, equipment or apparatus conducting or using electric current for light, heat or power in the city. If conductors, equipment or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, the official shall notify the person owning or operating the hazardous wiring or equipment to correct the condition within the time the official specifies. Failure to correct violations in the specified time constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 31.066; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-225. - Termination of service to hazardous connections. 
    The chief building official is given the power to disconnect extension cords, temporary wiring, branch circuits, subfeed conductors or the main service supplying electrical energy to any portion of an electrical wiring system on or in buildings or on premises, if this wiring is deemed by the official to be hazardous to life or property. 
(Code 1986, § 31.067; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-226. - Performance of work by authorized persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not qualified as an electrician in accordance with this article to do any electrical construction or make any repairs, alterations, additions or changes to any existing system of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power within the city limits except as provided for in subsection (c) of this section and section 14-257(a)(4). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an electrician in the city except as provided by section 14-257(a)(4), without first qualifying. 
(c)  Any corporation holding a franchise from the city for the purpose of furnishing electrical current for light, heat or power shall have the right to install, connect, disconnect or remove meters or their protective devices, without obtaining permits, after a certificate of approval has been issued on the installation. 
(Code 1986, § 31.069) 
Secs. 14-227-14-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-256. - Required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall install any electrical apparatus or perform any other work coming under this article without first obtaining a written permit from the building department. 
(Code 1986, § 31.083) 
Sec. 14-257. - Application of division to owner-occupant. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit any bona fide owner-occupant from personally installing electrical wiring on his premises, provided that he abides by the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Submit plans and specifications to the building department for approval. 
(2)  Satisfy the chief building official as to his ability and qualifications to install electrical wiring. 
(3)  Make application and secure an electrical permit before commencing electrical work of any character. 
(4)  File an affidavit that he is the bona fide owner-occupant and will personally install the work on his premises only. 
(5)  Pay the required permit fees set forth in this division. 
(6)  Perform the electrical work according to the rules and regulations contained in this division and the electrical code. 
(7)  Notify the chief building official when the work is ready for inspection. 
(b)  Personal installation by an owner-occupant must be by himself, for himself, on his own premises without compensation or pay from anyone for his labor or the installation. 
(c)  An owner-occupant exercising this privilege shall conform to all the requirements of this division and shall not set himself up as an electrical contractor, nor shall he employ anyone to assist him with the installation. 
(Code 1986, § 31.084; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-258. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans and specifications with complete descriptions of all proposed electrical work shall be submitted to the building department at the same time application is made for a building permit. The plans must be legibly drawn or printed to a definite scale by a registered architect, registered engineer, general contractor, electrical contractor or owner-occupant, two floor plans being sufficient provided they show all the proposed electrical work. The plans shall show the outline of the total floor area, the square feet of the building under consideration, the point at which the service connection is to be made with the public utility or isolated plant or with another building, the size of service and subfeeder wires, the location of service switches and center of distribution, and the arrangement of circuits showing the number of outlets connected thereto. The plans must be stamped "approved" by the chief building official before the building permit or the electrical permit can be obtained and before any electrical work can be started. All blueprints or drawings of this nature are filed in the office of the chief building official for safekeeping and future reference. 
(b)  The installation of the wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power within or attached to any building or premises, whether for private or public use, must be done in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted, as described in this section. Any changes or omissions in the wiring system shown on the plans must be made by the owner-occupant in the form of revised plans setting forth the changes and accepting the responsibilities for the changes. The revised plans must be addressed to the chief building official and shall be filed in his office. 
(Code 1986, § 31.085; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-259. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-06, adopted April 7, 2015, deleted § 14-259, which pertained to permit fees and derived from the 1986 Code; and Ord. No. 08-06, adopted June 3, 2008. 
Sec. 14-260. - Issuance. 
    A permit shall be issued by the electrical inspection division to a qualified person prior to any electrical work being started or caused to be started on an entirely new installation of permanent or temporary wiring, electrical apparatus or equipment or for making extensions or changes to existing wiring systems for light, heat or power upon premises, inside, outside or attached to buildings or structures of any character. 
(Code 1986, § 31.087) 
Sec. 14-261. - Failure to obtain. 
    Whenever any person shall commence or proceed with any electrical installation or construction work for which a permit is required by the city, without first obtaining such permit, the person so commencing or proceeding with such work without a permit shall take out a belated permit covering such work and shall pay, double the specific permit fees provided by section 14-2 to be paid for a timely permit covering such work. Neither anything contained in this section nor the act of taking out and paying fees for a belated permit shall absolve any person of any penalty incurred for the doing of electrical construction or installation work without first obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1986, § 31.088; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-262. - Request for inspection. 
    A request for the inspection of electrical work, such as roughing-in, equipment installations, final inspection or electrical work for light, heat or power of any character, must be made at the building department as soon as the job is ready. The request for inspection must be made by the person installing the wiring, and failure to request such inspection constitutes a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.089) 
Secs. 14-263-14-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 14-291. - Adopted. 
    See section 14-31. 
(Code 1986, § 31.092; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-292. - Conflicts. 
    If any conflict occurs between the provisions of the code adopted in section 14-31 and the applicable sections of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the more strict code shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1986, § 31.093; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-293. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted in section 14-31, it shall be construed to mean the City of Key West, Florida. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted in section 14-292 or 14-31, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city. 
(Code 1986, § 31.094; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-294. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted by section 14-31 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 31.095; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-295. - Standards for installation. 
    All electric heat, light and power wires, fixtures, appliances, conductors, apparatus and their supports placed or installed in or upon any building or other structure in the city shall be in strict conformity with approved standards of construction for safety to life and property and in accordance with this division, provided that materials for wiring, appliances and equipment shall conform to the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., which shall be prima facie evidence that the wiring, appliances and equipment comply with such provisions. 
(Code 1986, § 31.096) 
Secs. 14-296-14-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 14-321. - Adopted. 
    See section 14-31. 
(Code 1986, § 31.217; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-322. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Refrigeration and air conditioning installation means all work and materials used in installing and maintaining and/or extending a system of air conditioning or refrigeration apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith inside of or attached to any building or structure, lot or premises. 
(Code 1986, § 31.099) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-323. - Supervision of work. 
    The chief building official shall inspect all refrigeration, air conditioning, duct and exhaust systems, solar and other heating work in the city and enforce the applicable sections of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.100; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-324. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-06, adopted April 7, 2015, deleted § 14-324, which pertained to employment of refrigeration and air conditioning mechanics, and derived from the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 14-325. - Permits required. 
    Permits are required for refrigeration and air conditioning equipment installed in commercial buildings, motels, hotels, stores, apartments and residences regardless of the horsepower rating of the units. 
(Code 1986, § 31.109; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-326. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans and specifications with complete descriptions of all proposed refrigeration and air conditioning work shall be submitted to the chief building official at the same time application is made for a building permit. The plans must be legibly drawn or printed to a definite scale by a registered architect, registered engineer, mechanical contractor or owner/builder showing all the proposed work. The plans shall show the outline of the total floor area, the square feet of the building under consideration, the point at which the compressors are located, size and horsepower of motors, controls, piping, ductwork and arrangement of apparatus. All habitable rooms shall make provision for return air. Undercutting of doors is not approved. The plans must be stamped approved by the chief building official before the building permit or mechanical permit can be obtained and before any mechanical work can be started. The installation of mechanical apparatus or equipment within or attached to any building or premises, whether for private or public use, must be done in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted. 
(b)  Any changes or omissions in any mechanical system shown on the plans must be made in the form of revised plans setting forth the changes. The revised plans shall be submitted to the chief building official and shall be filed in his office. 
(Code 1986, § 31.110; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-327. - Inspection. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief building official to inspect all mechanical apparatus, equipment and installations within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 31.112; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-328. - Dangerous installations. 
    The chief building official is empowered to inspect or reinspect any refrigeration or air conditioning equipment. If the equipment or apparatus is found to be unsafe to life or property, the official shall notify the person owning or operating the hazardous equipment to correct the condition within the time the official specifies. Failure to correct violations in the specified time constitutes a violation of this Code. 
(a)  By order of the City Fire Marshal the side yard setbacks shall be kept clear and accessible. No fuel gas (propane) tanks or mechanical equipment shall be located within the required side yard setbacks. 
(Code 1986, § 31.113; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-329. - Obstructing inspection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the chief building official in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 31.114; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 14-330-14-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLUMBING AND GAS 

Sec. 14-356. - Codes adopted. 
    See section 14-31. 
(Code 1986, § 31.167; Ord. No. 01-19, § 3, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-357. - Conflicts. 
    If any conflict occurs between the provisions of the codes adopted in section 14-31 and the applicable sections of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the more strict code shall prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 31.168; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-358. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-06, adopted April 7, 2015, deleted § 14-358, which pertained to amendments to the Florida Plumbing code, and derived from the 1986 Code; Ord. No. 01-19, adopted December 4, 2001; and Ord. No. 08-06, adopted June 3, 2008. 
Sec. 14-359. - Permit display. 
    All plumbing or gas permits shall be kept on the work site or shall be in the possession of the person doing, having charge of, or performing the work and shall be exhibited upon the request of any person duly authorized to have such information. 
(Code 1986, § 31.174) 
Sec. 14-360. - Installations in streets. 
    No person shall install or cause to be installed a sanitary sewer lateral drain or storm drainline in the public streets or thoroughfares of the city. All such plumbing installations in public streets or thoroughfares shall be done by or under the supervision of the Community Services department, and reasonable charges shall be made to any person desiring to have sanitary sewer lateral drainlines installed to his property line. 
(Code 1986, § 31.175; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-361. - Side yard setbacks. 
    By order of the City Fire Marshal all required side yard setbacks shall be kept clear for access. No fuel tanks or other equipment or appliances shall be set within the required side yard setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-06, adopted April 7, 2015, amended § 14-361 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-361 pertained to excavations and derived from the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 14-362. - Connection to public sewer. 
    Where a public sewer becomes available to an abutting property on which has been constructed a septic tank, leaching field, cesspool, leaching well or other method of sewage disposal, such septic tank, leaching field, cesspool, leaching well, etc., shall be emptied of its entire contents and filled with earth or suitable fill, and the waste, drainage, etc., of such premises shall be connected with the public sewer in accordance with this Code. Where such transfer from an outmoded disposal system is made to the public sewer, the chief building official shall first examine all plumbing facilities of such place and ascertain that it is in such condition so as to be in conformity with this Code and that it is safe and dependable to connect with the public sewer. If finding it not to conform to this Code, the chief building official shall require such owner-occupant, agent, tenant or other person occupying such premises to immediately provide such alterations as shall be necessary to comply with this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.177; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-363. - Sewer connections containing harmful waste matter. 
(a)  No waste matter containing chemicals in any form which may be destructive to the sewer system shall be connected with the public sewer without first having been conducted through a neutralizing process or separating device. 
(b)  No steam or hot water in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit shall be connected with the public sewer. 
(c)  Gaseous or explosive substances shall not be connected with the public sewer without first being conducted through a sump or basin constructed so as to intercept any detrimental effects. 
(d)  No waste material or other substance of any kind which may cause clogging or damage to the sewer shall be conducted into any public sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 31.178) 
Sec. 14-364. - Stormwater retention. 
    Stormwater shall be retained on individual lots as required by city ordinance and shall not discharge into the city stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-06, adopted April 7, 2015, amended § 14-364 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-364 pertained to rainwater pipes discharging over sidewalks and derived from the 1986 Code. 
Secs. 14-365-14-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 13-05, adopted Mar. 19, 2013, repealed art. IX, Coastal construction and floodplain management codes, consisting of §§ 14-391-14-408, and deriving from the 1986 Code; and Ord. No. 01-19, adopted Dec. 4, 2001, in its entirety. 

Secs. 14-391-14-408. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainment, ch. 6; taxation, ch. 66; business tax, § 66-86 et seq.; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; commercial districts, § 122-356 et seq.; limited commercial district (C1), § 122-386 et seq.; general commercial district (CG), § 122-416 et seq.; mixed use residential/office district (RO), § 122-506 et seq.; historic neighborhood commercial districts, § 122-776 et seq.; group homes and foster care facilities, § 122-1246 et seq.; home occupations, § 122-1306 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Possession of open alcoholic beverage containers on city property, § 26-62; possession of open alcoholic beverage containers in parks on city property, § 26-97; open alcoholic beverage containers in vehicles, § 70-281 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages means distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent or more alcohol by volume. The measurement of the percentage of alcohol by volume shall be determined as provided in F.S. ch. 561. 
    Business establishment includes, but is not limited to, any place of business or any club, organization, person, firm, corporation, partnership, or special event such as: a golf club, country club, veteran's fraternal or benevolent organization, grocery store, drug store, nightclub, bottle club, cocktail bar, hotel bar, tavern, bona fide restaurant, restaurant bar, grill, filling station, convenience store, package store, or any other building, structure or location or portion thereof, wherein one person directly or indirectly pays another for purchase or dispensing of an alcoholic beverage. 
    Conspicuously post means clearly visible to patrons and vendors, easily readable and immediately viewable upon reading. 
    Dispense means storing, handling, apportionment, preparation, gift, distribution, or serving, directly or indirectly, of any amount of an alcoholic beverage to or for any person by any officer, owner, operator, lessee, or employee of a business establishment. For purposes of this definition, permitting or allowing any person to carry alcoholic beverages on the premises of any business establishment to be consumed thereon shall constitute the "dispensing" of such beverages. 
    Minor means any individual under the legal drinking age as set forth in F.S. §§ 562.11 and 562.111 as may be amended or replaced. 
    Sale means any transfer of an alcoholic beverage for consideration, or any gift of any alcoholic beverage in connection with or as part of a transfer of any property or product for consideration. 
    Vendor or vendor of alcoholic beverages means any person or entity who owns or operates a business establishment which sells or dispenses any alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
(Code 1986, § 103.02; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 18-27, § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-27. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed within the city limits by any person or vendor between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  During the restricted hours set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any person other than the vendor or his employee found on the premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed shall be presumed to be drinking on the premises. 
(c)  These restrictions shall not apply to private residences unless licensed to serve or to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1986, § 103.03; Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 7-5-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2). 
Sec. 18-28. - Proximity to churches, schools, cemeteries and funeral homes. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person shall conduct in the city any business involving the sale of alcoholic beverages where such place of business is within 300 feet of any established church, school, cemetery, or funeral home. Such distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary fare from the nearest point of the property line of the place of business to the property line of the church, school, cemetery, or funeral home grounds and used as a part of the church, school, cemetery, or funeral home facilities. However, any person licensed to conduct and legally conducting a business involving the sale of alcoholic beverages as of January 4, 1995, shall be governed by the provisions of this section which existed at the time of the original licensure of such business. 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a) above shall not apply if a property owner is granted a special exception to specifically sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  In conjunction with an approved conditional use application that includes consideration of the public welfare factors listed in subsection (2) below; or 
(2)  Pursuant to authorization granted by the planning board that the use will not detrimentally impact the public health, safety or welfare after consideration of all the following criteria: 
A.  Compatibility with surrounding existing uses; 
B.  The extent of conflict between the proposed use and the hours of operation of the facilities described in section (a) above; 
C.  Mitigation measures agreed to be implemented by the applicant; 
D.  Public input; 
E.  That the applicant has demonstrated a "good neighbor policy" by contacting or attempting to contact all noticed property owners who have objected to the application, and by addressing the objections expressed by these neighbors; 
F.  Any other factors the approving body determines relevant to the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Any special exception granted hereunder may be approved with conditions, which conditions shall be monitored in accordance with section 18-610. The exception shall be to the applicant only, shall not be transferable and shall only be effective in conjunction with the use(s) specified in the application. 
(d)  All applications for a special exception hereunder shall be on a form required and provided by the city planner. Such application shall be submitted to the city planning office together with the fee established by resolution of the city commission. A completed application shall include the application form, the fee and all required supplemental information necessary to render determinations related to the request. 
(e)  Upon receipt of an application, the planning board shall hold a public hearing upon the application in accordance with the procedures cited in section 90-393 and shall render an order granting or denying such application. In granting such application the planning board must make specific findings respecting each of the matters specified in subsection (b)(2), above. 
(f)  The planning board's decision regarding an application for a special exception hereunder may be appealed to the city commission in accordance with the provisions of section 90-431. 
(Code 1986, § 103.04; Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-1-2011) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 122. 
Sec. 18-29. - Warning sign required to be posted. 
(a)  All vendors of alcoholic beverages shall post in a conspicuous place in their premises a sign which is clearly visible and legible to all patrons entering the premises which shall read as follows: 
"HEALTH WARNING" 
DRINKING DISTILLED SPIRITS, BEER (INCLUDING NON-ALCOHOLIC), COOLERS, WINE AND OTHER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY MAY INCREASE THE RISK OF PERMANENT BIRTH DEFECTS. 
    In the alternative, a health warning sign provided by the Florida Keys Health Start Coalition may be used. 
(b)  The above-described sign shall be legibly printed on cardboard or other similar material with at minimum one-half-inch block style letters. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be subject to prosecution and fine under the civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680, or section 1-15 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 18-27, § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 18-30. - Posting and required notice regarding prohibition of purchase and sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age. 
(1)  All persons who own or operate a business establishment in the City which sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises shall conspicuously post a notice within said business establishment in such a place where alcoholic beverages are either displayed, purchased or consumed. Such notice shall comply with the requirements of this section. Failure to post such required notice pursuant to the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. This restriction shall not apply to a bona fide restaurant without a restaurant bar. Such places of business shall conspicuously post a notice within said business establishment in such a place where it will be visible to all employees of said business. 
(2)  Required notice shall consist of one or more signs or notices, each of which is not less than 93 square inches (8-1/2 by 11"), with at least one-half-inch block style letters, which contains the following information, clearly discernable by persons to whom alcoholic beverages may be sold or dispensed: 
"IT IS UNLAWFUL TO PURCHASE ALCOHOL IF YOU ARE UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE. 
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR DISPENSE ALCOHOL TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE, UNLESS EXEMPT PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 562.11 OR 562.13, FLORIDA STATUTES. 
THE PENALTIES ASSOCIATED WITH THE SALE OR DISPENSING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE INCLUDE IMPRISONMENT IN COUNTY JAIL FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO 60 DAYS, A FINE UP TO $500, OR BOTH. 
TO REPORT THOSE WHO ARE IN VIOLATION OF THE LAW, YOU CAN CALL: 
KEY WEST POLICE - (305)809-1000 
(NON-EMERGENCY #) 
FL DIVISION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES & TOBACCO - 1-866-540-SUDS (866-540-7837) 
    In the alternative to the above language, a health warning sign provided by the Monroe County Coalition may be used. 
(3)  A violation of this section shall be subject to prosecution and fine under the civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680, or section 1-15 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-27, § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Secs. 18-31-18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE 

Sec. 18-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Soundproof means any physical arrangement or configuration of a building that is sufficient to prevent the sound of live entertainment or amplified sound from constituting unreasonably excessive noise, as provided in division 3 of article II of chapter 6 and article IV of chapter 26. 
(Code 1986, § 103.05(b); Ord. No. 14-08, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-57. - Required; application; fee; term; exemption. 
(a)  An establishment selling alcoholic beverages and desiring to provide live or recorded amplified music for the entertainment of its customers shall obtain an entertainment license from the city. 
(b)  An application for an entertainment license shall be made to the city manager in the name of the business establishment. 
(c)  The annual fee shall be $150.00. 
(d)  This license is renewable on an annual basis on or before each October 1. A late penalty of $25.00 shall be assessed for a license payment made after October 1. 
(e)  An establishment is exempted from the requirements of this section if it soundproofs its building, as defined in section 18-56, or if the amplified recorded sound derives exclusively from either a jukebox, a radio (but not a boom box), or a digital music system supplied to the premises by a cable television company under the franchise of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 103.05(a)) 
Sec. 18-58. - Denial; violations. 
(a)  No person is entitled to an entertainment license who has failed to comply with the requirements of a business tax receipt pursuant to article IV of chapter 66. 
(b)  A misrepresentation in the application for an entertainment license, as well as any other violation of the terms and conditions of this division shall upon conviction be punishable in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 103.05(c); Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-59. - Mediation regarding complaints of noise. 
    The city manager shall conduct a mediation between the holder of an entertainment license and any person complaining of noise at such establishment if: 
(1)  The establishment or its owner or any employee thereof has been found in violation or pleads no contest to a violation of the sound control provisions in division 3 of article II of chapter 6 and article IV of chapter 26 at least one time within a two-year period; or 
(2)  The establishment is the subject of chronic noise complaints within any 30-day period. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "chronic" shall mean that the city manager initially has received a complaint of unreasonably excessive noise at a location from more than one person, and similar noise complaints continue after an investigating officer has issued either a citation or a warning. Submission to mediation shall be a requirement of the holding of an entertainment license. Upon issuance of the entertainment license, the licensing division shall provide the holder with a written notice of its responsibilities under this subsection. The city manager shall provide notice and opportunity to be heard by the parties at mediation, and shall issue final recommendations. The mediation is nonbinding. 
(Code 1986, § 103.05(d); Ord. No. 14-08, § 2, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 18-60. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  If a license holder is found in violation or pleads no contest to a violation of division 3 of article II of chapter 6 and article IV of chapter 26 three (3) times within any annual period and the noise violations are music related, the city manager may determine whether to revoke or suspend for a period of time the license holder's entertainment license. Before reaching a decision, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the license holder notice of the hearing and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the license holder's record of noise violations; 
(3)  Consider the seriousness and recurrence of the violation; 
(4)  Consider the degree of disturbance on persons or neighboring property owners; and 
(5)  Evaluate the license holder's record in mediation under section 18-59. 
(b)  The city manager's decision to revoke or suspend an entertainment license shall be issued in writing and shall inform the license holder of the right to appeal the decision to the city commission. A written appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the receipt of the decision. The city commission shall have the ability upon appeal to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the determination made by the city manager and may make any necessary further decisions respecting the subject of the appeal and, to that end, shall have all the powers as the city manager respecting such matter pursuant to subsection (a) above. An appeal shall not stay the city manager's decision unless the city manager's decision calls for a stay upon appeal. If a license is revoked or suspended and the establishment continues to provide live or recorded amplified music without a license, the city attorney is authorized to apply for an injunction from the circuit court. 
(Code 1986, § 103.05(e); Ord. No. 08-05, § 3, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 14-08, § 3, 5-6-2014) 
Secs. 18-61-18-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN CONTAINERS 

Sec. 18-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half (0.5) percent alcohol or more by weight. 
    Beverage law means F.S. chs. 561-565. 
    Commercial establishment parking lot means any private or public area appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for, and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives, parking areas, and sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto. 
    Open container means any receptacle or container immediately capable of being consumed from by a person or which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
    Public or semipublic area open for vehicular or pedestrian travel means any private or public road, street, highway, right-of-way, lane, alley, parking lot, or parking area on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or pedestrian means or which is otherwise open for such travel. It shall not include the following: 
(1)  Areas such as golf courses; 
(2)  Private driveways; or 
(3)  Property serving a single dwelling unit. 
(Code 1986, § 103.07(a); Ord. No. 11-14, § 1, 10-5-2011) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-87. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink from an open container of an alcoholic beverage and be under the influence of said beverage while upon a public or semipublic area open for vehicular or pedestrian travel, or a commercial establishment parking lot or property owned by or under lease to the city, except in those areas in which such consumption is permitted pursuant to the beverage law, other state statutes, state administrative rule, or city ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  All businesses that are licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages shall post at each exit a sign with the following wording: "It is illegal to carry an open container of an alcoholic beverage on the sidewalks or streets of Key West. KW Ord. 18-87." The dimensions of each sign shall be at least two square feet. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall consist of: (1) direct evidence of consumption of an alcoholic beverage while on public or semi-public property or area(s); or (2) evidence demonstrating any indicia of consumption of an alcoholic beverage including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, an unsteady gait, slurred speech, or an odor of an alcoholic beverage emanating from one's breath or person based on that officer's training and experience, while in or on public or semi-public property or area(s), and in possession of an open alcoholic beverage container. 
(d)  There shall be one verbal or written warning for any first time offender of this section provided that compliance is immediately achieved. Second or subsequent violations are subject to arrest pursuant to F.S. § 901.15. 
(e)  Proof that the beverage in question was contained in a container labeled as "beer," "ale," "malt liquor," "malt beverage," "wine," or "distilled spirits" or with other similar name; and which bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark shall serve as prima facie evidence that such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. Further, proof that a container contains alcohol as defined in this section, that is not so clearly marked as described herein, shall be established by testimony that the contents or remnants therein is consistent with alcohol through the officer's training and experience including but not limited to: odor, texture, appearance and color in combination with the officer's observations of the violator, including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, unsteady gait, slurred speech, odor of an alcoholic beverage and affect consistent with alcohol consumption. 
(Code 1986, § 103.07(b); Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 4-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-14, § 2, 10-5-2011; Ord. No. 13-21, § 1, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 18-88. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibition contained in section 18-87 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The following property owned by the city and leased or licensed to any individual, group, corporation or other entity: the Key West Yacht Club; 529 Front Street; 410 Wall Street; the marina area adjacent to Garrison Bight; 1405 Duval Street; the golf course and associated businesses, R.E. Nos. 228 and 229. 
(2)  Any person engaged in picking up empty beverage containers for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the bottle or can itself, or any person taking part in a litter control campaign. 
(3)  Passengers of vehicles as set forth in F.S. § 316.1936(5), incorporated by reference in this section. For the exception under this subsection to apply, however, transportation shall occur only in a wholly enclosed vehicle. Possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in an open air vehicle used for commercial purposes is prohibited. 
(4)  The lawful possession of any open container pursuant to F.S. § 316.1936 or section 70-283 of this Code. 
(b)  The city manager may issue temporary variances from the provisions of section 18-87 to allow the sale/possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages on property owned by or under lease to the city or a community redevelopment agency; provided, however, that any such variance shall: 
(1)  Be issued only upon written application by a nonprofit organization; 
(2)  Require the presence of security personnel during such sale/consumption, which personnel shall meet reasonable standards of qualification as determined by the city manager; 
(3)  Be issued only to applicants certifying that they have complied with all applicable permitting requirements of the city, county, state and federal agencies; 
(4)  Require execution of an indemnification and hold harmless agreement releasing the city from liability; 
(5)  Require execution of the applicant's promise to provide full cleanup of all litter arising from the use; 
(6)  Require execution of the applicant's promise to make all reasonable effort to secure general liability insurance covering the event; and 
(7)  Require payment of a fee according to a schedule provided by the city manager and approved by resolution of the city commission. 
The city manager shall issue no variance if the use described in the application presents an apparent danger to public health and safety. 
(Code 1986, § 103.07(c); Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 1-18-2006) 
Sec. 18-89. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for violation of this division shall be as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 103.07(d)) 
Secs. 18-90-18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Contracting, F.S. ch. 489. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any electrical device, signaling device, or combination of electrical devices used to signal or detect a burglary, fire, robbery, or medical emergency. 
    Alarm system contractor means a person whose business includes the execution of contracts requiring the ability, experience, science, knowledge, and skill to lay out, fabricate, install, maintain, alter, repair, monitor, inspect, replace, or service alarm systems for compensation, including but not limited to all types of alarm systems for all purposes. The term is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Alarm system contractor I means an alarm system contractor whose business includes all types of alarm systems for all purposes. 
(2)  Alarm system contractor II means an alarm system contractor whose business includes all types of alarm systems other than fire, for all purposes, except as provided in this article. 
    Apprentice means a person learning a craft under a skilled worker; hence, a beginner, and as such must have at least three years' experience before taking a journeyman exam. 
    Certificate means a certificate of competency issued by the state department of business and professional regulation as provided in this article. 
    Certified contractor means any contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the state department of business and professional regulation and who shall be allowed to contract in any jurisdiction in the state without being required to fulfill the competency requirements of that jurisdiction. 
    Contracting means, except as exempted in this article, engaging in business as a contractor and includes but is not limited to performance of any of the acts as set forth in the definition of the term "contractor" which defines types of contractors. The attempted sale of contracting services and the negotiation or bid for a contract on these services also constitutes contracting. If the services offered require licensure or agent qualification, the offering, negotiation for a bid, or attempted sale of these services requires the corresponding licensure. However, the term "contracting" shall not extend to an individual, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity that offers to sell or sells completed residences on property on which the individual or business entity has any legal or equitable interest, if the services of a qualified contractor certified or registered pursuant to the requirements of this article have been or will be retained for the purpose of constructing such residences. 
    Contractor means the person who is qualified for, and shall only be responsible for, the project contracted for and means, except as exempted in this article, the person who, for compensation, undertakes to, submits a bid to, or does himself or by others construct, repair, alter, remodel, add to, demolish, subtract from, or improve any building or structure, including related improvements to real estate, for others or for resale to others; and whose job scope is substantially similar to the job scope described in one of the subsequent subsections of this definition. For the purposes of regulation under this article, the term "demolish" applies only to demolition of steel tanks over 50 feet in height; towers over 50 feet in height; other structures over 50 feet in height, other than buildings or residences over three stories tall; and buildings or residences over three stories tall. Contractors are subdivided into two divisions, division I, consisting of those contractors defined in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition, and division II, consisting of those contractors defined in subsections (4) through (17) of this definition: 
(1)  General contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited as to the type of work which he may do, who may contract for any activity requiring licensure under this article, and who may perform any work requiring licensure under this article, except as otherwise expressly provided in F.S. § 489.113. 
(2)  Building contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to construction of commercial buildings and single-dwelling or multiple-dwelling residential buildings, which commercial or residential buildings do not exceed three stories in height, and accessory use structures in connection therewith or a contractor whose services are limited to remodeling, repair, or improvement of any size building if the services do not affect the structural members of the building. 
(3)  Residential contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to construction, remodeling, repair, or improvement of one-family, two-family, or three-family residences not exceeding two habitable stories above no more than one uninhabitable story and accessory use structures in connection therewith. 
(4)  Sheet metal contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited in the sheet metal trade and who has the experience, knowledge, and skill necessary for the manufacture, fabrication, assembling, handling, erection, installation, dismantling, conditioning, adjustment, insulation, alteration, repair, servicing, or design, when not prohibited by law, of ferrous or nonferrous metal work of U.S. no. 10 gauge or its equivalent or lighter gauge and of other materials, including but not limited to fiberglass, used in lieu thereof and of air-handling systems, including the setting of air-handling equipment and reinforcement of air-handling equipment, the balancing of air-handling systems, and any duct cleaning and equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling of the system. 
(5)  Roofing contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited in the roofing trade and who has the experience, knowledge, and skill to install, maintain, repair, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, and use materials and items used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all kinds of roofing, waterproofing, and coating, except when coating is not represented to protect, repair, waterproof, stop leaks, or extend the life of the roof. 
(6)  Class A air conditioning contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge, and skill to: 
a.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating, and ventilating systems, including ductwork in connection with a complete system only to the extent such ductwork is performed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air-distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, and all appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment used in connection therewith, and any duct cleaning and equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling of the system; 
b.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, piping, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts, pressure and process piping, and pneumatic control piping; 
c.  Replace, disconnect, or reconnect power wiring on the load side of the dedicated existing electrical disconnect switch; to install, disconnect, and reconnect low voltage heating, ventilating, and air conditioning control wiring; and 
d.  Install a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. 
The scope of work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable water lines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, or electrical power wiring. 
(7)  Class B air conditioning contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to 25 tons of cooling and 500,000 Btu of heating in any one system in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge, and skill to: 
a.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating, and ventilating systems, including ductwork in connection with a complete system only to the extent such ductwork is performed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air-distribution system being installed under this classification, and any duct cleaning and equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling of the system; 
b.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, piping and insulation of pipes, vessels, and ducts; 
c.  Replace, disconnect, or reconnect power wiring on the load side of the dedicated existing electrical disconnect switch; 
d.  Install, disconnect, and reconnect low voltage heating, ventilating, and air conditioning control wiring; and 
e.  Install a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. 
The scope of work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable water lines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, or electrical power wiring. 
(8)  Class C air conditioning contractor means a contractor whose business is limited to the servicing of air conditioning, heating, or refrigeration systems, including any duct cleaning and equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling of the system, and whose certification or registration, issued pursuant to this article, was valid on October 1, 1988. No person not previously registered or certified as a class C air conditioning contractor as of October 1, 1988, shall be so registered or certified after October 1, 1988. However, the board of examiners shall continue to license and regulate those class C air conditioning contractors who held class C licenses prior to October 1, 1988. 
(9)  Mechanical contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge, and skill to: 
a.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating, and ventilating systems, including ductwork in connection with a complete system only to the extent such ductwork is performed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air-distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, lift station equipment and piping, and all appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment used in connection therewith, and any duct cleaning and equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling of the system; 
b.  Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, piping, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts, pressure and process piping, pneumatic control piping, gasoline tanks and pump installations and piping for such, standpipes, air piping, vacuum line piping, oxygen lines, nitrous oxide piping, ink and chemical lines, fuel transmission lines, and natural gas fuel lines within buildings; 
c.  Replace, disconnect, or reconnect power wiring on the load side of the dedicated existing electrical disconnect switch; 
d.  Install, disconnect, and reconnect low voltage heating, ventilating, and air conditioning control wiring; and 
e.  Install a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. 
The scope of work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum gas fuel lines within buildings, potable water lines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, or electrical power wiring. 
(10)  Commercial pool/spa contractor means a contractor whose scope of work involves but is not limited to the construction, repair, and servicing of any swimming pool or hot tub or spa, whether public, private, or otherwise, regardless of use. The scope of work includes the installation, repair, or replacement of existing equipment, any cleaning or equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling, excluding filter changes, and the installation of new pool/spa equipment, interior finishes, the installation of package pool heaters, the installation of all perimeter piping and filter piping, and the construction of equipment rooms or housing for pool/spa equipment, and also includes the scope of work of a swimming pool/spa servicing contractor. The scope of such work does not include direct connections to a sanitary sewer system or to potable water lines. The installation, construction, modification, or replacement of equipment permanently attached to and associated with the pool or spa for the purpose of water treatment or cleaning of the pool or spa requires licensure; however, the usage of such equipment for the purposes of water treatment or cleaning shall not require licensure unless the usage involves construction, modification, or replacement of such equipment. Water treatment that does not require such equipment does not require a license. In addition, a license shall not be required for the cleaning of the pool or spa in any way that does not affect the structural integrity of the pool or spa or its associated equipment. 
(11)  Residential pool/spa contractor means a contractor whose scope of work involves but is not limited to the construction, repair, and servicing of any residential swimming pool, or hot tub or spa, regardless of use. The scope of work includes the installation, repair, or replacement of existing equipment, any cleaning or equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling, excluding filter changes, and the installation of new pool/spa equipment, interior finishes, the installation of package pool heaters, the installation of all perimeter piping and filter piping, and the construction of equipment rooms or housing for pool/spa equipment, and also includes the scope of work of a swimming pool/spa servicing contractor. The scope of such work does not include direct connections to a sanitary sewer system or to potable water lines. The installation, construction, modification, or replacement of equipment permanently attached to and associated with the pool or spa for the purpose of water treatment or cleaning of the pool or spa requires licensure; however, the usage of such equipment for the purposes of water treatment or cleaning shall not require licensure unless the usage involves construction, modification, or replacement of such equipment. Water treatment that does not require such equipment does not require a license. In addition, a license shall not be required for the cleaning of the pool or spa in any way that does not affect the structural integrity of the pool or spa or its associated equipment. 
(12)  Swimming pool/spa servicing contractor means a contractor whose scope of work involves but is not limited to the repair and servicing of any swimming pool, or hot tub or spa, whether public or private, or otherwise, regardless of use. The scope of work includes the repair or replacement of existing equipment, any cleaning or equipment sanitizing which requires at least a partial disassembling, excluding filter changes, and the installation of new pool/spa equipment, interior refinishing, the reinstallation or addition of pool heaters, the repair or replacement of all perimeter piping and filter piping, the repair of equipment rooms or housing for pool/spa equipment, and the substantial or complete draining of a swimming pool, or hot tub or spa, for the purpose of any repair or renovation. The scope of such work does not include direct connections to a sanitary sewer system or to potable water lines. The installation, construction, modification, substantial or complete disassembly, or replacement of equipment permanently attached to and associated with the pool or spa for the purpose of water treatment or cleaning of the pool or spa requires licensure; however, the usage of such equipment for the purposes of water treatment or cleaning shall not require licensure unless the usage involves construction, modification, substantial or complete disassembly, or replacement of such equipment. Water treatment that does not require such equipment does not require a license. In addition, a license shall not be required for the cleaning of the pool or spa in any way that does not affect the structural integrity of the pool or spa or its associated equipment. 
(13)  Plumbing contractor means a contractor whose contracting business consists of the execution of contracts requiring the experience, financial means, knowledge, and skill to install, maintain, repair, alter, extend, or, when not prohibited by law, design plumbing. A plumbing contractor may install, maintain, repair, alter, extend, or, when not prohibited by law, design the following without obtaining any additional local regulatory license, certificate, or registration: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting systems; public or private water supply systems; septic tanks; drainage and supply wells; swimming pool piping; irrigation systems; or solar heating water systems and all appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment used in connection therewith, including boilers and pressure process piping and including the installation of water, natural gas (excluding liquid petroleum gases), and storm and sanitary sewer lines; and water and sewer plants and substations. The scope of work of the plumbing contractor also includes the design, when not prohibited by law, and installation, maintenance, repair, alteration, or extension of air piping, vacuum line piping, oxygen line piping, nitrous oxide piping, and all related medical gas systems; fire line standpipes and fire sprinklers to the extent authorized by law; ink and chemical lines; fuel oil and gasoline piping and tank and pump installation, except bulk storage plants; and pneumatic control piping systems, all in such a manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws, and regulations applicable. The scope of work of the plumbing contractor shall apply to private property and public property, shall include any excavation work incidental thereto, and shall include the work of the specialty plumbing contractor. Such contractor shall subcontract, with a qualified contractor in the field concerned, all other work incidental to the work but which is specified in this article as being the work of a trade other than that of a plumbing contractor. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to limit the scope of work of any specialty contractor certified pursuant to F.S. § 489.113(6). Nothing in this definition shall be construed to require certification or registration under this article of any authorized employee of a public natural gas utility or of a private natural gas utility regulated by the state public service commission when disconnecting and reconnecting water lines in the servicing or replacement of an existing water heater. 
(14)  Underground utility and excavation contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to the construction, installation, and repair, on public or private property, whether accomplished through open excavations or through other means, including but not limited to directional drilling, auger boring, jacking and boring, trenchless technologies, wet and dry taps, grouting, and slip lining, of main sanitary sewer collection systems, main water distribution systems, storm sewer collection systems, and the continuation of utility lines from the main systems to a point of termination up to and including the meter location for the individual occupancy, sewer collection systems at the property line on residential or single-occupancy commercial properties, or on multi-occupancy properties at manhole or wye lateral extended to an invert elevation as engineered to accommodate future building sewers, water distribution systems, or storm sewer collection systems at storm sewer structures. However, an underground utility and excavation contractor may install empty underground conduits in rights-of-way, easements, platted rights-of-way in new site development, and sleeves for parking lot crossings no smaller than two inches in diameter, provided that each conduit system installed is designed by a licensed professional engineer or an authorized employee of a municipality, county, or public utility and that the installation of any such conduit does not include installation of any conductor wiring or connection to an energized electrical system. An underground utility and excavation contractor shall not install any piping that is an integral part of a fire protection system as defined in F.S. § 633.021 beginning at the point where the piping is used exclusively for such system. 
(15)  Solar contractor means a contractor whose services consist of the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance, relocation, or replacement of solar panels for potable solar water heating systems, swimming pool solar heating systems, and photovoltaic systems and any appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment used in connection therewith, whether public, private, or otherwise, regardless of use. A contractor, certified or registered pursuant to the provisions of this article, is not required to become a certified or registered solar contractor or to contract with a solar contractor in order to provide any services enumerated in this definition that are within the scope of the services such contractors may render under this article. 
(16)  Pollutant storage systems contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to and who has the experience, knowledge, and skill to install, maintain, repair, alter, extend, or design, when not prohibited by law, and use materials and items used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of pollutant storage tanks. Any person installing a pollutant storage tank shall perform such installation in accordance with the standards adopted pursuant to F.S. § 376.303. 
(17)  Specialty contractor means a contractor whose scope of work and responsibility is limited to a particular phase of construction and whose scope is limited to a subset of the activities described in the categories established in one of the subsections of this definition. The following is a list of specialty skills with the scope of work that may be performed under each certificate: 
a.  Acoustical ceiling contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install, repair, alter or extend any acoustical or suspended acoustical ceiling. 
b.  Aluminum contractor means a contractor who is qualified to fabricate, install, repair, alter or extend aluminum structures, including screen rooms, with solid or screen roofs, metal siding, soffits, gutters and awnings. 
c.  Asphalt sealing and coating contractor means a contractor who is qualified to coat an existing asphaltic paving material with a sealer, which may be applied by squeegee, broom or mechanical applicator. 
d.  Awning erection contractor means a contractor whose operation consists of the installation and repair of awning, wood, or metal. 
e.  Cabinet and millwork contractor means a contractor whose work consists of building and the installation of cabinets of all kinds; also millwork of any kind. 
f.  Concrete forming and placing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to construct forms and formwork for the casting and shaping of concrete, including but not limited to columns, beams, decks, and window frames; to place and erect concrete reinforcements; to batch and mix aggregate cement and water to specifications incidental to placing concrete; and to pour, place and finish concrete. 
g.  Demolition contractor means a contractor who is qualified to demolish and remove structures, such as dwellings, commercial buildings, and foundations. 
h.  Drywall contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install gypsum drywall products to wood and metal studs, wood and steel joists and metal runners in buildings of unlimited area and height. The scope of the work shall include the preparation of the surface over which the drywall product is to be applied, including the placing of metal studs and runners and all necessary trim. 
i.  Elevator contractor means a person licensed by the state in F.S. ch. 399. 
j.  Fencing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install, replace or repair fencing including but not limited to wood, metal chain link or masonry fences. 
k.  Floor covering contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install, repair and replace subflooring and finish floor coverings, including wood, parquet, resilient tile, sheet vinyl and floor trim. 
l.  General engineering contractor means a contractor who is qualified to do work such as but not limited to harbors, docks, excavating, filling and grading, pile driving, levees, pumping stations, and similar types of work in conjunction with water power, water control, waterworks and water supply, paving and sidewalks, curbs and gutter, streets and roads and bridges, overpasses and underpasses in streets; roads and public thoroughfares, underground sewage collection and disposal systems, bulkheading and underground utility line construction, both sanitary and storm sewer systems and similar work. 
m.  Glass and glazing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to select, cut, assemble, and install all makes and kinds of glass and glasswork and execute the glazing frames, panels, sash and door and holding metal frames, ornamental decorations, mirrors, tub and shower enclosures. 
n.  Insulating contractor means a contractor whose work is limited to the placing of any approved insulation in any type structure. 
o.  Irrigation sprinkler contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter, or extend all piping and sprinkler heads for the irrigation of lawns, including the connection to a water pump. 
p.  Low voltage contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter or extend any low voltage electrical construction less than 50 volts or equivalent rms. 
q.  Masonry contractor means a contractor who is qualified to select, cut, and lay brick and concrete block or any other unit masonry products, lay brick and other baked clay products, rough cut and dress stone, artificial stone, and precast block, structural glass brick or block and insulated concrete wall units. This work includes placement of reinforcing steel and concrete forming and placing incorporated into the masonry work. 
r.  Metal decking and siding contractor means a contractor who is qualified to install metal decking or siding. 
s.  Plastering/stucco contractor means a contractor who is qualified to coat surfaces with a mixture of sand or other aggregate gypsum plaster, Portland cement or quick-lime and water, or any combination of such material as to create a permanent surface coating. Such contractor may apply and affix gypsum or metal lath or any other product prepared or manufactured, including the placing of metal studs and runners to which lath is to be applied, to provide key or suction bases for the support of the plaster coating. 
t.  Reinforcing steel placing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to fabricate, place, and tie steel reinforcing bars (rods) of any profile, perimeter or cross section, that are or may be used to reinforce concrete buildings or structures in such a manner that under all agreed specification, steel reinforcing bars (rods) for concrete buildings and structures can be fabricated, placed, and tied. 
u.  Roof waterproofing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to paint and waterproof roofs. 
v.  Sandblasting contractor means a contractor who is qualified to operate a sandblasting equipment for the purpose of cleaning or preparatory to repainting surfaces of structures. 
w.  Sign contractor, nonelectrical, means a contractor who is qualified to install, repair, add or change nonelectrical signs according to the building code. 
x.  Structural steel/structural framing contractor means a contractor who is qualified to erect structural steel shapes and plates, including such minor field fabrication as may be necessary, of any profile, perimeter, or cross section, that are or may be used as structural members for buildings and structures, including metal decking, siding, joists, riveting, welding, and rigging, only in connection therewith. 
y.  Swimming pool maintenance repair contractor means a contractor who is qualified to maintain and treat the water in existing swimming pools, both public and private, make minor repairs to existing pool masonry, such as patching cracks in pool bottoms and walls, repaint or resurface the walls and bottoms of pools, and do preventative maintenance to equipment such as filters and chlorinators. 
z.  Tile, terrazzo and marble contractor means a contractor who is qualified to mix, prepare, and finish terrazzo, prepare the base, set tile and marble. 
aa.  Unlimited painting contractor means a contractor who performs all work related to industrial facilities and other superstructures including bridges, and both water and communication towers and shall include all commercial and residential buildings. This work shall include sandblasting, water/moisture proofing and pressure washing of exterior surfaces and related repairs to already installed surfaces both interior and exterior. This work includes both paper and fabric wall coverings and the necessary surface preparation. 
bb.  Welding contractor means a contractor who is qualified to fabricate and install assembled accessories and sections of structural and ornamental metals. 
cc.  Well drilling contractor means a person licensed pursuant to F.S. § 373.323. 
    Electrical contractor and unlimited electrical contractor mean a person who conducts business in the electrical trade field and who has the experience, knowledge, and skill to install, repair, alter, add to, or design, in compliance with law, electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, raceways, conduit, or any part thereof, which generates, transmits, transforms, or utilizes electrical energy in any form, including the electrical installations and systems within plants and substations, all in compliance with applicable plans, specifications, codes, laws, and regulations. The term means any person who engages in the business of electrical contracting under an express or implied contract; or who undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to engage in the business of electrical contracting; or who does himself or by or through others engages in the business of electrical contracting. 
    Electrician means a person who is engaged in the trade or business of electrical construction and who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article. 
    Engage in business means doing a trade for any owner or any tenant of land or of a building or of any part thereof, or for any person in possession or in charge of the land or building or any part thereof, or entering into a contract with any such owner, tenant, person, firm or corporation for the doing of a trade. 
    Maintenance electrician means a person who has qualified for a journeyman electrician, but who must be regularly employed to maintain and make minor repairs to the electrical wiring, apparatus and equipment which is installed, contained and used upon premises or in buildings owned, occupied or controlled by the person by whom the maintenance electrician is employed. 
    Qualified person means any person qualified under the terms and provisions of this article, including any bona fide owner who desires to perform work on his premises in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Code. 
    Registered contractor means any contractor who has registered with the state department of business and professional regulation pursuant to fulfilling the competency requirements in the jurisdiction for which the registration is issued. Registered contractors may contract only in such jurisdictions. 
    Registration means registration with the state department of business and professional regulation as provided in F.S. ch. 489. 
    Subcontractor means one who contracts with a contractor to perform part of the latter's work. 
    Trade includes but is not limited to plumbing, electrical work, plastering, construction, repair or removal of buildings, and any other similar occupation connected with the construction industry. 
(Code 1986, §§ 31.063, 33.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-117. - Acts declared unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any contractor, as defined in section 18-116, operating anywhere within the city, licensed individually or as a firm contractor, or any officers, directors or qualified representatives of a firm contractor to commit any one or more of the acts or omissions set forth in this section. It shall also be unlawful for any property owner to commit any one or more of the acts or omissions set forth in this section as it may pertain to a property owner who directly employs others to perform construction work at a property. Violations of this section by a property owner shall be subject to the authority of the special master. The following acts are declared unlawful: 
(1)  Contract or do any work outside the scope of operation, as set out in the definition of the particular type of contractor for which he is qualified, or to perform or offer to purport to perform any architectural or engineering or surveying services in violation of state statutes. 
(2)  Abandon without legal excuse a construction project or operation in which he is engaged or under contract as a contractor. 
(3)  Divert funds or property received for the execution or completion of a specific construction project or operation or for a specified purpose to any other use whatsoever. 
(4)  Depart from or disregard in any material respect the plans or specifications of a construction job without the consent of the owner or his duly authorized representative. 
(5)  Disregard or violate, in the performance of his contracting business, any of the building, safety, health insurance or worker's compensation laws of the state or resolutions of the city commission concerning such. 
(6)  Misrepresent any material fact in his application and supporting papers in obtaining a license under this article. 
(7)  Fail to fulfill his contractual obligation through inability to pay all creditors for material furnished or work or services performed in the operation of his business for which he is licensed under this article. 
(8)  Aid or abet an unlicensed person to evade the provisions of this article or allow his license to be used by any unlicensed person or to act as an agent of an unlicensed person with the intent to evade this article. 
(9)  Commit any fraudulent act as a contractor by which another is substantially injured. 
(Code 1986, § 33.02) 
Sec. 18-118. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to any person or transaction exempted by F.S. § 489.103. 
(b)  An agent shall not be allowed to act on the behalf of a person applying for a homeowner permit to alter, construct, or repair a structure unless a licensed contractor is employed. 
(Code 1986, § 33.06) 
Sec. 18-119. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this article, upon conviction thereof, or upon citation for civil infraction shall be punished or penalized as provided in section 1-15. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 33.07) 
Secs. 18-120-18-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-146. - License required. 
    Every person engaged in or who shall engage in the business or capacity of a contractor as defined in section 18-116 shall procure and maintain at all times while so engaged a city license. 
(Code 1986, § 33.03) 
Sec. 18-147. - Business tax receipt applicable. 
    Article IV of chapter 66, insofar as the requirements for a local business tax receipt may be applicable and not in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 33.04; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-148. - Limit of apprentices in certain trades. 
    In any and all trades in which a certificate of competency is required, apprentices shall be limited to not more than two apprentices per skilled craftsman. 
(Code 1986, § 33.05) 
Sec. 18-149. - Certification requirement, reciprocity. 
    Every person, who, under the terms of this Code, is required to hold a certificate of competency, and who, upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 80-19, holds a current certificate of competency issued by the city and shall be entitled to a certificate of competency without examination, but such certificate shall be subject to any restrictions and limitations carried by the current city certificate and shall entitle the holder of such certificate to do business only in the city. Evidence to be considered to warrant such entitlement shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Proof that written examination given by the city was successfully passed by the applicant. 
(2)  Letters from the county building department, stating that applicant has successfully passed the Experior Assessments LLC examination proctored by the county, and reciprocity is agreeable with the county. 
(Code 1986, § 33.14; Ord. No. 01-07, § 2, 7-3-2001) 
Sec. 18-150. - Certificate of competency required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor, electrician or maintenance personnel or perform any trade, as defined in section 18-116, anywhere within the city limits without a current valid certificate of competency issued by the building official having jurisdiction over the several trades concerned. Specialty contractors shall be subject to the requirements of sections 18-152 and 18-154 regarding applications and examinations. 
(b)  Any person not possessing a current certificate of competency and holding himself out as plaintiff or defendant in any court of this state or advertising in a newspaper or otherwise to be a contractor shall be subject to the provisions and penalties of this article, and a certified copy of such court records or a copy of the newspaper or other advertising making such an assertion shall be prima facie evidence in court or in any other proceeding authorized by this article that the person purported to have the capacity to act as a contractor. 
(Code 1986, § 33.08) 
Sec. 18-151. - Certificate prerequisite to issuance of business tax receipt. 
    Whenever a city business tax receipt is required of any contractor or subcontractor, no such business tax receipt shall be issued unless the applicant shall first procure from the building department a current certificate of competency and shall present a copy to the license division. 
(Code 1986, § 33.09; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-152. - Application for contractor's certificate. 
    A contractor's certificate of competency shall be obtained in the following manner: 
(1)  Any person required or desiring to be qualified as a contractor shall make application on a form prescribed by the building department at the office of the building director of the building department. 
(2)  If the applicant is a firm, the application shall be executed by the president, or one legally qualified to act for the firm shall show his authority to so act on the application and shall name an authorized agent on behalf of the firm showing his authority to: 
a.  Act for the firm in all matters in any manner connected with the contracting business; 
b.  Supervise the construction under the business tax receipt issued to the firm; and 
c.  Take the qualifying examination for the firm, unless holding a current certificate of competency of the class and type necessary. 
The firm shall be qualified only through the qualifications of such agent taking the examination or through an agent currently qualified. If the agent (qualifier) shall sever his affiliation with such firm, the certificate of competency held by such firm shall be automatically canceled. An agent (qualifier) shall be registered to the work of the firm he is currently qualifying. 
(3)  No application shall be considered unless the applicant gives all information required on the form, which shall include the following: 
a.  A statement of the applicant's proposed contracting business. 
b.  The type of certificate being applied for. 
c.  Name, residence, business address of the applicant. 
d.  If the applicant is a firm, the name and business address of the firm and the names and residences of all directors and officers of the firm and their interest therein, and the name and residence of the applicant's qualified representative and information contained in this subsection; if the applicant is a corporation, a certificate of incorporation. 
(4)  The building director shall notify the applicant of the next regular examination and shall notify the board of examiners of the application prior to its next regular meeting and shall make such additional investigation as may be directed by the board. 
(Code 1986, § 33.10; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-153. - Application for certificate of competency. 
    A certificate of competency for personnel shall be obtained in the following manner: 
(1)  Any person required or desiring to be qualified as a master, journeyman or maintenance personnel shall make an application on a form prescribed by the building department at the office of the building director. The application shall be retained by the department together with all supporting papers. 
(2)  The building director shall notify the applicant of the next examination. 
(Code 1986, § 33.11) 
Sec. 18-154. - Examinations; issuance. 
(a)  Examinations required under this article shall be of the type as furnished by Experior Assessments # LLC. 
(b)  The building director shall not issue a certificate of competency unless he finds that the applicant or, if the applicant is a firm, the qualified representative has made a passing grade of 70 percent or higher on the written examination and has the necessary experience for the type of certificate applied for. 
(Code 1986, § 33.12; Ord. No. 01-07, § 1 (33.12), 7-3-2001) 
Sec. 18-155. - Temporary certificates. 
    Any person who has in his possession a current license or certificate as a master or journeyman issued by any state, county or municipality in the United States certifying that the holder has been examined and found competent to perform the work of a master or journeyman shall, after making application for the next examination, be issued a temporary certificate by the building director authorizing such master or journeyman to work in the capacity of a journeyman. Such certificate shall be issued only upon written request of the employing contractor. Failure to take or pass the examination shall automatically terminate such certificate, and the employing contractor shall return the certificate to the building director. No further certificate shall be issued to the applicant unless he shall take and pass an examination. 
(Code 1986, § 33.13) 
Sec. 18-156. - Use of name of licensee prohibited. 
    No person licensed by the city pursuant to this article shall allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or doing work under the license of such person. Any person found guilty in the municipal court of permitting the use of his name in this manner shall be guilty of an offense, and in addition thereto, shall forfeit his license to do work in the city for a period of one year. 
(Code 1986, § 31.072) 
Sec. 18-157. - Employment of unlicensed persons prohibited. 
(a)  No licensed person shall employ any person required to be certified pursuant to this article to work unless the person has in his possession a certificate of competency as provided for in section 18-150. 
(b)  No person shall do work of any character which requires a license outside, inside or attached to buildings or premises, whether for permanent or temporary work, in the city unless he is employed by and works under the direct supervision of a licensed person who is duly certified as provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 31.073) 
Sec. 18-158. - Reexamination. 
    Where a certificate issued pursuant to this article has been revoked or has expired or lapsed for any reason, the board of examiners may require complete reexamination before a certificate of competency is renewed or reinstated. 
(Code 1986, § 33.15) 
Sec. 18-159. - Examination and renewal fees. 
(a)  Examination fees are as follows: 
(1)  Standard technical exam ..... $100.00 
(2)  Standard business and law exam ..... 100.00 
(b)  Under this article, the renewal fee shall cover two years, and the renewal fee is due on October 1 of each odd-numbered year. A delinquent charge of ten percent will be added for all renewals after November 15 of each odd-numbered year. 
(c)  Renewal fees shall be $15.00 per year for all categories if proper application for renewal is completed within 24 calendar months of the expiration date of the certificate of competency. Renewal applicants properly completing an application more than 24 but less than 60 months after the certificate's expiration shall pay, in addition to the renewal fee of $10.00, an administrative fee of $25.00 and shall receive the certificate only upon providing to the chief building official reasonable evidence of continued proficiency in the work for which the certificate is issued. An applicant whose certificate has been expired for more than 60 consecutive months shall be reexamined. 
(Code 1986, § 33.16; Ord. No. 01-07, § 1(33.16), 7-3-2001) 
Sec. 18-160. - Certificate number; state certified number. 
(a)  Any person who advertises in a newspaper, by handbills, signs (vehicles included), or any other printed matter that he will perform construction work or give estimates and holding himself out as qualified to perform such work must also include his permanent certificate of competency or state-certified number in such ad. 
(b)  This number shall also be affixed to all estimates, proposals, and contracts for work. 
(Code 1986, § 33.17) 
Sec. 18-161. - Suspension, revocation. 
    The certificate of competency issued by the city to a contractor may be suspended for a fixed term or revoked by the contractors examining board's determination by a majority vote of the entire board after hearing if the contractor, as an individual or the firm by its officers, directors or qualified representative, has violated any of the following provisions of this section. The suspension or revocation of a certificate of competency shall automatically suspend or revoke, as the case may be, any business tax receipt issued by the city. The contractors examining board shall suspend or revoke a contractor's certificate of competency if it is found that the contractor has: 
(1)  Been adjudicated bankrupt. 
(2)  Failed to maintain continually during the life of the certificate of competency appropriate liability and property damage insurance with an insurance company authorized to do business in the state as follows: 
Type of 
Contractor Liability Property 
Damage General (class A) $300,000.00 $50,000.00 Building (class B)  300,000.00  50,000.00 All others  100,000.00  50,000.00  
A certificate of insurance shall contain the information required by the state in F.A.C. 61G4-15.003(2), a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office. Certificates shall be filed with the secretary of the contractors examining board. The board may reinstate a revoked certificate of competency when the contractor obtains sufficient insurance coverage under this subsection. This subsection shall constitute an affirmative requirement of contractors to obtain liability and property damage insurance in accordance with the terms required in this subsection. 
(3)  Violated any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 33.18; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Secs. 18-162-18-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CUSTOM-MADE WEARING APPAREL 

Sec. 18-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Custom work means any alteration, addition, change, or decorative feature made or intended to be made or applied to wearing apparel at the request of the customer, including labor and materials. 
    Customer means any person entering upon the business premises of or engaging in discussion with a wearing apparel retailer for the purpose of inquiring about wearing apparel offered for sale, negotiating a purchase, or purchasing wearing apparel held for sale by a wearing apparel retailer. 
    Permit holder means wearing apparel retailer. 
    Wearing apparel means any and all types of clothing, coverings, garments and accessories worn or designed to be worn upon the human body, including but not limited to slacks, shirts, T-shirts, dresses, skirts, scarves, hats, shoes, shorts, bathing suits, belts, purses, waist pouches, and beach towels. Wearing apparel that has received custom work is known as "custom wearing apparel." 
    Wearing apparel retailer means any person or firm that sells or offers to sell custom wearing apparel to a customer. The wearing apparel retailer and his, her or its employees and agents also constitute the "permit holder" hereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 93.01; Ord. No. 03-30, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-192. - Permit required. 
    Any wearing apparel retailer offering custom wearing apparel for sale to a customer must obtain a permit from the city manager or his designee prior to engaging in the business of selling custom wearing apparel. 
(Code 1986, § 93.02; Ord. No. 03-30, § 2, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 18-193. - Custom work permit required; inspection; fee. 
(a)  No wearing apparel retailer shall engage in custom work without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his designee. The code enforcement office shall inspect the premises where custom work is to be performed to ensure compliance with section 18-194 and 18-195 prior to issuance or renewal of the permit. The permit required under this section shall be in addition to any license required under article IV of chapter 66 [section 66-86 et seq.]. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be $200.00 for each premises where custom work is to be performed. If a reinspection is required, the city may charge a reinspection fee of $50.00. This permit must be renewed on an annual basis each October 1. Failure to timely renew this permit shall constitute a violation of this section punishable pursuant to section 18-196 and 18-197. 
(Code 1986, § 93.03; Ord. No. 03-30, § 3, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 18-194. - Requirements for obtaining permit. 
(a)  Any applicant for a custom wearing apparel permit must provide the following information: 
(1)  Business name, as used for advertising. 
(2)  Business owners, including all corporate officers, stockholders (if a closely-held corporation), members (if a limited liability company), and general and limited partners (if a partnership). 
(3)  Business location and phone number. 
(4)  Business tax receipt number (the proposed permit holder must be the same person or entity as the business tax receipt holder). 
(5)  A listing of other similar businesses owned or operated by applicant. 
(6)  The name of the registered agent. 
(7)  The Federal Employer Identification Number. 
(b)  In addition the applicant shall: 
(1)  Display the business name and numbered street address of the business, in letters and/or numbers not less than five inches in height, on or above the entrance of the business or in a window adjacent to the entrance of the business. 
(2)  Post in plain view (unobstructed, at eye level) at each cash register, on cardboard or other similar material with one-half-inch block style letters, two signs issued by the licensing official which read as follows: 
CITY ORDINANCE REQUIRES A WRITTEN STATEMENT OF COST PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF CUSTOM WORK 
IF YOU HAVE A DISPUTE WITH THIS ESTABLISHMENT ABOUT THE PRICE OF YOUR PURCHASE, CONTACT KEY WEST CODE ENFORCEMENT AT 292-8191 OR THE POLICE AT 809-1111 FOR ASSISTANCE 
These notices shall appear in English, Spanish, French, Japanese, German and Italian. 
(Code 1986, § 93.04; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 9-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-30, § 4, 11-18-2003; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-195. - Requirements of permit holder. 
    Any permit holder must: 
(1)  Maintain conditions set forth in section 18-194(b)(1) and (2). 
(2)  Clearly display each custom item, including but not limited to decals, transfers, emblems, patches and appliques, offered for sale, with each item bearing a sale price posted directly on the item, in letters not less than two inches in height. The price shall include the cost of any labor involved. If the custom item is free or part of a discounted offer, then a statement to this effect shall both be displayed in the store and affixed to each applicable custom item. 
(3)  Where custom wearing apparel is displayed for sale, the permit holder must display or affix both the price of the wearing apparel and the price of the custom work appearing on the item. 
(4)  No wearing apparel retailer shall commence or initiate custom work for a customer without first furnishing to the customer a written statement showing the final total cost of the item to be purchased by the customer. The statement shall clearly delineate the cost of each item of wearing apparel, the cost of the custom work (labor and materials) for each item, and the total cost to the customer. The statement shall be provided in full detail on a form substantially identical to the following: 
[NAME OF STORE]       [ADDRESS OF STORE] 
ORDER OF CUSTOM WORK 
(Must be provided to customer prior to initiation of custom work.) Description of Item 
to be purchased Cost of 
Wearing Apparel Cost of 
Custom Work Subtotal Cost 
(including labor 
and materials) (*Text shall be in six languages: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Japanese.) The total at the bottom of the page is the total cost of your purchase in American dollars, including custom work. There is no exchange or refund for custom work. 
Signature of Buyer: _____ Date: _______ Subtotal: $ _____
Sales Tax of (71/2%) $ _____
TOTAL: $ _____  
(5)  Threats of arrest or prosecution to induce a sale are prohibited. No wearing apparel retailer shall threaten a customer with arrest or criminal prosecution when the customer refuses to accept a wearing apparel item from the retailer because of a dispute over price, quality or[of] work, or other terms of sale, in order to induce or force the customer to purchase the wearing apparel item. 
(6)  The permit holder shall issue to every customer a cash register receipt for each sale of custom wearing apparel. 
(Code 1986, § 93.05; Ord. No. 03-30, § 5, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 18-196. - Violations. 
    A violation of this article is subject to enforcement either pursuant to section 1-15 or pursuant to the code enforcement authority of the special master in sections 2-633 and 2-634. Any violation of this article shall also be considered an unfair or deceptive act or practice as contemplated by F.S. § 501.204. All remedies provided by Florida's Deceptive and Unfair Trade Practices Act (F.S. § 501.201, et seq.) shall be available for any violation of this article. Any such remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to all other remedies provided herein or available at law or equity. 
(Code 1986, § 93.06(a); Ord. No. 03-30, § 7, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 18-197. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  If a permit holder is found in violation or pleads no contest to a violation of this article, the city manager may conduct a permit suspension or revocation hearing, as applicable. The permit holder shall be afforded due process. The city manager may impose a permit suspension or revocation as follows: 
(1)  One violation: up to 30 days' suspension. 
(2)  Two violations: up to 60 days' suspension. 
(3)  Three or more violations: up to a year's suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(b)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Consider the permit holder's past record of compliance with this article and with the entire Code. 
(3)  Consider the seriousness of the violation. 
(c)  The city manager's decision to suspend or revoke shall be issued in writing and shall inform the permit holder of his right to appeal to the city commission by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten days of receipt of the notice. No permit holder shall engage in custom work while his permit is suspended or revoked, nor shall the permit holder display for sale any custom wearing apparel item during the period of suspension or revocation. The city manager or his designee may post the exterior of the property notifying the public of the violation hereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 93.06(b), (c); Ord. No. 03-30, § 8, 11-18-2003) 
Secs. 18-198-18-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Going out of business sales, F.S. § 559.20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-226. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Going out of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's; adjustment alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditor's; benefit of trustees'; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's; end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvent's; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business. 
(Code 1986, § 105.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-227. - Penalty. 
    A person committing a violation of this article shall be subject to the penalty of section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 105.04) 
Sec. 18-228. - Unlawful signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to place in a store window a "Going Out of Business" sign, or a sign whose terms suggest or indicate a sale for the sake of the discontinuing or winding down of a business, if the proprietor does not intend to go out of business or has not complied with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-20, § 1, 8-6-2002) 
Secs. 18-229-18-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-256. - Required. 
    A person who intends to conduct a going out of business sale within the city limits shall apply to the licensing division and be issued a going out of business sale license. The license shall be obtained before the person advertises or offers for sale any such goods. 
(Code 1986, § 105.02(a)) 
Sec. 18-257. - Issuance for same location in certain period. 
    Any person who has held a going out of business sale at a location in the city within a one-year period shall not be issued a license for a going out of business sale for the same location. 
(Code 1986, § 105.02(b)) 
Sec. 18-258. - Term. 
    A license issued under this division shall be valid for a period of 60 consecutive days. The licensing division may grant a one-time extension of 14 days upon a showing by the license holder of facts justifying an extension, including but not limited a showing that original inventory remains unsold. 
(Code 1986, § 105.02(c)) 
Sec. 18-259. - Surrender of business tax receipt. 
    Upon being issued a license required by this division for a going out of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the licensing division the business tax receipt and any other city-issued licenses related to the applicable location. 
(Code 1986, § 105.03; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Secs. 18-260-18-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOBILE VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-286. - Title. 
    This article may be cited as the "mobile vendors ordinance" of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 107.25) 
Sec. 18-287. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any commercial activity in which any goods and/or services are offered for sale as a means of livelihood, but not including occasional sale of household goods by the owner-user. 
    Edibles means any food or beverage intended for human consumption. 
    Goods means any tangible item, including edibles, offered for sale. 
    MVL means mobile vendor's license. 
    Public road means any public right-of-way for cars and trucks in the city, but not including sidewalks or footpaths. 
    Sale means any trade or offer of trade for currency, credit, services or goods. 
    Services means any work or act rendered for sale. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled device by which any person or goods may be transported or drawn upon any public road. 
(Code 1986, § 107.26) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-288. - Regulatory penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15. 
(b)  Upon one or more judicial findings of a violation of this article or other pertinent federal, state, or local law by a person holding a valid mobile vendor's license, the city manager shall, after conforming with subsection (c) of this section, issue a written warning or impose a determinate suspension of the mobile vendor's license or revoke the mobile vendor's license. Judicial findings of violation shall include nolo contendere pleas and convictions, whether or not adjudication is withheld. 
(c)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (b) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford to the mobile vendor's license holder notice of the violation charged and a reasonable, informal opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the license holder's past record of compliance with this article and related laws; and 
(3)  Consider the degree of risk to public health, safety, and peace arising from the violation in evidence. 
(d)  The city manager's decision shall be rendered in writing and shall include notice to the mobile vendor's license holder of a right to appeal the decision within ten days thereof. Appeals not filed in writing with the city clerk within the period shall be deemed waived and shall not be heard by the city commission. 
(e)  Any mobile vendor's license revoked by the city manager pursuant to this section shall immediately be void and of no further use and effect to any person, including during the pendency of any appeal. 
(Code 1986, § 107.35) 
Secs. 18-289-18-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-316. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall offer for business sale any goods or services in the city except from a business duly licensed pursuant to the applicable sections of this Code or unless the person holds a valid mobile vendor's license and fully conforms to the terms of this article. 
(b)  No person shall conduct any business sale or offer to conduct any business sale from any public road, other public thoroughfare, sidewalk, parking lot, or any public property whatsoever, except a person on a public road holding a valid mobile vendor's license and fully conforming to the terms of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 107.27) 
Sec. 18-317. - License as business tax receipt. 
    A valid mobile vendor's license shall be construed as satisfying, for the named holder thereof and for the uses provided in this article, the business tax receipt requirements of article IV of chapter 66. 
(Code 1986, § 107.37; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-318. - Application; franchise fee. 
(a)  Upon application and upon expiration of a reasonable time for administrative processing and review, the city manager shall issue a mobile vendor's license only to any applicant who: 
(1)  Is 18 years of age or older; 
(2)  Submits two identification cards and two photographs which have been taken within 30 days of the application and which are three inches by five inches in size; 
(3)  Provides, on a form provided by the city manager, all of the following information regarding the applicant: 
a.  Name, home address, local address, telephone number; 
b.  Age, height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
c.  Date of birth; 
d.  Social Security number; and 
e.  State sales tax number; 
(4)  Provides, on a form provided by the city manager, all of the following information regarding the applicant's business sales: 
a.  A description of the business, including specification of the goods/services offered for sale, and the expected locations from which sales will be offered; and 
b.  A description of the vehicle to be used in the business, including model, year, manufacturer, color, and license number; 
(5)  Submits, if edibles are offered for business sale, a written acknowledgement from the appropriate state or county agency that the business is licensed in conformity with applicable health codes, which acknowledgement shall have been issued within 30 days of the application: 
(6)  Provides proof of insurance required by section 18-320; 
(7)  Provides a mailing address at which notice of any pertinent city information shall be considered received and binding upon the applicant or mobile vendor's license holder on the fifth day after first class mail is posted to the address; and 
(8)  Pays a fee of the following: 
a.  Twenty-five dollars for city administrative processing costs; 
b.  Three hundred twenty dollars per year for solid waste collection costs, if offering services and rentals for business sale, and $626.00 per year if offering goods or edibles for business sale; a licensee falling within more than one of such categories shall pay the applicable rate for the higher category; and 
c.  Two hundred fifty dollars for the right to offer for business sale, as provided in this article, goods or services of only one of the categories provided in section 18-321(b). A person holding a valid mobile vendor's license shall offer for business sale goods or services of more than one category only upon payment of $250.00 for each such additional category. 
All such fees shall be prorated for mobile vendor's licenses issued after October 1 according to a fraction rounded up to the number of months remaining in the fiscal year. 
(b)  An applicant who misrepresents information provided under this section shall not be issued a mobile vendor's license or, if issued, shall suffer suspension or revocation of the mobile vendor's license pursuant to section 18-288. 
(Code 1986, § 107.28; Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-319. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The fees required by section 18-318(a)(8)c shall be waived for persons over 65 years of age and for disabled persons, including veterans, according to the city's policies for waiver of the business tax receipt fees set by section 66-88. 
(b)  The city manager shall have authority to exempt persons from the terms of this article, for a period of up to 24 consecutive hours, during Bahama Village Night, Fantasy Fest, the Sidewalk Arts Festival, special programs at Bayview Park, and similar events. No more than one such exemption shall be delivered to any person for any 24-hour period. 
(c)  By resolution, the city commission may exempt from the terms of this article and from article IV of chapter 66 persons offering business sales from public property by permission of persons having a leasehold interest in the property. 
(d)  Notwithstanding certain subsections of section 18-324, any mobile vendor's license holder who provides by February 29, 1992, reasonable evidence to the city manager that, on a regular basis between January and November of 1986, he has offered goods or services for business sale from the bridle path parkway, as defined in section 18-324(2), shall be entitled to a certificate from the city manager permitting him to continue to so use the mobile vendor's license in zones other than HP districts. These special rights shall irrevocably expire if not exercised by the holder for any period of five consecutive weeks, and in any event shall irrevocably expire on December 15, 1996. 
(Code 1986, § 107.36; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-320. - Insurance. 
(a)  No person shall offer for business sale any goods or services pursuant to a mobile vendor's license unless the business is covered by a comprehensive liability insurance policy insuring the public against injury or damage occasioned by negligence arising from or incidental to the business activity. At a minimum, the policy shall provide coverage of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per incident. The policy shall list the city as a coinsured and shall provide that coverage shall not be cancelled or materially altered except after 30 days' written notice has been received by the city. 
(b)  Proof of the continued viability of the insurance policy shall be provided upon the city manager's request given on reasonable notice at any time that the mobile vendor's license is valid and outstanding. Any failure to provide such proof shall render the mobile vendor's license null and void and of no further use or effect. The holder's subsequent application for a new mobile vendor's license shall be entitled to no special priority. 
(Code 1986, § 107.34) 
Sec. 18-321. - Term; random distribution. 
(a)  Mobile vendor's licenses shall be issued on an annual basis coinciding with the city's fiscal year, October 1 through September 30. 
(b)  Each mobile vendor's license shall show a designation according to the following categories, for which payment shall have been made as provided by section 18-318(a)(8): 
(1)  Edibles. 
(2)  Goods, except edibles or items offered for rent. 
(3)  Services. 
(4)  Rentals. 
As provided in this article, a mobile vendor's licensee shall sell services or rentals or tickets to services or rentals only of businesses having a city business tax receipt. The sale of tickets by a mobile vendor's licensee for use of a motorized watercraft shall be deemed an embarkation under section 82-72. 
(c)  Each mobile vendor's license shall be issued in the name of the individual applicant, only, and shall not be issued in the name of any corporation, partnership, or business. Each mobile vendor's license to be used in connection with a vehicle shall be issued for one vehicle, only. Licensees shall provide the city manager with a current photograph of the vehicle in use. 
(Code 1986, § 107.29; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-322. - Renewal. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, upon application, the city manager shall renew the mobile vendor's license of any applicant who: 
(1)  Held a valid mobile vendor's license which expired not more than 30 calendar days prior to filing of a complete application for renewal; 
(2)  Has provided the city with new or updated information, documents, and fees listed in section 18-318 and continues to meet all requirements of such section; and 
(3)  Pays a late processing fee of $25.00 for any renewal application filed after October 1. 
(b)  Upon application, the city manager shall renew any mobile vendor's license suspended under section 18-288, but any remaining term of suspension shall be applied to the renewed license, and during the term the mobile vendor's license confers no rights to offer for business sale any goods or services. 
(c)  Any mobile vendor's license not renewed within 30 days of its expiration on September 30 shall be void and of no further use or effect whatsoever. At any time that the number of outstanding mobile vendor's license's falls below 25, the city manager shall within 30 days of availability distribute, on a random basis among any applicants, a sufficient number of mobile vendor's license's to ensure that the total number of outstanding mobile vendor's licenses equals 25. 
(Code 1986, § 107.30) 
Sec. 18-323. - Display. 
    Any person offering goods or services for business sale pursuant to a mobile vendor's license shall display the mobile vendor's license, including a three-inch by five-inch photograph of the licensee, at the left-rear side of any vehicle used to facilitate the offer; if no vehicle is so used, the person shall wear the mobile vendor's license, including a three-inch by five-inch photograph of the licensee, located as on a shirt front pocket. 
(Code 1986, § 107.31; Ord. No. 01-20, § 2, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-324. - Conditions of use. 
    Persons offering goods or services for business sale and holding a valid mobile vendor's license shall be situated, together with their vehicles, goods, displays, or other accoutrements, only upon public roads, and shall not: 
(1)  Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  Enter upon sidewalks, footpaths, or the 50-foot-wide bridle path parkway adjacent to the northern curb of South Roosevelt Boulevard; 
(3)  Enter upon any zoning district or area of the city, except as follows, and according to the conditions and hours shown: 
a.  CG, from 8:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.; 
b.  CL, from 8:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.; 
c.  HMDR, HRO, HHDR and HNC-1, 2, 3, from 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.; and HCT, HRCC-1, 2, 3, (as limited in subsection (14)) from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m., except that no person shall conduct or offer to conduct any business sale of goods or services on Duval Street (from Florida Bay to the Atlantic Ocean), and on Front Street, including any and all sidewalks, parking lots, and other public property adjacent to Duval Street or Front Street; including that area known as Clinton Square, including that portion of Whitehead Street between Front Street and a point 100 feet south of Greene Street, and including the portion of Greene Street from Whitehead Street to Front Street provided, however that a mobile vendor's license shall operate in an historic zoning district only after the historical architectural review commission has approved the appearance of the mobile vendor's license holder's vehicle(s) and/or displays; 
d.  The paved roadway adjacent to Smathers Beach, from 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. 
(4)  Enter upon any parking lot, no-parking area, residential parking program space, designated or restricted parking area or loading zone; 
(5)  Enter upon any metered public parking space, unless the required meter amounts are paid as due; 
(6)  Stop or stand any vehicle, except in the normal flow of traffic, except vehicles less than 20 feet in length and 11 feet in height, including any towed vehicle, unless otherwise provided in this article; 
(7)  Enter within 500 feet, measured by ordinary pedestrian route, of any elementary or secondary school building during a period commencing 30 minutes before classes begin and expiring 30 minutes after classes are concluded each day, unless in possession of written permission of the principal of such school, whose determinations shall protect the health and safety of the students; 
(8)  Occupy, including the vehicles as well as associated goods, displays, and any accoutrements whatsoever, all of which must be affixed to the vehicle, a space larger than 20 feet in length and eight feet in width; provided, however, that in the HRCC-1, HRCC-2, HRO, HNC-1, HPS, HRCC-3, [and] HCT zoning districts, the space shall not exceed seven feet by four feet in dimension, and all vehicles shall be non-motorized within said districts as contained in this subsection. Non-motorized shall mean that no mobile vendors shall occupy any cart, structure, vehicle, or conveyance of any kind on city rights-of-way within this subsection that contains any combustible engine or electric motor or any form of non-human propulsion devices; 
(9)  Station himself or any vehicle, goods, displays or other accoutrements whatsoever within 75 feet of any business property licensed pursuant to this Code which offers for business sale the same goods or services; 
(10)  Station himself upon South Roosevelt Boulevard and there offer for rent any item of beach or water sports equipment greater than seven square feet in dimension and weighing more than 15 pounds, including but not limited to lounge chairs, jet skis, boats, sailboats, sailboards, or surfboards, except by written franchise granted by the city commission; 
(11)  Except by authorization of the city manager, leave any vehicle unattended for a period of longer than one hour; 
(12)  Fail to provide an appropriate number and size of fire extinguishers, if using any flammable substance in vending operations; or 
(13)  Display more than two signs of total combined area of 12 square feet, which signs must be displayed on the vehicle. 
(14)  Operate from Truman Avenue east to the Atlantic Ocean (including along Truman, Julia, Virginia, Amelia, Catherine, Louisa, United and South Streets) as bounded by Simonton and Whitehead Streets; along Simonton, Duval and Whitehead Streets as bounded by Truman Avenue and the Atlantic Ocean, including the entire area known as the Southernmost Point (and Southernmost Monument). Mobile vendor license holder #12777 is hereby grandfathered at a location on United Street at the southwest corner of United and Duval Streets. 
(15)  Notwithstanding relevant subsections above, a licensed mobile vendor who has consistently operated from a location that is otherwise not in strict conformity with the provisions of this article, may petition the city to remain in such location, conditioned upon: sufficient evidence being provided by the vendor to the city manager or his designee to document that consistent and regular activities have been conducted from such location for at least a period of one year within the past three years; there being no impediment to traffic, pedestrian or other safety and engineering concerns, or any laws relating thereto; all such necessary information required herein, or as requested by the city manager or his designee in conformity with this provision, being provided within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance provision. Any request for an exemption hereunder made after the expiration of 30 days from the date of this provision shall not be considered. Any individual petitioning the city for this exemption shall pay any costs incurred by the city in verifying any health or safety concerns implicated by a particular location. Any exemption granted pursuant to this provision shall irrevocably expire if not exercised by the holder for any period of five consecutive weeks. 
(Code 1986, § 107.32; Ord. No. 01-20, § 3, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 7-19-2005; Ord. No. 08-21, § 1, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 18-325. - Transferability. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, the mobile vendor's license is nontransferable, and shall be used only by the person in whose name it is issued. Exceptions to nontransferability may be made upon application to the city manager in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Temporary transfer for medical reasons. Documentation of medical necessity shall be provided to the city manager upon presentation of a physician's certificate that the mobile vendor's license holder is unable to function as a mobile vendor. Prior to commencement of the temporary transfer, the substituting party shall provide the information and payments required by section 18-318(a)(1) through (8) to the city manager. In no event shall a temporary transfer be allowed more than once, for a period of up to 90 consecutive days, within any one licensing year. The substituting party shall comply with all sections of this article and shall pay any renewal fees which become due during the temporary transfer period. 
(c)  Transfer to surviving spouse or registered domestic partner. Upon the death of the holder of an active valid mobile vendor's license, the mobile vendor's license may be transferred to the surviving spouse or registered domestic partner not holding a separate mobile vendor's license. Intent to so transfer must have been documented by the mobile vendor's license holder while still living by means of a will, trust document, or other statement of intent to transfer meeting all statutory requirements for validity at the time of execution. In order to obtain transfer, the surviving spouse or registered domestic partner must make a written request to the city manager within 45 days of the death of the mobile vendor's license holder, accompanied by a copy of the death certificate and a copy of the will, trust document, or other statement of intent referred to in this subsection. Prior to issuance of the transfer, the surviving spouse or registered domestic partner shall provide the information and payments required by sections 18-318(a)(1) through (8) to the city manager. The surviving spouse or registered domestic partner shall comply with all sections of this article. 
(d)  Hardship. Upon receipt of a mobile vendor's license holder's sworn, written statement of hardship addressed to the city manager and upon the advice of the city manager, the city commission may approve the transfer of a mobile vendor's license. To obtain approval of a transfer under this subsection, the mobile vendor's license holder must demonstrate that special conditions or circumstances exist beyond the mobile vendor's license holder's control that cause a personal hardship to the license holder. The city commission may consider the following factors, among others, in its determination: 
(1)  The length of time the mobile vendor's license holder has held his mobile vendor's license; 
(2)  The substantiality of investment the mobile vendor's license holder has made in his business; 
(3)  The nature of the personal hardship, whether it concerns age, illness, death, family affairs or financial setback; 
(4)  Whether the mobile vendor's license holder obtained the mobile vendor's license prior to December 15, 1986, the date at which transferring the mobile vendor's license became restricted; and 
(5)  Whether the proposed transfer will be detrimental to the public welfare. 
A transfer under this subsection shall not be approved if it results in or contributes to a person holding more than one mobile vendor's license, nor may a transfer be approved primarily for the benefit of or based on the hardship of the transferee. Upon approval of a hardship transfer, the transferor shall pay to the city the amount of $100.00 representing a hardship transfer processing fee. This fee shall be in addition to all fees required under section 18-318. The city commission's grant of a hardship transfer shall not constitute precedent for a later application for transfer. 
(Code 1986, § 107.33; Ord. No. 19-09, § 1, 3-20-2019) 
Secs. 18-326-18-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECREATIONAL RENTAL VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 13-13, adopted Aug. 20, 2013, changed the title of art. VII from Moped and Scooter Rentals to Recreational Rental Vehicles. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Secs. 3-13 of Ord. No. 13-13, adopted Aug. 20, 2013, amended div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 18-351-18-353, and derived from the 1986 Code; and Ord. No. 06-292, adopted Sept. 6, 2006. 

Sec. 18-351. - Registration of rental units. 
(a)  Every person in the business of renting recreational rental vehicles to the public annually shall submit to the licensing division a list of recreational rental vehicles identified by serial number, that are available for rental. These registration lists shall be submitted and shall be updated annually at the time of business tax receipt renewal. No person shall rent or provide for rental a number of recreational rental vehicles in excess of that permitted under the business tax receipt. 
(b)  Within 90 days after the submission of registration lists, the city manager shall report the number of recreational rental vehicles to the city commission and recommend whether further regulation is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 3, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-352. - Obedience to laws. 
    Every person in the business of renting recreational rental vehicles to the public and every person who rents and operates a recreational rental vehicle on the city streets shall abide by state traffic, motor vehicle, motor vehicle operator and insurance laws. No person in the business of renting recreational rental vehicles to the public shall so rent or otherwise provide a recreational rental vehicle to a person who appears to be or for whom the business personnel have reason to believe is incompetent to operate a recreational rental vehicle whether due to drunkenness, incapacity by drugs, age or physical or mental infirmity. This article shall not be applicable to the rental of automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 4, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-353. - Annual record of traffic accidents; license suspension. 
    The licensing division, in cooperation with the police department, shall maintain an annual record of all reported traffic accidents involving recreational rental vehicles. The record shall include the registered owner of the vehicle, the cause of the accident, the injuries sustained, and the traffic citations issued. If, in the opinion of the city manager, a substantial or disproportionate number of accidents are attributable to a rental business, the city manager may make the rebuttable presumption that its instruction and training are inadequate and take action to suspend the business tax receipt in accordance with section 66-105. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 5, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-354. - Permit required; application; franchise fees. 
(a)  A permit system for recreational rental vehicle and bicycle tours is hereby established. It shall be unlawful for any business to operate in the City of Key West without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. 
(b)  The city through its licensing division shall issue recreational rental vehicle and bicycle tour permits. Each permit shall be valid for one year; beginning June 1 and ending May 30. 
(c)  The licensing division shall establish a standard application that shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Business name. 
(2)  Business address and telephone of the applicant. 
(3)  For rental vehicles; vehicle identification number and proof of valid registration. 
(4)  For recreational rental vehicles; fee of $50.00 plus $1.00 per vehicle; for bicycle tours $100.00. 
(d)  The holder of a recreational rental vehicle permit may obtain a renewal of the permit each year on or prior to May 30 by applying to the licensing office and submitting the following information: 
(1)  Vehicle identification number for each permitted unit; 
(2)  A renewal fee of $50.00 per moped/scooter and electric car business plus $1.00 per unit; $100.00 per bike tour business if paid prior to June 1, with a penalty of $25.00 if paid after June 1. 
(e)  Any recreational rental vehicle permit not renewed within 30 days of its expiration on May 30 shall be void and of no use or effect whatsoever. 
(f)  Violations of this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15 and subject to prosecution and fine under civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 6, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-355. - Recreational rental vehicle deemed conditional use. 
    As of the effective date of this ordinance, all moped/scooter, electric car, bike tour and other recreation rental establishments are considered deemed to have a valid conditional use approval as required by section 122-61, with the number of legally established registered rental units according to section 18-351 and 18-356 for which the number has been recorded in city records. The establishment of any new or relocation of a recreational rental vehicle use shall require a conditional use approval, and may be established only within the zoning districts which allow small recreational power-driven equipment rentals as a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 7, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-356. - Thirty-day period to establish numbers of recreational rental vehicles. 
    As of the effective date of this ordinance, a period of 30 days is created to correctly establish the number of rental mopeds/scooters, bike tours, electric cars and other recreational rental vehicles in use during the creation and publication of the Key West Carrying Capacity Traffic Study in 2011, and also to establish the number of current and active business tax receipt holders of recreational rental vehicle businesses that were in place on January 1, 2013, in order to establish the maximum number of recreational rental vehicle units operating on city streets. The city shall during the 30-day period establish a method for registration of businesses and rental units and publish notice of the process. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 8, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18 357. - Restrictions: Bicycle tour companies. 
    As of the effective date of this ordinance, owners and operators of bicycle tour companies shall meet clients and exchange money at the business address; shall not block or obstruct traffic in any manner: shall not solicit prospective clients while on public property; and shall take no more than 15 clients per tour guide. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 9, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-358. - Traffic impacts on level of service. 
    Any new or relocated non-motorized and/or motorized recreational rental vehicle rental permit applicant shall be required to complete a traffic impact analysis to demonstrate that the size, location and operation of the facility does not degrade the existing traffic level of service (LOS) of city streets, corridors and intersections determined by the city staff to be affected by the proposed use. If the traffic analysis, in the opinion of city staff and its consultants, demonstrates an increase of average daily or peak hour traffic of three percent or more, impacting city streets and intersections, the applicant shall mitigate the impact by constructing a capital improvement for that section impacted or a transportation mitigation program, which may include, at city's sole discretion, payment of traffic impact fees appropriate to the impacts created. The identification of a significant (as described above) traffic impact, as determined by the planning board may serve as one reason to deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 10, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-359. - Identification by decal. 
    Within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance, the city shall provide to each licensee of each recreational rental vehicle establishment, a vehicle identification decal each of the recreational vehicles licensed to the licensed site. During this 90-day period, city code compliance staff shall inspect each licensed site, to establish that the decals are permanently and properly affixed to the specific vehicle corresponding to the vehicle identification number registered to that site or sites when a business licensee operates from multiple sites. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 11, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-360. - Annual inspection. 
    The code compliance department shall inspect each facility on an annual basis prior to the issuance of a recreational vehicle permit to determine compliance with the conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 12, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 18-361. - Penalty. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to prosecution and fine under the civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680, or section 1-15 of the Key West Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 13, 8-20-2013) 
Secs. 18-362-18-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-381. - Instruction and training. 
(a)  Required. Every person in the business of renting mopeds or scooters to the public shall provide instruction and training to each customer in advance of the rental of the moped or scooter. 
(b)  Instruction. 
(1)  The owner shall instruct the renter to abide by all applicable traffic and parking laws, particularly including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The driver shall not drive on the sidewalk, 
b.  The driver shall not pass on the right, and 
c.  The driver shall observe regulations pertaining to the proper use of horns. 
(2)  The owner shall advise the renter that the renter is not covered by insurance and that the renter is responsible for the cost of property damage and personal injury. 
(3)  The owner shall evaluate the prospective renter's ability to understand instructions and determine whether to refuse to rent the moped or scooter. 
(c)  Training. 
(1)  The owner shall instruct the renter on how to start and operate the moped or scooter with emphasis on the proper use of the rear brake, the turn signals, the horn, the throttle and the center stands. 
(2)  The owner shall require the renter to drive the vehicle on the business premises or in its immediate vicinity, in the presence of a trained instructor, in order for the renter to demonstrate safe operational ability. 
(3)  The owner shall refuse to rent the moped or scooter to any prospective renter who cannot demonstrate the ability to drive the vehicle safely. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(a)) 
Sec. 18-382. - Posting of sign warning of danger. 
    Every person in the business of renting mopeds or scooters to the public shall post a sign on the premises, clearly visible to customers, warning of the potential dangers of a moped or scooter rental in the city. The licensing division shall establish standard language for the sign in cooperation with the rental businesses and the community traffic safety program. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(b)) 
Sec. 18-383. - Notice issued to customer. 
    Every person in the business of renting mopeds or scooters shall issue each customer a written notice. The notice shall be filled out in duplicate with the customer carrying the notice at all times while operating the moped or scooter, and the business maintaining a copy for at least 60 days after the completion of the rental. The notice may be included in a copy of the rental contract or may constitute a separate document. If the notice is contained in the contract, it shall be legible and published in bold print. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The renter has received instruction and training in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The renter understands the potential dangers of operating a moped or scooter in the city and that no insurance coverage is provided for property damage or personal injury. 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of a person to be notified in case of accident. 
(4)  The renter's signature of acknowledgment. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(c)) 
Sec. 18-384. - Offer of helmet. 
    Every person in the business of renting mopeds or scooters to the public shall offer a bicycle helmet, certified for head injury protection, to the customer. In addition, such business shall require customers renting motor vehicles with a motor rated in excess of two brake horsepower and a displacement of 50 cubic centimeters or more to wear state-required motorcycle headgear. A failure to issue required headgear to a customer may result in business tax receipt revocation. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(d); Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-385. - Rear reflector. 
    Every person in the business of renting mopeds or scooters to the public shall equip the rear of each moped or scooter with an approved reflector that will serve to increase the visibility of the moped or scooter in traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(e)) 
Sec. 18-386. - Distribution of safety pamphlet. 
    The moped and scooter rental business shall distribute to renters a safety pamphlet to be devised in collaboration with the community traffic safety program (CTSP). The city manager shall resolve disputes between the rental businesses and the community traffic safety program in the writing of the pamphlet, and his determinations shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 63.34(f)) 
Secs. 18-387-18-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-PREMISES CANVASSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-411. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the off-premises canvassing ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 94.01) 
Sec. 18-412. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any commercial activity in which any real property, goods or services are sold or offered for sale, performance for lease, or for rent within the corporate city limits as defined by the Charter. 
    Edibles means any food or beverage intended for human consumption. 
    Goods means any tangible item, including edibles. 
    Historic district means all of that portion of the city located west of White Street between the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. 
    Off-premises canvassing means distribution of information or solicitation of customers on publicly owned property in connection with a business, excluding peddling as defined in section 18-541, activities licensed pursuant to article VI of this chapter pertaining to mobile vendors, and traditional costumed presentations as defined herein. 
    OPC means off-premises canvassing. 
    Sale means any trade or offer of trade for currency, credit, services, or goods. 
    Services means any work, attraction amenity or act rendered for sale. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, refuse, bulky items and other discarded solid or liquid materials, including materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural and community activities. 
    Traditional costumed presentations means the appearance of performers, dressed in the same traditional costume worn during performance, on the sidewalk immediately abutting the licensed entertainment establishment at which the performance is presented. In order to be considered a traditional costume, the performer's garb must be readily identifiable by the general public as the characteristic garb worn by entertainers who performed at the same entertainment establishment in the historic district prior to 1987. 
(Code 1986, § 94.02; Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 6-19-2007) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-413. - Penalty for violation. 
    Violations of this article shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 94.09; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 18-414. - Prohibited in certain locations. 
    No person shall engage in off-premises canvassing in the following locations: 
(1)  Any publicly owned parking lot. 
(2)  Mallory Dock, except that those artisans, vendors and performers authorized by the cultural preservation society to be present during the nightly sunset activities and participating in the drawing for the 60 available spaces administered by the society shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Any publicly owned beach or seawall or city-owned, state-owned, or federally owned right-of-way adjacent to any publicly owned beach or seawall. 
(Code 1986, § 94.05) 
Sec. 18-415. - Restrictions in historic district. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corner and street corner mean the sidewalk where two or more platted or public streets meet, overlap, intersect or bisect, and the adjoining sidewalk area or unpaved right-of-way area serving as a sidewalk, but not including the street, extending 25 feet in either direction. 
    Right-of-way includes but is not limited to the street, the sidewalk, the corner and the curb. 
(b)  Any person engaging in off-premises canvassing in the historic district shall abide by the following restrictions: 
(1)  No off-premises canvasser may operate on the public right-of-way at the following prohibited streets or areas: 
a.  Duval Street. 
b.  Front Street. 
c.  Wall Street. 
d.  Exchange Street. 
e.  Fitzpatrick Street. 
f.  Tift Alley. 
g.  The area known as Clinton Square, including that portion of Whitehead Street between Front Street and a point one hundred feet south of Greene Street, and including the portion of Greene Street from Whitehead Street to Front Street. 
h.  The area known as the Key West Bight, including all city-owned leasehold properties, parking lots, streets, the Harbor Walk and docks. 
i.  The area commonly known as the Southernmost Point extending from the intersection of South and Duval Streets westward to the Southernmost Point monument then continuing northward to the intersection of United and Whitehead Streets. 
(2)  When an off-premises canvasser stands on a permitted right-of-way, the off-premises canvasser shall remain at least ten feet away from any right-of-way prohibited in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  An off-premises canvasser may operate on a sidewalk so long as he remains within the area defined in subsection (a) of this section as a street corner. No off-premises canvasser shall operate on the street or other portion of the public right-of-way. 
(4)  No two off-premises canvassers from the same business may operate within 100 feet of each other where both off-premises canvassers are located on public property. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be prosecuted in accordance with section 1-15. A violation may also be prosecuted through proceedings before the special master or through any other lawfully available means including civil and injunctive relief. 
(Code 1986, § 94.06; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 6-7-2016) 
Secs. 18-416-18-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-441. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in off-premises canvassing unless the person holds a valid off-premises canvassing permit and fully conforms to the terms of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 94.09) 
Sec. 18-442. - Limitations. 
    Any off-premises canvassing permit shall not be considered to be a business tax receipt or be equivalent to such license, nor to entitle the permit holder to rights provided in F.S. ch. 205. 
(Code 1986, § 94.08; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-443. - Application; fee; issuance. 
(a)  Each person who engages in off-premises canvassing shall apply to the licensing office of the building department for an off-premises canvassing permit by submitting an application which shall set forth the name, the date of birth, the business represented, and the business address and telephone number. Proof of citizenship, permanent residence, or a work permit shall be required. 
(b)  A nonrefundable permit fee of $30.00 must be paid at the time of the application. 
(c)  A photograph will be taken of each applicant and will be incorporated into the off-premises canvassing permit. 
(d)  The licensing office, upon receipt of a completed application and permit fee, shall verify that the business represented has a current business tax receipt from the city or another jurisdiction and upon such verification shall issue an off-premises canvassing permit. No off-premises canvassing permit shall be issued for a representative of an unlicensed business. 
(e)  Any off-premises canvassing permit issued under articles VI and X of this chapter and article VI of chapter 62 will be valid for purposes of this section until the expiration date stated on the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 94.03; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-444. - Transferability; limitation on number; renewal. 
(a)  The off-premises canvassing permit is nontransferable and shall be used only by the person in whose name it is issued. Any permit transfer shall render the permit void and ineffective. Any business sale, assignment whether voluntary or involuntary, or transfer of over 50 percent of the shares of any corporate business represented shall render the permit void and ineffective. 
(b)  A permit holder may represent more than one business at a time, but must obtain a separate off-premises canvassing permit for each business represented. 
(c)  No more than four off-premises canvassing permits will be issued per business. 
(d)  Off-premises canvassing permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance. An off-premises canvassing permit holder may obtain renewal each year by applying to the licensing office, updating the required information, and paying a renewal fee of $30.00. Any off-premises canvassing permit not renewed prior to expiration shall be deemed void and of no further use and effect to any person. 
(Code 1986, § 94.04) 
Sec. 18-445. - Conduct. 
    All off-premises canvassing permit holders shall comply with the following conditions while engaged in off-premises canvassing: 
(1)  The off-premises canvassing permit holder shall wear the permit, including a photograph of the permit holder, located as on a shirt front pocket. 
(2)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder shall obstruct vehicular traffic in violation of the provisions of F.S. ch. 316. 
(3)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder shall place advertising materials upon any vehicle not belonging to the permit holder. 
(4)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder shall throw, place or deposit solid waste on any street, sidewalk, or publicly owned right-of-way unless such solid waste is advertising material and is bundled and ready for distribution. 
(5)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder shall interfere with or obstruct the free travel or passage of any pedestrian on the sidewalk. 
(6)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder shall distribute printed literature except upon request of an interested party. 
(7)  No off-premises canvassing permit holder operating on public property shall leave the area of operation without forfeiting his right to operate in a given area. 
(Code 1986, § 94.07) 
Sec. 18-446. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  An off-premises canvassing permit may be suspended or revoked on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation of a material statement contained in the permit application. 
(2)  Failure by permit holder to comply with sections 18-414 and 18-415 and this division. 
(3)  Conduct by the permit holder in connection with the permitted business in a manner which creates a public nuisance or endangers the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Upon one judicial or special master finding of a violation of the terms of sections 18-414 and 18-415 and this division or other pertinent federal, state, or local law by a person holding a valid off-premises canvassing permit, the city manager shall, after conforming with subsection (c) of this section, issue a written warning. Upon a second such judicial or special master finding the city manager shall impose a determinate suspension of the off-premises canvassing permit or revoke the off-premises canvassing permit. Upon three such judicial or special master findings regarding a particular business within one calendar year, the city manager may revoke all off-premises canvassing permits for the business involved. Judicial findings of violation shall include pleas of nolo contendere and convictions, whether or not adjudication is withheld. 
(c)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (b) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford to the permit holder or business, in the case of revocation of all permits for that business, notice of the violation charged and a reasonable, informal opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the permit holder's or business', in the case of revocation of all permits for that business, past record of compliance with this article and related laws; and 
(3)  Consider the degree of risk to the public health, safety, and peace arising from the violation in evidence. 
(d)  The city manager's decision shall be rendered in writing and shall include notice to the operator of a right to appeal the decision to the city commission within ten days thereof. Appeals not filed in writing with the city clerk within the period shall be deemed waived and shall not be heard by the city commission. 
(e)  Any off-premises canvassing permit revoked by the city manager pursuant to this section shall immediately be void and of no further use and effect to any person, including during the pendency of any appeal. Persons and businesses having off-premises canvassing permits revoked may reapply for new off-premises canvassing permits upon the expiration of a period of one year from the date of revocation. 
(Code 1986, § 94.10) 
Secs. 18-447-18-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNBROKERS AND METAL DEALERS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, F.S. ch. 538; pawnbrokers, F.S. ch. 539. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-476. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Foundry means an establishment which uses, casts, or consumes metal of any kind. 
    Metal dealer means a person who engages in the business of buying and selling gold, silver, or platinum. 
    Pawnbroker means any person whose business is to take or receive by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange any goods, wares, or merchandise or article of personal property whatsoever as security for money loaned thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 106.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-477. - Designation of officer or agent of corporation. 
(a)  If any dealer or foundry contemplated by this article is a corporation, such corporation shall file with the chief of police a written designation which shall be under the seal of such corporation and executed by its president and secretary, which designation shall state the name of the officer, agent, servant, or employee designated by such corporation to make and transact its purchases, trades, pawns and acquisitions from minors in the city, and no more than one person shall be so designated therein. 
(b)  No officer, agent, servant or employee of any such corporate dealer shall purchase, trade for, pawn, or acquire from any minor any secondhand jewelry, furniture, clothing, radio, musical instrument, blackjack, metallic knuckles, handcuffs, or other similar equipment used primarily by police officers, except firearms, as governed by F.S. ch. 790, and other secondhand goods, wares, merchandise and materials, unless such officer, agent, servant or employee shall have been designated by such corporate dealer in the manner provided in this section and shall have consented in writing in the presence of and to the chief of police to such designation. 
(c)  All requirements, provisions, and prohibitions contained in this article shall apply with full and equal force to the person so designated and so consenting to such designation. 
(Code 1986, § 106.11; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 18-478. - Register. 
(a)  Any person engaged in business as a pawnbroker, metal dealer, or founder shall keep a register in connection with such business, and, at the close of business on each day or not later than 8:00 a.m. of the succeeding day, shall enter or cause to be entered therein an accurate description of the person from whom any article of personal property is purchased or received or to whom any loan is made on personal property. The entry shall include in such description the name, age, sex, color, nationality, and place of residence of such person. 
(b)  In the register shall also be entered an accurate description of any article or personal property so purchased or received or upon which a loan is made. Such description shall contain any mark, brand, monogram, words or letters blown, stamped, etched or otherwise permanently marked upon such article, and all articles so purchased or received shall be so arranged in stock as to enable the articles to be inspected by the police department or any other person in authority. 
(c)  The register shall at all times be kept open for the inspection and examination of the chief of police. 
(Code 1986, § 106.06) 
Sec. 18-479. - Transcript of register furnished police. 
    All pawnbrokers shall, not later than 12:00 noon of each day, furnish to the chief of police a full and complete copy or transcript of the article card and name card in which is entered the transactions of the preceding day. 
(Code 1986, § 106.07) 
Sec. 18-480. - Failure to make report; falsely describing articles. 
    Any metal dealer, founder or any dealer in secondhand jewelry, furniture, clothing, radios, musical instruments, blackjacks, metallic knuckles, handcuffs, or other similar equipment used primarily by police officers, except firearms, as governed by F.S. ch. 790, and other secondhand goods, wares, merchandise and materials who shall fail to make the report required by section 18-479 or who falsely described any such secondhand articles so purchased, traded for, pawned to or acquired shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof the license of such dealer shall thereupon be revoked and cancelled. 
(Code 1986, § 106.08; Ord. No. 11-20, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 18-481. - Dealing with minors. 
    It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to loan money to or buy or receive from any minor any goods, chattels or other articles of personal property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any minor whose disabilities of nonage have been removed as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 106.09) 
Sec. 18-482. - Time for holding goods before sale. 
    No goods or chattels or articles of personal property of any kind or character shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by any pawnbroker, metal dealer, or founder until ten days have elapsed from the time the chief of police has been furnished with a copy of transcript of the register in which such goods or chattels or articles of personal property are entered. 
(Code 1986, § 106.10) 
Sec. 18-483. - Receiving lost or stolen goods; inspection. 
    Any pawnbroker, metal dealer, or founder who shall have or receive any goods, articles or things lost or stolen or resembling any goods, articles or things lost or stolen, shall exhibit the goods, articles or things on demand to any police officer or to the municipal judge, chief of police or any magistrate or any person duly authorized in writing by the chief of police or any magistrate who shall exhibit such authorization to such dealer. Any member of the police department shall at any time have a right to inspect all articles of merchandise in custody or possession of the dealer in search for lost or stolen goods. 
(Code 1986, § 106.12) 
Secs. 18-484-18-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-511. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker, metal dealer, or founder until after receiving a license from the city in the manner prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 106.02) 
Sec. 18-512. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license under section 18-511 shall file his application with the city clerk. Such application shall contain the name and age of the persons who constitute a partnership or, if a corporation, the names and ages of its directors and president or managing officer and the location of the proposed business. 
(Code 1986, § 106.03; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 18-513. - Fee; term. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall pay an annual license fee in the amount prescribed by the license schedule in section 66-109. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued as of October 1 each year and shall continue in force until September 30 next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1986, § 106.05) 
Secs. 18-514-18-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PEDDLERS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, F.S. §§ 501.021-501.055. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-541. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person, without any permanent or fixed place of business, carrying or transporting merchandise and offering it for sale door to door which may include exhibiting samples, taking orders on future sales and deliveries, or operating from a motor vehicle on private property to exhibit samples, take orders for future delivery or offer or make sales of merchandise; or contacting potential customers via the telephone or the internet to solicit sales or take orders for future delivery. For the purposes of this article, the meaning of the word "peddler" includes the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," and "itinerant merchant." 
(Code 1986, § 107.01; Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 2-5-2019) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-542. - Exceptions to article. 
    This article shall not apply to religious organizations on public property, nor shall this article apply during periods of special events as authorized from time to time by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 107.02) 
Sec. 18-543. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "no peddlers allowed" or "no solicitations allowed" or other words to such effect. 
(Code 1986, § 107.03) 
Sec. 18-544. - Refusing to leave. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises or his agent to leave the premises and not return to such premises shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 107.04) 
Sec. 18-545. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make a false or fraudulent statement concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
(Code 1986, § 107.05) 
Sec. 18-546. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between 8:30 p.m. and 8:30 a.m., or on Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1986, § 107.06) 
Sec. 18-547. - Locations. 
    The following locations in the Historic District shall not be used by peddlers under this ordinance: 
a)  Mallory Square. 
b)  Wall Street. 
c)  In front of or abutting a federal, state, or local government building. 
d)  In front of or abutting a church, synagogue, or other place of worship. 
e)  In front of or abutting a theatre. 
f)  The Key West Bight Harborwalk. 
g)  The Truman Waterfront Park. 
h)  The area commonly known as the Southernmost Point, extending from the center of the intersection of South and Duval Streets westward to the Southernmost Point monument, then continuing northward to the center of the intersection of United and Whitehead Streets. 
i)  Whitehead Street from Front Street to Eaton Street. 
j)  The area commonly known as Clinton Square including those portions of Whitehead, Greene and Front Streets. 
k)  Edward B. Knight Pier. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 2, 2-5-2019) 
Secs. 18-548-18-575. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-576. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so. Each peddler permit shall be issued in the name of the individual applicant only, and shall not be issued in the name of any corporation, partnership, or business. A peddler permit is non-transferable. 
    A valid peddler permit issued by the City of Key West shall be construed as satisfying, for the named holder thereof and for the uses provided in this article, the business tax receipt requirements of Chapter 66, Article IV, City of Key West Municipal Code. 
(Code 1986, § 107.08; Ord. No. 19-04, § 3, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-577. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this division. 
(Code 1986, § 107.12) 
Sec. 18-578. - Application. 
    An applicant for a permit required under this ordinance shall file with the city Licensing Division a sworn application on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant. 
(2)  The permanent home address and full local home address of the applicant. 
(3)  A physical, accurate mailing address, phone number, and email address for the applicant. 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(5)  If acting as an employee of a business, the name and address of the employer, 
(6)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(7)  Applicants shall provide a NICS FBI criminal background check that has been performed within a month of making application. A conviction for a felony shall disqualify an applicant from receiving a permit. 
(8)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(9)  State sales tax registration number. 
(10)  Such other relevant information as may be deemed appropriate by the Licensing Division. 
(Code 1986, § 107.09; Ord. No. 19-04, § 4, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-579. - Identification. 
    At the time of filing his/her application for a permit required by this division, the applicant shall present his/her driver's license or other government-issued picture identification. 
(Code 1986, § 107.10; Ord. No. 19-04, § 5, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-580. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant for a peddler permit shall file with the city manager or designee a surety bond running to the city in the amount of $1,000.00, with surety acceptable to and approved by the city manager or designee. The bond shall be conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the applicable sections of this Code, the city ordinances and state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling, and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler. The bond shall further guarantee to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the fictitious name act of the state, such business may furnish one bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for any and all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
(Code 1986, § 107.15; Ord. No. 19-04, §§ 6, 8, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 19-04, §§ 6, 7 adopted February 5, 2019, repealed §§ 18-580, 18-581 which pertained to the application fee and fingerprints, respectively; both derived from the 1986 Code. Ordinance §§ 8-12 renumbered subsequent former §§ 18-582-18-586 as §§ 18-580-18-584. 
Sec. 18-581. - Fee. 
    An annual permit fee in the amount of $200.00 shall be due at the time of application. This fee shall be prorated for peddler permits issued after October 1 according to a fraction rounded up to the number of months remaining in the fiscal year. 
    Any person who engages in peddling without first obtaining a peddler permit is subject to a penalty of 25% of the annual permit fee, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. Each peddler permit shall be issued on an annual basis coinciding with the city's fiscal year, October 1 through September 30. 
    Any peddler permits in existence as of the revision date of this ordinance which currently do not coincide with the city's fiscal year will be required to pay a pro-rated renewal fee prior to expiration to extend the term of the existing permit to September 30, 2019. 
(Code 1986, § 107.14; Ord. No. 19-04, § 9, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- See note at § 18-580. 
Sec. 18-582. - Renewal. 
    The City Manager or designee shall annually renew the peddler permit of any applicant who has provided the city with new or updated information, documents, and fees as indicated in this division, and who continues to meet all requirements of such sections. 
    Peddler permits not renewed prior to October 1 of each year will be assessed a delinquency penalty of 10% for the month of October, plus an additional 5% penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid, up to a maximum delinquency penalty of 25%. 
    Any active peddler with a peddler permit that has not been renewed prior to January 31 of each year shall be referred to the Code Compliance Special Magistrate pursuant to Ch. 2 Article VI of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 107.23; Ord. No. 19-04, § 10, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- See note at § 18-580. 
Sec. 18-583. - Display. 
    Every permitted peddler shall have in his/her possession, and provide upon the request of any person, an unaltered copy of his/her peddler permit. Every peddler shall also be required to obtain a photo-identification badge as provided by the city Licensing Division which shall be attached to his/her clothing at all times while performing the functions described as peddling. Failure to provide either item shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 107.22; Ord. No. 19-04, § 11, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- See note at § 18-580. 
Sec. 18-584. - Revocation. 
(a)  A permit obtained through fraud or through material misrepresentation on the permit holder's application is deemed void ab initio, and the city manager shall revoke the permit. Prior to revocation, the city manager or his/her designee shall provide the permit holder notice and an informal opportunity to be heard on the decision to revoke. 
(b)  If a permit holder is found by the code enforcement special master or the county court to have violated the regulations set forth in this article two times within a three-year period, then the city manager may revoke the permit. Prior to revocation, the city manager or his designee shall provide the permit holder notice and an informal opportunity to be heard on the decision to revoke. 
(c)  Any revocation of a permit under subsections (a) or (b) shall be for the duration of the current permitting period and for the subsequent permitting period. 
(d)  The decision of the city manager or his designee, to revoke a permit, or the denial of a permit based on Sec. 18-578(7), or any disciplinary action or fine under this section shall be provided in writing to the permit holder. The revocation shall be appealable to the city commission at their next available meeting after providing a written notice of appeal with supporting documents to the city clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the revocation. 
(Code 1986, § 107.24; Ord. No. 19-04, § 12, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- See note at § 18-580. 
Secs. 18-585-18-589. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TRANSIENT RENTALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-590-18-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 18-601. - License required. 
(a)  The short-term rental of a residential property is a business activity that requires the property owner to hold a business tax receipt issued by the city. A state or county license without an accompanying city license is insufficient. Notwithstanding the existence of any other regulation of the city regulating the transient use of property, the short-term rental of a residential property without a business tax receipt violates the law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a property owner to lease a residential property for a period of less than 30 days or one calendar month without having obtained a business tax receipt under this division. 
(Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 2-20-2002; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-602. - Rebuttable presumption of violation. 
    There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a property owner without a business tax receipt is in violation of this division upon the existence of any of the following: 
(1)  A lease between a property owner and a tenant that by its terms demonstrates a rental of a residential property of less than 30 days or one calendar month; 
(2)  An advertisement in any medium, such advertisement that holds out the residential property for rental for a period of less than 30 days or one calendar month; or 
(3)  Testimony is presented by any person who is a neighbor or by a representative of a condominium or homeowners association board that a pattern of activity generally associated with unlicensed transient rental activity is occurring at the property. 
    A presumption of illegal activity, as set forth above, may be rebutted by direct testimony under oath by the alleged tenant of the alleged unlicensed rental; or, in the case of a citation based upon an advertisement where the property owner is not cited for a completed rental transaction, by direct testimony under oath by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 2-20-2002; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 18-603. - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation of this division shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day an unlicensed residential unit is rented or advertised for rental constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 2-20-2002) 
Secs. 18-604-18-609. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CONDITIONAL APPROVAL PERMIT 
DIVISION 1. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-610. - Required. 
    Any development approved after [effective date of this ordinance] operating pursuant to a conditional use approval pursuant to section 122-62, transient unit or transient business tax receipt transfer pursuant to section 122-1340, and minor and major development plan approval pursuant to sections 108-196 and 108-198, when such approvals contain conditions of approval, shall obtain and maintain a conditional approval permit from the city prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No facility required to obtain such permit will operate without a permit and failure to obtain a permit or renew a permit shall be subject to procedures outlined in section 18-615. A 90-day delinquency period for renewal of permits is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 18-611. - Application and permit fee. 
    An application for the conditional use permit shall be made to the city manager in the name of the property owner. A single annual fee of $150.00 is established for the application which includes an annual inspection. A delinquency fee is established at $50.00. The annual application fee shall be prorated for new permits. Future modification to these fees shall be as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 18-612. - Term. 
    This permit is renewable on an annual basis on or before each June 1. A delinquency fee shall be assessed for a permit payment made after June 1. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 18-613. - Incorporation of conditions of approval. 
    The permit will include all conditions of approval, including, but not limited to, the associated development plan or site plan which survive the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 18-614. - Annual inspection. 
    The code compliance department will inspect each facility on an annual basis upon reasonable notice to determine compliance with conditions. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 18-615. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Failure to adhere to the provisions herein shall constitute a violation of this article. At the city's option it may enforce an alleged violation of a conditional approval use permit either in a court of law or in the proceedings of the code enforcement special magistrate pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 2, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  If a permit holder is found in violation of permit conditions or enters an admission to a violation as established by a findings and order pursuant to section 2-641, the city manager may determine whether to revoke or suspend for a period of time the permit. Before reaching a decision, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the permit holder notice of the hearing and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the permit holder's record of violations; 
(3)  Consider the seriousness and recurrence of the violation; 
(4)  Consider the degree of disturbance on persons or neighboring property owners; and 
(5)  Consider the impact to public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  The city manager's decision to revoke or suspend a permit shall be issued in writing and shall inform the permit holder of the right to appeal the decision to the planning board. A written appeal must be accompanied by a fee as established by the city commission and filed with the city clerk within ten days of the receipt of the decision. An appeal shall not stay the city manager's decision unless the city manager's decision calls for a stay upon appeal. If a permit is revoked or suspended and the establishment continues to operate without a permit, the city attorney is authorized to apply for an injunction from the circuit court. 
(d)  The final revocation will serve to automatically revoke the underlying land use regulatory approval associated with the violation. The property owner must apply for and obtain the underlying land development approval in order to restore the use. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Secs. 18-616-18-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - COSMETICS 

Sec. 18-701. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cosmetic retailer means any business, person or firm that offers for sale cosmetic products in an amount over $75.00 U.S. Dollars, or who offers cosmetic product samples wherein said samples are applied on customers in any form, with or without an associated fee. The cosmetic retailer and his, her or its employees and agents also constitute the "permit holder" hereunder. 
    Cosmetologist is a person who is licensed by the State of Florida to perform the mechanical or chemical treatment of the head, face, and scalp for aesthetic rather than medical purposes, including, but not limited to, hair shampooing, hair cutting, hair arranging, hair braiding, hair coloring, permanent waving, and hair relaxing, for compensation. A cosmetologist may also perform non-invasive hair removals, including wax treatments but not including electrolysis as that term is defined in Chapter 478, F.S., manicures, pedicures, and skin care services. 
    Cosmetology means the mechanical or chemical treatment of the head, face, and scalp for aesthetic rather than medical purposes, including, but not limited to, hair shampooing, hair cutting, hair arranging, hair coloring, permanent waving, and hair relaxing for compensation. This term also includes performing hair removal, including wax treatments, manicures, pedicures, and skin care services. 
    Cosmetic products means any external preparation which is intended to cleanse, tone, color or beautify the face or neck, including but not limited to skin cleansers, astringents, skin fresheners, lipstick, eyeliner, eye shadow, foundation, rouge or cheek color, mascara, face powder or corrective stick, and other similar products so intended. 
    Compensation is defined as the payment of money or its equivalent, the receipt or delivery of property, or the performance of a service, or the receipt or delivery of anything of value in exchange for cosmetology services. 
    Customer means any person entering upon the business premises of or engaging in discussion with a cosmetic retailer for the purpose of inquiring about cosmetics offered for sale, sampling, or negotiating a purchase, or actual purchasing cosmetics held for sale by a cosmetics retailer. 
    Facials means the massaging or treating of the face, neck or scalp with or without the use of mechanical devices using oils, creams, lotions or other cosmetic products which are used to cleanse and condition the skin, to prevent or correct problems or conditions of the face, neck, and scalp and to color and beautify the face, neck and scalp or enhance their features. Facials shall be performed only by individuals licensed pursuant to Sections 477.019 and 477.0201, F.S., and performed in schools licensed pursuant to Chapter 1005, F.S., or salons licensed pursuant to Section 477.025, F.S. 
    Historic district shall mean all property located within the following zoning districts of Key West: HRO, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, HRCC-3, HRCC-4, HMDR, HHDR, HNC-1, HNC-2, HNC-3, HCT, HCL, HPS, HPS-1 and HPRD. 
    Permit holder means cosmetics retailer. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 15-09, § 1, 5-19-2015; Ord. No. 19-07, § 1, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-702. - Permit required. 
    Any cosmetics retailer offering cosmetics for sale or sampling to a customer as defined herein within the historic district, must obtain a permit from the city manager or his designee prior to engaging in the business of selling cosmetics or offering cosmetics as samples. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 18-703. - Cosmetics permit required; inspection; fee. 
(a)  No cosmetics retailer shall engage in the retail sale of cosmetics or the offering of samples of any sort within the historic district without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his designee. The code enforcement office shall inspect the premises where retail sale of cosmetics or the offering of samples is to be performed to ensure compliance with section 18-704 prior to issuance or renewal of the permit. The permit required under this section shall be in addition to any license required under article IV of chapter 66 [section 66-86 et seq.]. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be $200.00 for each premises where retail sale of cosmetics or the offering of samples is to be performed. If a re-inspection is required, the city may charge a re-inspection fee of $50.00. This permit must be renewed on an annual basis each October 1. Failure to timely renew this permit shall constitute a violation of this section punishable pursuant to section 18-706. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 18-704. - Requirements for obtaining permit. 
(a)  Any applicant for a cosmetic retail permit must provide the following information: 
(1)  Business name, as used for advertising. 
(2)  Business owners, including all corporate officers, stockholders (if a closely-held corporation), members {if a limited liability company), and general and limited partners (if a partnership). 
(3)  Business location and phone number. 
(4)  Business tax receipt number (the proposed permit holder must be the same person or entity as the business tax receipt). 
(5)  A listing of other similar businesses owned or operated by applicant. 
(6)  The name of the registered agent. 
(7)  The Federal Employer Identification Number. 
(b)  In addition the applicant shall: 
(1)  Display the business name and numbered street address of the business, in letters and/or numbers not less than five inches in height, on or above the entrance of the business or in a window adjacent to the entrance of the business. 
(2)  Post in plain view (unobstructed, at eye level) at each cash register, on cardboard or other similar material with one-half-inch block style letters, two signs issued by the licensing official which read as follows: 
CITY ORDINANCE REQUIRES A WRITTEN STATEMENT OF COST PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF THE SALE OF COSMETICS, THE OFFERING OF SAMPLES, THE APPLICATION OF COSMETIC SAMPLES, AND THE RETURN, EXCHANGE & REFUND POLICY: 
IF YOU HAVE A DISPUTE WITH THIS ESTABLISHMENT ABOUT THE PRICE OF YOUR PURCHASE, CONTACT KEY WEST CODE ENFORCEMENT AT (305)809-3740 OR THE KEY WEST POLICE DEPARTMENT AT (305)809-1111 FOR ASSISTANCE. 
These notices shall appear in English, Spanish, French, Japanese, German and Italian. 
(3)  Unless licensed by the State of Florida a cosmetology or specialty salon, a cosmetic retailer shall display a notice in all capital letters which reads "WE ARE NOT A STATE OF FLORIDA LICENSED COSMETOLOGY OR SPECIALTY SALON" in letters not less than five inches in height, on or above the entrance of the business or in a window adjacent to the entrance of the business. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 19-07, § 2, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-705. - Requirements of permit holder. 
    Any permit holder must: 
(1)  Maintain conditions set forth in section 18-704; and 
(2)  Clearly display each cosmetic item offered for sale with each item bearing a sale price posted directly on the item. For services, a description of the service with the associated price posted in a location at the cash register and at the location where the service is actually rendered within the establishment plainly visible to patrons, in letters not less than two inches in height. If the item is free or part of a discounted offer, then a statement to this effect shall both be displayed in the store and affixed to each applicable item or description of service. 
(3)  No permit holder shall commence or initiate the application of cosmetic samples in any form for a customer without first furnishing to the customer a written statement showing the final total cost of the item or service. The statement shall clearly delineate the cost of each cosmetic item, the cost of the application of cosmetics for each item, and the total cost to the customer. These shall be available to customers printed in six languages: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Japanese. The statement shall be provided in full detail on a form substantially identical to the following content: 
[NAME OF STORE] 
[ADDRESS OF STORE] 
ORDER OF COSMETICS/SERVICES Description of Item or Service to be purchased Cost of Item Cost of Service Subtotal Cost (including Items and Service or Labor) The total at the bottom of the page is the total cost of your purchase in American dollars. 
Signature of Buyer:_______ 
Date:_______ 
  Subtotal: 
$_______ 
Sales Tax of (71/2%) 
$_______ 
TOTAL: 
$_______ 
   
(4)  Not engage in the practice of cosmetology or provide facials without the required state license. 
(5)  Threats of arrest or prosecution to induce a sale are prohibited. No permit holder shall threaten a customer with arrest or criminal prosecution when the customer refuses to purchase a cosmetic item or service from the retailer because of a dispute over price, quality of work, or other terms of sale in order to induce or force the customer to purchase the cosmetic or service. Any intimidation or coercion utilized to induce a signature on the consent form shall constitute a separate violation of this ordinance. 
(6)  The permit holder shall issue to every customer a cash register receipt for each sale of cosmetics or services. 
(7)  Unless the permit holder or employee obtains an executed Consent Form referenced in Sec. 18-705(8), or holds a cosmetology license issued by the State to provide facials or as a cosmetologist, permit holders or employees shall not make physical contact with a customer in any form. 
(8)  In the event that the permit holder does not hold a cosmetology license issued by the State of Florida, the permit holder must have all customers execute the Consent Form attached as "Exhibit A" prior to the application of any samples or demonstrations. The executed Consent Form shall be retained as a record by the permit holder for a period of one year after execution. The Consent Form shall be available to customers printed in six languages: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Japanese. The contents of the Consent Form can be amended by Resolution of the City Commission. 
(9)  In the event that the permit holder does not hold a cosmetology license issued by the State of Florida, the permit holder or employee shall use disposable applicators, and disposable gloves prior to the application of any sample or services. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 2-8-2018; Ord. No. 19-07, § 3, 3-5-2019) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A is on file with the city. 
Sec. 18-706. - Violations. 
    A violation of this article is subject to enforcement either pursuant to section 1-15, which provides for a fine of not more than $500.00, or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment, or pursuant to the code enforcement authority of the special master in sections 2-633 and 2-634. Any violation of this article shall also be considered an unfair or deceptive act or practice as contemplated by F.S. §501.204. All remedies provided by Florida's Deceptive and Unfair Trade Practices Act (F.S. §501.201, et seq.) shall be available for any violation of this article. Any such remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to all other remedies provided herein or available at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 19-07, § 4, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 18-707. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  If a permit holder is found in violation or admits to a violation of this article, or is found in violation or admits to a violation of Article VIII Off-Premises Canvassing, the city manager may conduct a permit suspension or revocation hearing, as applicable. The permit holder shall be afforded due process. The city manager may impose a permit suspension or revocation as follows: 
(1)  One violation: Up to 30 days' suspension. 
(2)  Two violations: Up to 60 days' suspension. 
(3)  Three or more violations: Up to a year's suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(b)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Consider the permit holder's past record of compliance with this article and with the entire Code. 
(3)  Consider the seriousness of the violation. 
(c)  The city manager's decision to suspend or revoke shall be issued in writing and shall inform the permit holder of his right to appeal to the city commission by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten days of receipt of the notice. No permit holder shall engage in cosmetic sales or services while his or her permit is suspended or revoked, nor shall the permit holder display for sale any cosmetic time or service during the period of suspension or revocation. The city manager or his designee may post the exterior of the property notifying the public of the violation hereunder. An appeal to the city commission shall be in accordance with the procedural elements set out in Sec. 90-431(1)-(6). 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 18-02, § 2, 2-8-2018) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 06-25, adopted Dec. 5, 2006, repealed Ch. 22, §§ 22-1-22-64, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Formerly Ch. 22 derived from §§ 71.03-71.11 of the 1986 Code and Ord. No. 04-10, adopted June 2, 2004. 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries, F.S. ch. 497. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    Cemetery shall mean both the Historic Key West Cemetery located at 701 Passover Lane and the Peary Court Military Cemetery located along White Street. 
    Grave shall mean an area, typically four feet wide by eight feet long, of allocated ground to be used for burial. 
    Lot or plot shall mean more than one grave or vault grouped together. 
    Management shall mean the City of Key West. 
    Mausoleum shall mean a structure built according to section 430 of the Florida Building Code. 
    Memorial shall mean a marker, headstone, footstone, vault or niche plate. Memorial also may include an emblem, cameo or statuary. 
    Monument shall mean a memorial of granite or other approved stone that extends above the surface of the ground or is placed on a vault. 
    Niche shall mean a structure built to hold the ashes of a deceased. 
    Section shall mean a geographical area or subdivision within the cemetery. 
    Sexton shall mean the city associate designated to represent management. 
    Vault shall mean a structure built to hold a casket. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-2. - Admission and conduct. 
    Admission is open to the public, subject to the restrictions of this chapter. Management reserves the right to refuse admission to anyone not a lot owner, relative of a person interred, or a family friend in the cemetery. No one shall walk on, sit on, stand on or lie on a grave or a vault. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-3. - Duties of sexton and staff. 
(a)  The sexton, cemetery crew and office staff are vested with authority to enforce the regulations of this chapter. They shall enforce all rules and regulations as embodied in the ordinance sections. All burials, processions, monument dealers, vault contractors, funeral directors (and their employees), and the public are subject to this authority. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city cemetery sexton to: 
(1)  Superintend the operational, maintenance and construction work to be performed in the city cemetery; 
(2)  Have charge of the burial plots, location of burial lots and the directing and placing of bodies in the lots; 
(3)  Perform all other duties in connection with the superintending of all work in the cemetery as required by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-4. - Areas of travel. 
    All persons shall use only the avenues, streets and designated pedestrian pathways of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-5. - Children. 
    Management reserves the right to exclude children under fifteen (15) years of age unless under adult supervision 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-6. - Flowers, etc. 
    All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or taking or otherwise damaging trees, shrubbery or plants, unless approved by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-7. - Refreshments. 
    No person shall be permitted to have food or beverages within the cemetery, except as authorized by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-8. - Rubbish. 
    It is prohibited to throw rubbish anywhere within the cemetery, except into trash receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-9. - Vehicles and bicycles. 
(a)  Except for vehicles driven by cemetery employees, automobiles and other vehicles shall not exceed five (5) miles per hour and shall use only the designated roadways of the cemetery. Motorcycles and scooters are not permitted within the cemetery. 
(b)  All cars, trucks, specialty vehicles and bicycles must stay on cemetery streets. No vehicles or bicycles of any type may be used on pathways or among grave sites. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-10. - Peddling or soliciting. 
    The peddling of flowers or plants and the solicitation or sale of any commodity are prohibited within the confines of the cemetery. For-profit tours are not permitted within the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-18, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, repealed § 22-11, which had pertained to firearms, and derived from Ord. No. 06-25, adopted Dec. 5, 2006. 
Sec. 22-12. - Notice and advertisements. 
    No signs or notices of advertisements of any kind shall be permitted in the cemetery unless placed by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-13. - Pets, animals. 
    Pets and other animals shall not be permitted within the cemetery. Pets and animals shall not be fed in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-14. - Smoking. 
    Smoking in the cemetery is prohibited except in designated areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-15. - Cemetery hours. 
    The cemetery shall be open every day from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., eastern standard time; and from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., daylight savings time. Unless authorized by the city manager or city sexton, a person who is in the cemetery beyond these hours of operation shall commit a trespass. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-16. - Use as thoroughfares. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets and avenues within the city cemetery as thoroughfares or as a place for conducting business, when such use is not in connection with a bona fide visit to the cemetery; or in connection with the performance of work or duty therein as authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. It shall be considered a bona fide visit under this section if such person traverses the cemetery by foot, wheelchair or bicycle for their individual appreciation of the surroundings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city sexton or his designee is authorized to temporarily close or limit access through cemetery gates for one hour before, during and one hour after funeral and remembrance services for the express purpose of providing for the peacefulness of attendees. Additionally, except as provided above, the Frances Street Gate shall remain open during cemetery hours. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 3-1-2011) 
Sec. 22-17. - Removal of material. 
    No rock, dirt, sand or loam excavated from within the limits of the city cemetery shall be removed outside of the limits of the city cemetery, and the removal of such material outside of such limits is declared to be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
ARTICLE II. - INTERMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-18. - Lot prices. 
    The city manager or his/her designee shall supervise the setting of prices of all lots contained in the cemetery that are owned and controlled by the city, and shall furnish the sexton with a list of prices so fixed. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-19. - Transit permit required. 
    No person shall be interred in the city cemetery without the sexton first being furnished with the proper Key West cemetery forms and a State of Florida transit permit or a certificate of cremation. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 

Sec. 22-20. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig grave spaces or build, repair, construct, place, replace or remove grave markers, monuments, tombstones, walls or fences without first applying to the city Sexton and obtaining from him/her a written permit granting permission to such application to perform the proposed work. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-21. - Application. 
    Every application for the permit required by section 22-20 shall be in writing and shall identify the cemetery lot at which the proposed work is to be done and shall describe the type of work proposed. There shall be no charge for issuance of the permit. The city sexton shall issue or deny the permit within eight (8) hours of receipt of the application. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-22. - Records. 
    The city manager or his designee shall furnish the city sexton with the administrative supplies necessary to enable the sexton to perform his or her duty properly in the issuance of permits required by section 22-20. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-23. - Denial; appeal. 
    If the city sexton declines to issue a permit to an applicant seeking to obtain permission to perform certain work in the city cemetery, such applicant, within five days of the denial, may apply to the city manager in writing for a decision to determine if such permit should be granted. The applicant shall be entitled to notice and an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city manager shall constitute final agency action. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
DIVISION 3. - RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO FUNERAL DIRECTORS AND BURIALS 

Sec. 22-24. - Funeral arrangements. 
    Unless special permission is given by the cemetery sexton (with particular regard to religious burial traditions) arrangements for burial must be made at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the hour set for the funeral services at the cemetery. More time may be required due to difficult surface, sub-surface or weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-25. - Permit required. 
    No body will be interred until required permits and other authorizations as management may require have been presented to the sexton. Management shall not bear responsibility for the authenticity of any permit nor for the identity of the deceased. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-26. - Time of funerals. 
    The cemetery's ordinary hours for burials are from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Management may allow a burial arriving at the cemetery after 4:00 p.m. or one that is scheduled for a Sunday or holiday, subject to the approval of the sexton and the payment of additional overtime charges. Management may postpone the time of a burial if too many funeral processions arrive at the same time or because of inclement weather conditions or because of other conditions beyond the control of management. The sexton shall have the right to limit funeral services to a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-27. - Charges for interment services, etc. 
    All grave or vault openings and other service charges must be paid for in advance according to a fee schedule in the sexton's office. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-28. - Charges against plot or vault. 
    No grave or vault will be opened unless all outstanding charges against the plot, vault or niche owner have been paid in full or other arrangement for payment satisfactory to management has been made. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-29. - Mistakes in information. 
    Management is not responsible for mistakes in transmission or reception of telephone messages or for any mistakes occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location of a plot, vault or niche where interment is desired. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-30. - Services performed by cemetery personnel. 
    Only cemetery personnel are authorized to dig graves. City-built vault or niche openings and closings must be performed by cemetery personnel. The breaking and removal of copings and foundations must be performed by cemetery personnel. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-31. - Caskets. 
    Caskets to be placed in the cemetery must be a minimum of twenty gauge metal and gasketed. Each casket must have a casket tray for burial in vaults above ground. Wooden caskets are permitted only for the burial of Jewish persons. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-32. - Embalmed. 
    All above ground burials in vaults must be embalmed. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-33. - Errors may be corrected. 
    Management reserves the right to correct any errors that may be made by it either in making interments, disinterments or removals, or in the inscription or installation of memorials, or in the description, transfer or conveyance and substituting of another interment plot of equal value and similar location, either by correcting such error or by refunding the amount of money paid on account of the purchase. 
    In the event such error shall involve the interment of remains of any person, management reserves the right to remove and transfer such remains so interred to the correct location or such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. Management shall also have the right to correct any inscription errors, including incorrect name or date either on a memorial nameplate, urn or other item. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-34. - Delays in interment caused by protest. 
    Management shall not be liable for any delay in an interment where a protest to the interment has been made, or where the cemetery regulations have not been complied with. Management may require any protest or settlement to be in writing and filed in the city manager's office of the City of Key West. Management may require that a bond in an amount determined by management be provided by the protesting party to protect management from any claim by any person asserting injury or loss as a result of such delay or protest. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-35. - Disinterments and removals. 
    Disinterments and removals shall be performed by a licensed funeral director and shall be performed only upon presentation of proper legal authority. Disinterments made on weekends or holidays incur overtime charges. No one other than authorized management personnel shall be permitted to attend a disinterment or removal; provided, however, that the family of the deceased may be represented at a disinterment by a licensed funeral director. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-36. - Care in removal. 
    To the extent that management becomes involved in a disinterment or removal, it shall exercise due care, but it shall not be liable for damage to any casket, burial case, vault, niche or urn as a result of the disinterment or removal. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-37. - Authorization for burial. 
    Prior to permitting any interment or entombment, management shall require written authorization duly executed by the plot, lot, grave, vault or niche owner or his or her legal representative, on a form provided by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-38. - Holidays. 
    No interments, disinterments, removals, cremations, or interment services shall be permitted on any of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and other such holidays as shall be added from time to time. The city manager may make exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-39. - Multiple burials. 
    Grave or lot owners may bury a maximum of a double depth vault below ground and a maximum of three vaults above ground. A mausoleum with acceptable engineering drawings may be built to a level of four vaults above ground in accordance with section 430 of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-40. - Subject to laws. 
    In addition to being subject to these regulations, all interments, disinterments, and removals are subject to all pertinent laws of local, state and federal governments. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-41. - Vaults. 
    Underground vaults (UGV) and above ground vaults (AGV) must meet or exceed the recommended industry standards as follows: 
(a)  Underground vault (UGV). The burial vault shall be constructed and sealed so as to withstand all anticipated loads considering all local conditions, as follows: 
1.  The bottom shall be concrete to prevent liquid seepage. 
2.  The burial vault shall have adequate reinforcing sufficient to prevent the collapse of the burial vault. 
(b)  Aboveground vault (AGV). The vault shall be constructed to withstand all anticipated loads considering all local conditions, as follows: 
1.  The vault shall have adequate reinforcing sufficient to prevent the collapse of the vault. 
2.  The vault front must be caulked in addition to the use of cement to seal the front. 
3.  The bottom of the vault front (the lip) shall be constructed with a slight downward angle to facilitate drainage of water. 
4.  Vaults and grave sites shall be painted white or gray compatible with surrounding vaults. 
5.  Vault and grave sites shall not obstruct interments in adjacent lots. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-42. - Vault contractors. 
(a)  A burial vault contractor, vault dealer or manufacturer or other person, firm or corporation, in order to perform services in connection with a vault installation at the Key West cemetery, must obtain a working certificate by submitting, in writing, a resume stating its, or his or her qualifications, including experience in this field within the preceding five (5) years and a showing of proof that the vault contractor has the necessary equipment to carry out the work to be performed and is able to and will comply with all city of Key West and cemetery requirements. The vault contractor shall include with the resume the vault contractor's understanding of OSHA requirements relating to the installation of burial vaults, which interpretation shall be subject to review by the sexton. Contractors must be certified by the city of Key West. 
(b)  Management reserves the right to deny anyone the privilege of a working certificate if the criteria set forth in subsection (a) are not met. A charge for such certificate will be made to new applicants. Vault contractors performing work in the cemetery as of the effective date of this section 22-42 are grandfathered and a list of them shall be maintained in the sexton's office. The working certificate may be revoked at any time by management for failure to comply with these rules or if the vault contractor's activities in any other cemetery are (in management's opinion) dangerous or inconsistent with proper respect to the cemetery or any decedent. 
(c)  A vault contractor shall submit an insurance certificate from a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in Florida. The certificate must specify the city of Key West as named insured. 
(d)  A vault contractor's use of mechanical carriers or equipment may be limited when weather conditions, the conditions of the ground or other reasonable criteria in the sole judgment of the sexton, make it advisable that such mechanical carriers or equipment not be used. It is the vault contractor's responsibility to have adequate personnel available. The problems presented by wet ground are within the responsibility of the vault contractor who should be familiar with the burial site to address such conditions. 
(e)  When the burial service has been completed, it is the responsibility of the vault contractor to have personnel available to close the vault, seal the vault if necessary and clean up the debris. 
(f)  Because the primary responsibility for the conduct of the funeral service is that of management, a vault contractor is subject to all reasonable directions given by the sexton or assigned cemetery staff. 
(g)  Management has the right to suspend any operation that in its judgment is unsafe. If the sexton determines that a person, crew or a machine is unfit for work in the cemetery, the vault contractor shall immediately remove that person, crew or machine from the cemetery. 
(h)  Vault contractors shall not solicit services from cemetery employees other than through the cemetery management. 
(i)  Management shall apply these regulations uniformly to all vaults installed in the cemetery and shall not give preference to any vault contractor, manufacturer or dealer. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-43. - Movement of memorials for interment. 
    If a memorial on or near the space to be used for interment impedes the interment, such memorial shall be moved by the owner. Management is not liable for any damage to a memorial moved to accommodate an interment. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-44. - Ingress and egress. 
    Management reserves to itself, and to those lawfully entitled thereto, a perpetual right of ingress and egress over lots and all lawn areas for the purpose of passage to and from other lots and areas of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
DIVISION 4. - INTERMENT RIGHTS OF PLOT OWNERS 

Sec. 22-45. - Plot conveyance. 
    All plots conveyed to individuals are presumed to be owned by the person named in the instrument of conveyance and all plots conveyed to husband and wife are held as tenants by the entireties. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-46. - Right of spouse. 
    Except as provided in section 22-47, the spouse of an owner of any plot containing more than one interment space has a vested right of interment of his or her remains in the plot; and any person thereafter becoming the spouse of the owner has a vested right of interment of his or her remains in the plot if more than one interment space is unoccupied at the time the person becomes the spouse of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-47. - Limitation on conveyance. 
    A conveyance by the owner without the written consent or joinder of the spouse of the owner divests the spouse of a vested right of interment. A final decree of divorce terminates a vested right of interment unless otherwise provided in the decree. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide management with adequate proof of any change in ownership due to a final decree of divorce. In the absence of such proof and until it is furnished to management, the interment rights of the original owner shall remain unchanged. Management shall not rely on oral representations as proof of a change in ownership due to a final decree of divorce. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-48. - Joint tenants. 
    In a conveyance to two or more persons as joint tenants, each joint tenant has a vested right of interment in the plot conveyed. A joint tenancy must be expressly created. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-49. - Rights of survivorship to joint tenant. 
    Upon the death of a joint tenant, the title of the plot held in joint tenancy immediately vests in the survivor(s), subject to the vested right of interment of the remains of the deceased joint tenant (and his or her spouse if there are sufficient spaces to permit burial of all surviving joint tenants). 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-50. - Waiver of right of interment. 
    A vested right to interment may be waived and is terminated upon the interment elsewhere of the remains of the person in whom vested. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-51. - Affidavit sufficient. 
    An affidavit by a person having knowledge of the facts, which sets forth the facts of the death of the owner and the names of the person or persons entitled to the use of the plot, is complete authorization to management to permit the use of the unoccupied portions of a plot by the person entitled to use it. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-52. - Identity of surviving joint tenants. 
    An affidavit by any person having knowledge of the facts, which sets forth the fact of death of one joint tenant and establishes the identity of the surviving joint tenant named in the deed to any plot, when filed with management, is complete authorization to management to permit the use of the unoccupied portion of the plot in accordance with the directions of the surviving joint tenants or their successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-53. - Designation of authorized persons. 
    When there are several owners of a plot or the rights of interment in it, they may designate one or more persons to represent the plot and file written notice of designation with management. In the absence of such notice or of a written objection to it, management is not liable to any owner for interring or permitting any interment in the plot upon the request of direction of any co-owner of the plot. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-54. - Right of interment. 
    A deceased may be interred in a space occupied by another family member. Only the Olivia Mausoleum permits more than one burial in the double companion vaults. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-55. - Right of interment in family plot. 
    In the absence of (i) a specific request by will or deed of Trust (but not by any residuary clause contained therein), or (ii) a conveyance of interment rights during the owner's lifetime in a family plot, one grave may be used for the owner's interment; one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any; and in those remaining, if any, the parents and children of the deceased owner in order of death may be interred without the consent of any person claiming any interest in the plot. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-56. - Rights of interment if no parent or child survives. 
    If no parent or child survives, the right of interment goes in the order of death, first to the spouse of any child of the record owner and, second in the order of death to the next heirs at law of the owner as if there were an intestacy. If such heir at law has been buried in the plot, then the spouse of any such heir at law may be interred next. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-57. - Waiver of rights. 
    Any surviving spouse, parent, child or heir who has a right of interment in a family plot may waive such right in favor of any other relative or spouse of a relative of either the deceased owner or of his spouse, and upon such waiver the remains of the person in whose favor the waiver is made may be interred in the plot. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-58. - Insufficient number of graves. 
    If the number of persons having rights of interment in a plot exceeds the number of graves (or interment rights if multiple depth and/or height burials are permitted), then the persons having the interment rights shall be entitled to be buried in the plot in the order of their deaths until all graves are used. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
DIVISION 5. - CONTROL OF WORK BY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-59. - Cemetery management must direct and may remove improvement. 
    All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of management. 
    Should improvements or alterations be made without with management's consent, management shall have the right to remove, alter or change any such improvements or alterations at the expense of the plot owner. Management shall have the authority to remove all improvements, floral designs, weeds, flowers, trees, shrubs or plants of any kind from the cemetery when, in the sole judgment of management, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased. Management shall not be responsible for plants of any kind damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals, or by other reasons beyond its control. Management reserves the right to deny the removal of any flower, floral design, tree, shrub or plant of any kind. No planting may be made except as directed by management. 
    Management makes no representation that any improvement, tree, shrub, or planting it makes or installs is permanent and it reserves the right to remove any improvement, tree, shrub, or planting and not replace it, at its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-60. - Performance of work by management. 
    In order to ensure the quality of the work and to minimize interference with the peacefulness of the grounds, unless otherwise approved by management under such reasonable conditions as it shall impose, all work incidental or connected with the digging of graves, breaking of foundations, breaking of copings, or opening of city-built vaults and mausoleums, shall be done, and performed by management and management shall be entitled to receive and to collect from the plot owner, in advance, the prices or charges therefor in accordance with the schedule of charges posted in the sexton's office that are in effect at the time any such work is ordered. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-61. - Performance of grave openings, etc. 
    All grave openings, grave fillings, and disinterments must be performed under supervision of management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-62. - Management may charge for unusual repairs necessitated by acts of God, etc. 
    In the event that it becomes necessary to repair or reconstruct any marble, granite, bronze, or concrete work on any section or plot, crypt, niche or any portion thereof in the cemetery, mausoleum or columbarium, that has been damaged by the elements, deterioration due to the passage of time, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, insurrections, riots, or by the order of any military or civil authority, management shall give ten (10) days' written notice via certified mail of the necessity for such repair to the plot owner of record. The notice shall be given by depositing the same in the United States mail, addressed to the plot owner of record at his or her address stated in the records of management. In the event that the plot owner fails to repair the damage within a reasonable time, management may direct that the repairs be made and charge the expense against the plot and to the plot owner of record. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-63. - Plot owner must notify management. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the plot owner to notify management of any change in his or her mailing address. Notice sent to a plot owner at the last address on file in the office of the management shall be considered sufficient and proper legal notification. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the plot owner to notify management of a change in plot ownership. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
ARTICLE III. - MEMORIALS 

Sec. 22-64. - Memorials, personal property. 
    All memorials installed or placed in the cemetery shall remain the personal property of the person who purchased the memorial. At no time shall any memorial become the property of management, nor shall management be responsible for insuring the memorial. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-65. - Theft or damage. 
    The city of Key West shall not be responsible for theft of or damage to any article or personal property placed on graves or elsewhere in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-66. - Approval of design. 
    So that all memorials shall be in good taste and add to the beauty of the cemetery, it is necessary that management retain authority to reject any plan or design for a memorial which, on account of size, design or inscription, is unsuitable to the plot on which it is to be placed. If the plan for the memorial is rejected, such rejection shall be made to the memorial designer/contractor within ten (10) working days and an explanation given. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-67. - Permit required. 
    For the protection of all plot owners, it is necessary that persons erecting, cleaning or repairing memorials obtain a permit, and in doing such work, comply with the reasonable direction of management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-68. - Work to stop during funeral. 
    All work of any description shall cease while an interment or disinterment is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-69. - Right to stop work. 
    Management reserves the right to stop all work of any nature, whatsoever if in its opinion, proper preparations therefore have not been made; or when tools and machinery are insufficient or defective; or when work is being executed in such manner as to threaten life or property; or when the monument dealer has or appears to have made a misrepresentation; or when any reasonable request on the part of management is disregarded; or when any person employed on the work has violated any rule of management (in which case only the person so involved shall be restricted). 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-70. - Management not responsible for memorial dealers. 
    In no case shall management be responsible for any defect or damage of any memorial whether due to design, manufacture, inherent defect, nature of material, actions of vandals, acts of God or other cause beyond the control of management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-71. - Times for setting memorials. 
    No memorial settings will be allowed when the cemetery is closed. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-72. - Clean plots required. 
    Plots must be left clean after a memorial is set or inscribed. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-73. - Prohibited items. 
    The placing of boxes, chairs, couches, glass, wood or iron cases and similar articles upon plots is prohibited. If so placed, management may remove them. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-74. - Right to remove. 
    Should any memorial, vault or mausoleum become unsightly or dilapidated, management shall have the right, at the expense of the lot owner and after written notice, either to correct the condition or to remove same. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-75. - Written order required to remove a memorial. 
    No memorial shall be removed from the cemetery unless a written order of the plot owner or the legal representatives is presented to management's office and permission is granted by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-76. - Right to correct errors. 
    Management shall not be liable for defective workmanship, defective material, incorrect inscriptions, or incorrect locations, furnished or performed by management, in connection with memorials, monuments, or foundations. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-77. - Private mausoleums and tombs. 
(a)  Mausoleums or tombs, either wholly or partially above ground, shall be constructed only in lot(s) belonging to the lot owner and shall be built of first grade material similar in all respects to stone used in other memorials within the cemetery. They must not interfere with or obstruct interments within adjacent lots. 
(b)  Plans and specifications shall be subject to the approval of management. Plans must include architectural drawings and engineering specifications which must be approved by the city of Key West building department. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-78. - Damaged memorials. 
    Management expressly disclaims all responsibility for loss, or damage from causes beyond its control to any memorial, monument, bronze, foundation or mausoleum, and specifically from damage caused by the elements, deterioration due to the passage of time, act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, malicious mischief makers, explosion, unavoidable accidents, insurrection, riots, or by the order of any military or civic authority whether the damage be direct or collateral. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
ARTICLE IV. - CARE 

Sec. 22-79. - Care defined. 
    "Care" means maintenance of roadways and pathways and city-owned buildings within the cemetery, including the perimeter fence. The term includes the equipment and vehicles necessary to maintain the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-80. - Care exceptions. 
    The term "care" shall not be construed as meaning the maintenance, repair or replacement of any gravestones, monumental structures, sheds or memorials placed or erected upon plots or grave sites; nor the planting of flowers or ornamental plants; nor the doing of any special or unusual maintenance work in the cemetery or mausoleums; nor does it mean the repair or reconstruction of any marble, granite, bronze or concrete work on any section or plot or any portion or portions thereof in the cemetery, or any mausoleum or other buildings or structures, caused by the elements, act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, malicious mischief maker, explosion, unavoidable accidents, insurrections, riots, or by order of any military or civil authority. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-81. - Cut flowers. 
    Cut flowers may be placed in permitted receptacles and remain during such time as they are not wilted. At such time all wilted flowers must be removed promptly. Management shall have the right to remove wilted flowers if the plot owner fails to do so. Plastic flowers are discouraged. Glass flower receptacles are prohibited due to breakage. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-82. - Perpetual care fee. 
    A fee of $75.00 will be levied for each burial. This fee will ensure a separate account for the perpetual care of the streets, pathways and buildings within the cemetery. The interment of ashes is exempt from this fee. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
ARTICLE V. - CREMATION 

Sec. 22-83. - Cremation. 
    All cremated remains interred in the cemetery must have city of Key West cemetery form #1 (interview form) completed and submitted to the sexton. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-84. - Containers. 
    All cremated remains are to be received in an urn or container acceptable to cemetery standards. Only remains designated for scattering will be accepted in a cardboard box and the cemetery shall be responsible for proper disposal of the box. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 22-85. - Right to replat, regrade and use property. 
    The right and privilege, at any time and from time to time, to resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape and size, or otherwise to change all or any part, portion or subdivision of the cemetery (including the right to lay out, establish, close, eliminate, or otherwise modify or change the location of roads, walks or drives), and to file amended maps or plats thereof, and to use the same for the erection of buildings, or for any purposes or uses connected with, incident to or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation for the interment of human remains, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements and rights of ways over and through the cemetery, and the right and privilege of installing, maintaining and operation of pipelines, is hereby expressly reserved by management. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-86. - Exemptions. 
    Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of the regulations of this chapter 22 may impose unnecessary hardship. Management, therefore, reserves the right to make reasonable exceptions, suspensions, or modifications in these regulations. A temporary exception, suspension or modification shall in no way be construed as affecting the general application of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 22-87. - Interpretation. 
    In the event of a misunderstanding or dispute involving the meaning of any of regulations set forth in this chapter 22, and to the extent that rights are observed and protected, the interpretation by the management of the cemetery shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-5-2006) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; moving buildings, § 14-146 et seq.; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; development standards, ch. 98; historic preservation, ch. 102; performance standards, ch. 106; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110; environmental resources, § 110-61 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Penalty for violation. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any section of this chapter shall be punished or penalized as provided in section 1-15. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 54.02) 
Secs. 26-2-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisance animals prohibited, § 10-7; buildings as nuisances, § 14-74; nuisances, § 106-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to make regulations, pass ordinances regarding health and sanitation, F.S. § 381.101; state law to control, F.S. § 381.091. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Offensive and nuisance conditions prohibited. 
    No person shall permit, cause, keep, maintain or do any nuisance or contribute to the nuisance, as defined by the laws of this state, this Code or city ordinances, or cause or permit to be committed, caused, kept, maintained or done or contribute to the committing, causing, keeping or maintaining of any such nuisance within the city's jurisdictional limits. 
(Code 1986, § 54.03) 
Sec. 26-32. - Nuisances illustrated. 
    The following are declared to be nuisances; provided, however, that the following shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  All substances which emit or cause foul, obnoxious, unhealthful or disagreeable odor or effluvia, in the neighborhood where they exist. 
(2)  All carcasses of animals remaining exposed for 12 hours after death. 
(3)  Any growth of weeds, grasses or bushes to excessive height, provided that this shall not apply to planted and cultivated flowers, shrubbery or other landscaping. 
(4)  All slop, foul or dirty water, filth, refuse or offal, discharged in or upon any street, avenue, sidewalk, alley, park, public enclosure or other public place, or allowed to accumulate there or in a pond or pool. 
(5)  Any article, instrumentality or physical thing that, in the reasonable opinion of the city manager, poses an immediate threat of injury to persons or damage to property in the public right-of-way or other public area. 
(6)  The keeping or allowing to remain on any premises any trees, shrubs or other vegetation infected with fungus or other diseases that will or might spread to other noninfected trees, shrubs or other vegetation. 
(7)  Stagnant water in a swimming pool, cistern or fountain that is a breeding ground or feeding area for mosquitoes. 
(Code 1986, § 54.04; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-33. - Notice to abate. 
    If a code enforcement officer determines that a nuisance exists under this Code, he shall give the property owner or tenant notice thereof. If the property owner or tenant fails to timely abate the nuisance, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation, refer the matter to the county health department, and/or refer the matter to the city attorney to file a case for injunctive relief in a court of law. 
(Code 1986, § 54.05) 
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 26-34. - Definitions. 
    Commercial property means property that is used for business, commercial, or for-profit purposes. It shall be prima facie evidence that a property is commercial if it is located in a business, commercial, office, apartment building (if more than four units), hotel or industrial zone. Commercial property shall include nonpermanent structures. Commercial property shall not include: (1) residential property; (2) property owned by a government and used for governmental purposes; (3) property owned by and used for nonprofit purposes by educational institutions, libraries, charities or religious institutions. 
    Corrective action means an act required to remove or effectively obscure graffiti that is visible from the right-of-way. 
    Graffiti means the unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, or other inscribed or engraved material on public or private permanent structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city. 
    Nonpermanent structure means newsracks, trailers, tents, dumpsters, traffic signs, barricades, utility poles, traffic signal boxes, and construction equipment. 
    Residential property means single-family homes or property of four or fewer dwelling units. 
    Owner means any and all persons with legal and/or equitable title to real property in the City of Key West as their names and addresses are shown upon the records of the property appraiser department. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 26-35. - Nuisance declared. 
    The creating or maintaining of unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, or other inscribed or engraved material on public or private structures located on publicly or privately owned real property in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 2, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 26-36. - Graffiti prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or otherwise damage private or public property without the owner's consent, by or through the application of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 3, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 26-37. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  It is prohibited for an owner to allow graffiti to remain for more than seven calendar days on a commercial property or on a residential property. 
(b)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any property, a code enforcement officer is authorized upon such discovery, to give, or cause to be given, notice to take corrective action to the property owner or the property owner's agent or manager. It shall not be a defense that the graffiti was placed on the property prior to the effective date of this section. The code enforcement division is authorized to develop a standard "Notice to Remove Graffiti" form. 
(1)  Commercial property. For commercial property, the property owner or the property owner's agent or manager shall take corrective action within seven calendar days from the receipt or delivery of the code enforcement notice. 
(2)  Residential property. For residential property, the property owner, or property owner's agent shall take corrective action within seven calendar days from the receipt or delivery of the code enforcement notice. 
(c)  The city shall waive painting permit and historic architectural review commission requirements, if any, for abating graffiti, subject to the use of the same colored exterior paint. 
(d)  Graffiti abatement shall consist of: 
(1)  Painting of the entire wall and/or nonpermanent structure, or a portion thereof (if the latter is approved by the building official), that is defaced by graffiti; or 
(2)  Pressure-cleaning or any other method that will successfully remove graffiti from a wall or nonpermanent structure, without causing damage. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 4, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 26-38. - Corrective action; appeal. 
(a)  An owner who has been served with notice pursuant to section 26-37(b) shall elect either to: 
(1)  Take corrective action with respect to the graffiti within the time specified on the notice; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before the city manager, or his designee, to appeal the determination of the code enforcement officer that resulted in the issuance of the notice. 
(b)  An appeal for an administrative hearing shall be provided in writing by the owner or his agent not later than two days after the service of the code enforcement notice (unless such deadline shall occur on a weekend or a holiday, then, in such case, the next day). The city manager or his designee shall provide notice of the hearing and an opportunity to be heard to the owner or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 5, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 26-39. - Penalty. 
(a)  A violation of section 26-35, 26-36 or 26-37 shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In the event of a violation of section 26-36, the court as an additional remedy may order any violator to make restitution to the owner for damages or loss caused by the violator's action in the amount or manner determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 6, 5-17-2005) 
Secs. 26-40-26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF BEACHES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, adopted September 20, 2016, amended the title of div. 3 to read as set out herein. Previously div. 3 was titled "Use of Beaches Located on City Property." 

Sec. 26-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beach means that area from the actual low water line to the curb or pavement edge of the nearest adjacent street, consisting of unconsolidated sand, rock, paved area, parking spaces, or other composition, and also including any piers, docks, jetties, boat ramps, or similar structures extending waterward of the actual low water line. 
    Public beach means any beach located on property owned or leased by city, county, state or federal government. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including without limitation bicycles, tricycles, mopeds, motor-driven cycles, motorcycles, and other similar mechanisms. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(a); Ord. No. 16-18, § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-62. - Possession of open alcoholic beverage containers on city beaches. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half (0.5) percent alcohol or more by volume. 
    Open container means any receptacle or container immediately capable of being consumed from by a person or which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
(b)  No person shall drink from any open container containing any alcoholic beverage while upon any public beach. An open container shall not be considered to be in the possession of a person upon any public beach if it is in a location not accessible for consumption. 
(c)  The city commission may grant variances from this section on city property by resolution adopted by the city commission; provided, however, that any such variance shall be issued only to a nonprofit organization and shall require the presence of a security guard during such sale/consumption. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall consist of (1) direct evidence of consumption of an alcoholic beverage while on public or semi-public property or area(s); or (2) evidence demonstrating any indicia of consumption of an alcoholic beverage including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, an unsteady gait, slurred speech, or an odor of an alcoholic beverage emanating from one's breath or person based on that officer's training and experience, while on a city beach, and in possession of an open alcoholic beverage container. 
(e)  Proof that the beverage in question was contained in a container labeled as "beer," "ale," "malt liquor," "malt beverage," "wine," or "distilled spirits" or with other similar name; and which bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark shall serve as prima facie evidence that such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. Further, proof that a container contains alcohol, that is not so clearly marked as described herein, shall be established by testimony that the contents or remnants therein is consistent with alcohol through the officer's training and experience including, but not limited to: odor, texture, appearance and color in combination with the officer's observations of the violator, including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, unsteady gait, slurred speech, odor of an alcoholic beverage and affect consistent with alcohol consumption. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(b); Ord. No. 11-15, § 1, 10-5-2011; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, § 18-26 et seq. 
Sec. 26-63. - Restroom facilities closed overnight. 
    Restroom facilities at all public beaches shall be closed from sunset to 7:00 a.m., and no person shall enter or use such facilities for any purpose during such hours. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(c)) 
Sec. 26-64. - Cooking and fires. 
    No person shall cook or light or maintain any cooking fire, campfire, or other fire upon a public beach, except in city-approved, designated, permanently installed grill structures. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(d)) 
Sec. 26-65. - Vehicles. 
    No person shall bring, drive, or park a vehicle upon a public beach except in designated parking areas. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(e)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
Sec. 26-66. - Animals. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of an animal shall willfully or negligently allow the animal, whether at large or under the control of such person, to be upon a public beach. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall have no application to animals under adult control at Vernon Street Beach. Subsection (a) of this section shall have no application to animals under control at Vernon Street Beach or to service animals as defined in section 10-2. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(f)) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 26-67. - Cleaning fish, shellfish or other seafood. 
    No person shall clean any fish, shellfish, or other seafood product upon a public beach. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(g)) 
Sec. 26-68. - Unattended vessels. 
    No person shall leave any vessel unattended in or about any ramp or dock area on a public beach, other than necessary during brief periods for purposes of launching and retrieval of the vessel, and other than as provided in section 26-69. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(h)) 
Sec. 26-69. - Dinghy storage; access. 
    No person shall store a dinghy upon any public beach except in an approved storage area. Access to such area shall be on a first come, first served basis. No person shall store a dinghy in any approved storage area once the reasonable capacity of such area has been reached. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(i)) 
Sec. 26-70. - Closing hours. 
    All public beaches shall be closed during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. No person shall enter or remain upon any public beach during such hours. This section shall have no application to boatramps. 
(Code 1986, § 54.09(j)) 
Secs. 26-71-26-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PARKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-19, § 1, adopted September 20, 2016, amended the title of div. 4 to read as set out herein. Previously div. 4 was titled "Use of Parks Located on City Property." 

Sec. 26-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half (0.5) percent alcohol or more by weight. 
    Open container means any receptacle or container immediately capable of being consumed from by a person or which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
    Public park means any public open space owned by city, county, state or federal government including, but not limited to: the area commonly referred to as "The Pines" south of the airport, Indigenous Park, Cozumel Park, Bill Butler Park, Little Hamaca Park, Nelson English Park, Bayview Park, Mallory Square, Mallory Dock, Wickers Field, Clayton Sterling Fields, that portion of Peary Court leased by the city, Edward B. Knight Pier, the AIDS Memorial Park, the upland area of Rest Beach from the mean high tide waterline to the curb of Atlantic Boulevard, the community pool, the area commonly known as the Truman Waterfront owned by the City of Key West, Spottswood Park, and all designated city pocket parks. 
(Code 1986, § 54.10(a); Ord. No. 11-15, § 2, 10-5-2011; Ord. No. 14-20, § 1, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 16-19, § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-97. - Possession of open alcoholic beverage containers in city parks. 
(a)  No person shall drink from any open container containing any alcoholic beverage while in any public park. An open container shall not be considered to be in the possession of a person in any public park if it is in a location not accessible for consumption. 
(b)  The city commission may grant variances from this section by resolution adopted by the city commission; provided, however, that any such variance shall require the presence of a security guard during such sale/consumption. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall consist of: (1) direct evidence of consumption of an alcoholic beverage while on public or semi-public property or area(s); or (2) evidence demonstrating any indicia of consumption of an alcoholic beverage including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, an unsteady gait, slurred speech, or an odor of an alcoholic beverage emanating from one's breath or person based on that officer's training and experience, while in a city park or designated pocket park, and in possession of an open alcoholic beverage container. 
(d)  Proof that the beverage in question was contained in a container labeled as "beer," "ale," "malt liquor," "malt beverage," "wine," or "distilled spirits" or with other similar name; and which bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark shall serve as prima facie evidence that such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. Further, proof that a container contains alcohol, that is not so clearly marked as described herein, shall be established by testimony that the contents or remnants therein is consistent with alcohol through the officer's training and experience including, but not limited to: odor, texture, appearance and color in combination with the officer's observations of the violator, including, but not limited to: bloodshot eyes, unsteady gait, slurred speech, odor of an alcoholic beverage and affect consistent with alcohol consumption. 
(Code 1986, § 54.10(b); Ord. No. 11-15, § 3, 10-5-2011; Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, § 18-26 et seq. 
Sec. 26-98. - Cooking and fires. 
    No person shall cook or light or maintain any cooking fire, campfire, or other fire in a public park except in city-approved, designated facilities or structures. 
(Code 1986, § 54.10(c)) 
Sec. 26-99. - Restroom facilities closed overnight. 
    Restroom facilities at all public parks shall be closed from sunset to 7:00 a.m., and no person shall enter or use such facilities for any purpose during the hours. The city commission may grant variances from this section by resolution adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 54.10(d)) 
Sec. 26-100. - Closing hours. 
    All public parks shall be closed during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. No person shall enter or remain in any public park during such hours. The city commission may grant variances from this section by resolution adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 54.10(e)) 
Sec. 26-101. - Park rules. 
(a)  Visitors to all city parks as defined in section 26-96 shall abide by the park rules attached as Exhibit A to Resolution No. 15-230. 
(b)  The city commission for the City of Key West can amend the park rules by resolution. 
(c)  A list of all current rules shall be posted at or near all entrances to all city parks. 
(d)  Violations of this section are subject to the penalties contained in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-22-2012; Res. No. 15-230, § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Secs. 26-102-26-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CLEANING OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-126. - Clearing of property of debris and noxious material required. 
    For the purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the city residents, the city manager is authorized and empowered to require that vacant lands and/or improved property within the city be cleared of debris and any noxious material, including garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, solid waste, trash or industrial waste or high grass or weeds which tend to: 
(1)  Be a breeding place or haven for snakes, rodents, insects, and vermin; 
(2)  Create a fire hazard or endanger the lives and property of the city residents; 
(3)  Create a traffic hazard; or 
(4)  Create a nuisance or other unsightly or unsanitary condition. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(a)) 
Sec. 26-127. - Periods for mowing and removal of debris. 
    For the purposes of health, safety and general welfare of the city residents, all lots, vacant or occupied, shall be mowed and/or cleared of debris no less than once each three months as follows: once during the period from January 1 through March 31; once during the period from April 1 through June 30; once during the period from July 1 through September 30; and once during the period from October 1 through December 31. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(b)) 
Sec. 26-128. - Demand for clearing. 
    Upon a determination by the city manager that lands in the city should be cleared in accordance with this division, the city manager shall make a written demand on such property owner by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, directed to his address as shown on the current tax rolls of the county, that his property be cleared in accordance with this division. The demand shall state that if such demand is not complied with within 30 days from the date thereof, the land described in such demand will be cleared and/or mowed by the city, and the costs thereof will constitute a lien against the land. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(c)) 
Sec. 26-129. - Work done by city. 
    If such land is not cleared or mowed within the 30-day period allotted by the demand as provided in section 26-128, the city employees may enter upon such land and clear and/or mow the land. After having given written notice to a property owner whose property was so cleared or mowed by the city, the city manager shall in writing notify the city commission of the name of the owner of the property, the legal description of the property, and of the city's costs of clearing and/or mowing the land. The city commission shall, by resolution, affix the charge against such property for the cost of such clearing and/or mowing, and a lien shall be placed on such property as of the date of the resolution. A notice of lien shall be filed in the official record books of the county and a copy mailed by certified mail to the property owner. Thereafter the lien shall be collectible in the same manner and shall have the same status as the regular annual charge levied against residential properties by the city for garbage and trash collection and disposal. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(d)) 
Sec. 26-130. - Failure to comply. 
    Any unauthorized accumulations of refuse and/or failure to keep a parcel mowed on any property as set forth in this division is declared to be illegal and prohibited. In addition to the lien provided for under this division, any owner of property failing to comply with the written demand as provided for in this division shall upon conviction be guilty of a violation of this division and shall be punished in accordance with the penalty provided for in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(e)) 
Sec. 26-131. - Unlawful deposits of solid waste or trash. 
    No person shall cause to be deposited any solid waste or yard waste as defined in section 58-1, upon any city street, sidewalk or right-of-way unless the same is placed in containers as required by sections 58-31 and 58-32 or meets the requirements set forth in section 58-35 for pickup of bulk waste. A person who violates this provision shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 73.09(f); Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 8-6-2002) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58. 
Secs. 26-132-26-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413. 

Sec. 26-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter includes all garbage, rubbish, yard waste, and all waste materials including, but not limited to, bottles, glass, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, disposable packages or containers and all other similar materials, and any substance of any kind or nature whatsoever that creates a public health, safety or fire hazard or a public nuisance. 
    Public or semipublic area means any private or public road, street, highway, right-of-way, lane, alley, parking lot, parking area, park, beach or open space on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or pedestrian means or which is otherwise open for such travel. 
(Code 1986, § 73.01; Ord. No. 02-21, § 2, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-1-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-162. - Receptacles required for privately owned establishments serving public. 
(a)  The proprietors of all privately owned establishments which serve the public, including but not limited to drive-in restaurants, retail shopping centers, grocery stores, convenience stores, gasoline service stations, commercial parking lots, campgrounds, trailer parks and all other such establishments, shall be required to place litter receptacles of a size and nature suitable to the need and bearing in large print thereon the label "trash." The nature of such receptacles and their size, composition, number and place of location shall be determined by the proprietor based on the size, location and circumstances of the establishment. The type and number of such litter receptacles shall be based on the nature and type of business and the customers of such establishments. Failure on the part of a proprietor to provide adequate receptacles shall result in action by the city to compel compliance. Such proprietors shall be responsible for the removal of litter from such litter receptacles when necessary. 
(b)  Such proprietors shall, within 30 days of notification by the city in reference to such litter receptacles, comply with the terms of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 73.14) 
Sec. 26-163. - Owners of privately owned establishments required to post signs warning against violations. 
(a)  The proprietors of all privately owned establishments which serve the public, including, but not limited to, drive-in restaurants, retail shopping centers, grocery stores, convenience stores, gasoline service stations, commercial parking lots, campgrounds, trailer parks and other such establishments, shall be required to prominently place signs warning persons against violation of the antilitter ordinance in this article and its possible criminal sanctions. 
(b)  The nature, content, number, location, size and composition of the signs shall be determined by the proprietor of each establishment based on the size, location and circumstances; the volume of potential litter generated by such establishment; and the need for such signs caused by the nature and type of business and customers of such establishment. 
(c)  Failure on the part of the proprietor to provide such signs shall result in action by the city to compel compliance. Such proprietor shall, within 30 days of notification by the city of the required information, comply with the terms of this section. The city may produce such signs and offer them for sale at cost and with no profit to the city to establishments requiring them. 
(Code 1986, § 73.15) 
Sec. 26-164. - Presumptions as to discarded solid waste; procedure for removal of certain solid waste; enforcement, penalties, lien. 
(a)  Any solid waste discarded or deposited in violation of this article or chapter 58 which can be established to have been in the possession of ownership of any person shall be presumed to have been discarded or deposited by such person. This presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence or testimony establishing that such item of solid waste had left the ownership or possession of such person prior to being deposited or discarded in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Any solid waste placed, with or without a container, on city property in violation of this article or chapter 58 shall be presumed to have been generated by the owner or occupant of the property nearest the location where it is found and shall become the property of the city or its franchise hauler for purposes of removal. No person shall have a claim of action for theft or conversion of property against the city or its agent for removal of the property. 
(c)  The city shall verbally notify the responsible party, including the property owner and any tenants, that the solid waste referred to in subsection (a) or (b) of this section must be removed for proper disposal upon demand. If the solid waste is not so removed, the city, through its agents, may issue a notice to appear in county court pursuant to article VI of chapter 2 or a notice to appear before the code enforcement special master. In addition to any other legally permissible remedies, the city may remove the solid waste and impose upon the property owner and tenants, jointly and severally, an administrative charge for the actual costs incurred in the disposal of the solid waste, including any tipping fees actually paid. The city may place a lien on the subject property for such administrative charge, and such lien may be foreclosed upon in accordance with provisions of the state statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 73.16; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 26-165. - Unlawful deposit of cigarette butts. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit any used or unused cigarette butt onto any public or semipublic areas including any beach, park, sidewalk, or any right-of-way. This prohibition shall not apply to the proper disposal of cigarette butts in properly marked receptacles intended for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 26-166. - Penalties. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a violation of section 26-165 shall be punishable under section 2-680 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Secs. 26-167-26-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOUND CONTROL 

Sec. 26-189. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish specific permissible noise limits in order to provide for the abatement, prevention and prohibition of excessive and unnecessary noise so as to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Key West. Excessive and unnecessary noise can cause adverse psychological and physiological effects on humans, and deprive people of the peaceable enjoyment of their private property. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-190. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  Unreasonably excessive noise interferes with the quality of life and the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  In particular, unreasonably excessive noise can and does cause adverse psychological and physiological effects in humans, inefficiency, accidents and other undesirable and dangerous conditions. 
(c)  A substantial body of science and technology exists by which noise may be measured and substantially abated. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 2, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-191. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in this article. 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound level as measured with the A-weighting network on a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S1.4-1983 or its successors. The unit of reporting is dBA. Sounds measured with the "A" weighting network approximate the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity without an amplified low frequency component. 
    Amplified sound means the reproduction of sound from any radio, stereo, CD player, DVD player, microphone, drum, turn table, audio or visual equipment, musical instrument, sound equipment, sound amplification device, television set, exterior loudspeakers, bullhorn or any similar device. 
    C-weighted sound level means the sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards as set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. The unit of reporting is dBC. The "C" weighting network is more sensitive to low frequencies than the "A" weighting network. 
    Commercial district means the HRO, HRCC-3, HNC-1, HNC-2, HNC-3, HCT, HPS (Mallory Square only), CL, CG, CT and A zoning districts. 
    Core commercial district means the HRCC-1, HRCC-4, and HRCC-2 zoning districts. 
    Decibel means a logarithmic (dimensionless) unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as dB. 
    Disturbing noise means unreasonably excessive noise that is an uninvited or disruptive level of noise that is unreasonably loud or that is raucous and jarring, due to volume, character, or duration, and that causes an actual interference with a person's ability to enjoy peacefully his residence or place of business. 
    Emergency and emergency work means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving or creating actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate attention. 
    Noise control officer means environmental inspectors, building and zoning inspectors, code enforcement officers and police enforcement personnel authorized to enforce provisions of this Code. 
    Property boundary means the imaginary line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one person from that owned, rented, or leased by another person. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, lane, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity or which has been dedicated to use or access for the benefit of the public or adjacent property owners. 
    Residential district means any zoning district within the City of Key West that is not specifically defined in this section as a commercial district or a core commercial district. 
    Unreasonable noise means unreasonably excessive noise: 
(1)  In or emanating from a commercial district which equals or exceeds a measured sound level of 75 dBA or 77 dBC (maximum permitted sound level in decibels) collectively for more than 30 seconds of any measurement period which shall not be less than five minutes. 
(2)  In or emanating from a residential district which equals or exceeds a measured sound of 75 dBA or 77 dBC between 8:00 a.m. and 7:59 p.m. and 60 dBA or 62 dBC from 8:00 p.m. to 7:59 a.m. (maximum permitted sound level in decibels) collectively for more than 30 seconds of any measurement period which shall not be less than five minutes. 
    Unreasonably excessive noise means any sound that exceeds the limits as defined in [section] 26-192 below. 
(Code 1986, § 55.01; Ord. No. 14-06, § 3, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-192. - Unreasonably excessive noise prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibition of unreasonably excessive noise. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), to permit, cause, allow, amplify, create, emit, or sustain unreasonably excessive noise on any property, including air space thereof, located in the City of Key West. Unreasonably excessive noise shall be that noise which exceeds the noise limitations set forth in subsection (b). 
(b)  Noise limitations. 
(1)  Within a core commercial district as defined in this article, the maximum dBA and dBC sound levels permitted on any property located therein shall be as follows: 
The average measurement taken between ten (10) and twenty (20) seconds shall be no greater than the maximum levels set out below. The measurement shall be taken from the sound source property line, or individual lease boundary in the case of property which has been subdivided by the execution of individual leases, of the noise generating property at a location that is closest to the complainant's property line: 
a.  Eighty-five (85) dBA or ninety-four (94) dBC between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:59 a.m. 
b.  Seventy-five (75) dBA or eighty-four (84) dBC between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 10:59 a.m. 
(2)  In any residential or commercial district as defined in this article, a decibel meter shall be used for a complaint of unreasonable noise made at or within 100 feet of the property line of the sound source. The decibel reading shall be made at the location of the complaint. The investigating officer shall issue a citation for unreasonably excessive noise, unless in his judgment a warning is sufficient to cease the violation. There shall be no more than a total of one warning per offending person or establishment. 
(3)  A complaint of disturbing noise may be made when the location of the complaint is beyond 100 feet of the property line of a commercial district property sound source. Additionally, a complaint of disturbing noise may be made when the location of the complaint is a residential property and the location of the sound source is a residential property at any distance from each other. A decibel meter measurement is not required to determine disturbing noise. The investigating officer shall issue a citation if the complainant suffers disturbing noise within the boundaries of his property. The investigating officer may issue a warning if in his judgment a warning is sufficient to cease the violation. There shall be no more than a total of one warning per offending person or establishment in any six-month period. 
(4)  If a complaint arises of unreasonably excessive noise emanating from a multistory structure, the determination of whether such sound constitutes unreasonably excessive noise shall be made from a story height equal to that of the sound source or from the nearest accessible point on the ground floor. 
(Code 1986, § 55.02(a); Ord. No. 14-06, § 4, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-193. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibitions contained in this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emergencies. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or emergency vehicle or to the performance of emergency work. 
(2)  Church bells and chimes. 
(3)  Construction/demolition. Sound levels produced from tools and equipment in commercial construction, demolition, drilling, or reasonably similar activities. However, such sound levels are limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. The tools and equipment must be muffled and maintained equal to the functional standards of the industry. No exceptions contained in this subsection shall apply on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day. 
(4)  Domestic power tools. Sound levels produced from any hand-powered or mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn/garden tool or reasonably similar tools. However, to be lawful, sound producing the use must conform to industry standards for the equipment and must occur only between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday only. 
(5)  Public events. Sound levels from public events and celebrations sponsored by the city or approved by resolution of the city commission, but only during the hours designated by the resolution. 
(6)  Government radio transmissions. Sound levels from equipment used by police, fire, and other city department radio or emergency equipment, and from similar equipment used by other government agencies in performance of official duties. 
(7)  Public address systems. Sound levels from public address broadcast systems used in public stadiums, ballfields, parks and schoolyards. 
(8)  Sunset celebration. Sound levels produced by performers engaged in activities sponsored by the city's lessee at Mallory Square Dock during sunset celebration. 
(9)  Industrial equipment. Noise levels for industrial equipment, including, but not limited to, air conditioners, generators, and pool pumps, must be set to reasonable industry standards for properly maintained equipment. 
(10)  Sound created by safety and protective devices, emergency equipment, including, but not limited to, emergency standby or backup equipment, necessary in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 1986, § 55.03; Ord. No. 12-30. § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 14-06, § 5, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-194. - Citation procedure and penalties. 
(a)  All citations for violations issued under this article shall be based on a complaint to the city. The complainant shall be identified by name and address, the sound source shall be identified, and the investigating noise control officer shall verify all information provided by the complainant. The officer shall provide the complainant with a copy of the complaint form which may serve as a record of complaints relating to a property. 
(b)  Citations issued for unreasonably excessive noise under this article shall be of a content-neutral character. 
(c)  Any investigating noise control officer may issue a citation to an offender under this article. 
(d)  The investigating noise control officer may issue a warning if in his or her judgment a warning is sufficient to cease the violation. There shall be no more than a total of one warning issued during any six (6) month period. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and who shall be found violating or found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in chapter 2, article VI, division 2 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b) and (c) above, a complaint of disturbing noise may be made at any distance from a commercial or residential property when the location of the sound source is a public right-of-way. The investigating officer shall issue a citation if the complainant suffers disturbing noise within the boundaries of his or her property. The investigating officer may issue a warning if in his or her judgement a warning is sufficient to cease the violation. There shall be no more than a total of one warning issued during any twelve (12) month period. 
(Code 1986, § 55.02(b)-(g), 55.07(b); Ord. No. 10-21, § 1, 10-15-2010; Ord. No. 14-06, § 6, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-195. - Liability; citizen suit. 
(a)  Liability. The individual controlling or responsible for maintaining the volume of unreasonably excessive noise and the operator and/or owner of the premises that are its sound source shall each be subject to liability for violations of this article. If prosecuted jointly, each shall be jointly and severally liable for any fines imposed pursuant to this article. The sponsor of a special event shall not be liable for unreasonably excessive noise unless conditions placed upon the sponsor in the special event permit are violated. 
(b)  Citizen suit. In addition to any other remedy available to the city, including code enforcement, the city or any other adversely affected party may enforce the terms of this article in law or equity. Any citizen of the city may seek injunctive relief and damages in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent a violation of this article. No section of this article shall be interpreted to prevent any person from commencing a civil action on his own behalf against any person who is alleged to be in violation of any section of this article. Attorney's fees and costs incurred in an action to enforce this article may be awarded to a substantially prevailing party in the discretion of the court. 
(c)  Mediation services. Upon request of parties to a residential noise dispute, the city manager shall provide mediation services. 
(d)  Multiple unsubstantiated complaints. An unsubstantiated complaint is one to which a noise control officer has responded and found either no evidence of any noise, or sound that is ten (10) decibels or more below the standard for the finding of a violation of unreasonably excessive noise. The noise control office shall explain his or her findings to the complainant and detail the relevant standards for determining a violation as specified by the City Code. It shall be a violation of this article subjecting an individual to the provisions of chapter 2, article VI, division 2 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West for any individual to make three (3) or more unsubstantiated complaints within a one (1) month period or five (5) total in any twelve (12) month period. 
(Code 1986, § 55.07(a), (c), (d); Ord. No. 14-06, § 7, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 26-196. - Motor vehicle noise emissions. 
(a)  Motor vehicles operating on the public right-of-way are regulated as set forth in F.S. § 403.415. The decibel measurements of this statute shall pertain to motor vehicle noise. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle, moped, scooter or motorcycle in the city in violation of a provision of this statute. In addition, every vehicle, moped, scooter and motorcycle shall be equipped with a muffler in constant operation and be properly maintained to prevent disturbing or unreasonable noise. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for a person to engage in rapid throttle advancing or revving of an internal combustion engine of a vehicle, moped, scooter or motorcycle that is at a standstill or that is in the flow of traffic where such rapid throttle advancing or revving is not necessary for its safe operation, thus resulting in increased noise. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle off a public right-of-way in violation of this article. This article shall apply to all motor vehicles, whether or not duly licensed or registered, including but not limited to commercial or recreational racing vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, mopeds, go-carts, amphibious vehicles, campers, power boats, personal watercraft, or any other engine-powered vehicle; provided, however, that a vessel owner may operate an engine for a reasonable period of time in order to flush out the engine with fresh water. 
(c)  A citation issued under this section need not be initiated by citizen complaint. It may be issued by a police officer in the course of his duties. 
(Code 1986, § 55.04; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 26-197. - Animals. 
    The owner of an animal that creates a noise nuisance as provided in section 10-2 is subject to citation for violation of this article. Animal noise need not be measured by decibel meter to be unreasonable. If animal noise disturbs at least two persons residing in separate residences adjacent to or within 100 feet of the property on which the animal is kept and such persons file a joint complaint or separate complaints with the city as provided in section 26-194, their complaint shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation. 
(Code 1986, § 55.05) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 26-198. - Retail establishment sound amplifiers; setback. 
(a)  The property owner or operator of a retail establishment shall establish an interior 15-foot setback for sound amplifiers and speakers. This requirement pertains to sound that emanates directly from the retail establishment to a street, sidewalk or alley. All sound amplifiers and speakers shall be located inside the retail establishment at least 15 feet from the plane of the front, side or rear entrance and at least 15 feet from the plane of any open window. "Retail" shall be determined by business tax receipt status. This regulation shall apply only to the retail portion of a mixed-use commercial establishment. 
(b)  A property owner may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance to this section. The property owner must demonstrate a hardship based on the size or configuration of the retail establishment. 
(Ord. No. 03-13, § 2, 6-3-2003; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-199. - Temporary waiver. 
(a)  Any person who owns or operates a sound source, or intends or desires to operate or maintain a sound source, for one of the following purposes may apply for a temporary waiver from the city commission: 
(1)  Private or public celebrations in accordance with the requirements of City Code of Ordinances section 6-86; 
(2)  Nighttime construction projects; or 
(3)  Homeowner construction projects. 
(b)  Applications for a permit for a temporary waiver shall supply information including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The nature and location of the noise source for which such application is made; 
(2)  The reason for which the permit for temporary waiver is requested, including the hardship, if any, that will result to the applicant or the public if the permit for temporary waiver is not granted; 
(3)  The nature and intensity of noise that will occur during the period of the temporary waiver; 
(4)  A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom; and 
(5)  The name, address and means of contacting a responsible party during the hours of operation for which the permit for temporary waiver is issued. 
(c)  The city commission may charge the applicant a fee established by resolution of the city commission to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the permit of temporary waiver application. 
(d)  In making the determination on granting a temporary waiver, the city commission shall consider: 
(1)  The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health and welfare of the reasonable use of adjacent property which is caused or threatened to be caused by the sound to result from the permit for temporary waiver; 
(2)  The social and economic value of the activity for which the temporary waiver is sought; and 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to apply best practical noise control measures. 
(e)  The permit of temporary waiver shall enumerate the conditions of the waiver, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Specific location, dates and times for which the temporary waiver is valid; 
(2)  Sound level limits which shall not be exceeded at the nearest affected residential property; 
(3)  The use of noise control measures to minimize noise impacts on adjacent property. 
(f)  A temporary waiver may be revoked by the city manager or his designee and the issuance of future waivers withheld, if there is: 
(1)  Violation of one or more conditions of the temporary waiver; 
(2)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the temporary waiver application; or, 
(3)  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the city commission in granting the temporary waiver. 
(g)  Notice of the city commission's proposed action on an application for a permit for a temporary shall be mailed prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be considered to all property owners located within a 100-foot radius of the proposed waiver. Notice of such proposed action also shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days prior to the date of the city commission decision. The notice shall identify a contact person and phone number for complaints. The applicant shall pay for the newspaper advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 8, 4-22-2014) 
Secs. 26-200-26-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 26-221. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
    Costs means those necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the city in connection with investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating discharges of hazardous substances, including but not limited to the following: Actual labor costs of city personnel or its authorized agents, cost of equipment operation and rental, cost of expendable items including, but not limited to, fire fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing. 
    Discharge means any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the corporate limits of Key West. 
    Hazardous substances means any substances or materials in a quantity or form, which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized designee, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property within Key West and shall include, but not be limited to those hazardous substances listed in the N.F.P.A. Guide on Hazardous Materials or the EPA's list of extremely hazardous substances, or the Florida Substance List promulgated by the Department of Labor and Employment Security. 
    Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, associations or any other entities or combinations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 1-15-2002) 
Sec. 26-222. - Hazardous substances, recovery of costs. 
(a)  The fire department is hereby authorized to take such steps as necessary to clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous substances discharged upon or into public or private property or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances that requires emergency action by the fire department or its authorized agents in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the costs incurred by the city in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge. 
(c)  When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances, the fire department shall keep a detailed record of the costs attributable thereto. 
(d)  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include costs incurred for actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department or its authorized agents. 
(e)  Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances shall reimburse the city for the full amount of all costs, as defined herein, associated with the investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge, within a period of 30 days after receipt of an itemized bill for such costs from the city. 
(f)  The city may enforce these provisions by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus administrative collection costs, attorneys' fees, or for any other relief that may be appropriate. A certified copy of a judgment in favor of the city may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any real or personal property owned by such person(s) and such lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state, district and municipal taxes superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until paid or extinguished. The city may pursue any other remedy, whether civil or criminal, instituting any appropriate action or proceedings, including injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. The recovery of expenses under this article shall not in any way release the various parties, or limit them, from legal liability incurred as a result of hazardous substance cleanup or abatement as defined under any local, state or federal rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 2, 1-15-2002) 
Secs. 26-223-26-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 26-300. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide the residents and visitors of the City of Key West protection from invasions of privacy, and reckless operation over crowded areas, due to the rapid implementation of drone technology being put into use by individuals and business entities. The unregulated use of drones also poses a significant public safety concern to individuals and property on the ground and other nearby aircraft in the event of malfunction, operator negligence, loss of control, or other inability to sustain flight as intended. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prevent, prohibit, or regulate any type of drone or remote controlled model aircraft that are otherwise permitted by the FAA for recreational use, or any operator who lawfully possesses a Certificate of Authorization or Letter of Exemption issued by the FAA. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 2-17-2016) 
Sec. 26-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drone means any powered, aerial vehicle, that is either fixed wing or rotor-operated, that does not carry a human being, which uses aerodynamic forces to provide the vehicle with lift, that can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely, and that can be expendable or recoverable. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 2-17-2016) 
Sec. 26-302. - Prohibitions. 
    No person may operate a drone, whether or not it has the capability of capturing or transmitting audio, video, or still images within or over the City of Key West, unless the drone operator possesses either a certificate of authorization, a letter of exemption lawfully issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, or unless the operator is using a drone strictly for recreational purposes pursuant to the Federal Aviation Administration Interpretation of the Special Rule for Model Aircraft cited as 14 CFR Part 91 and attached as Exhibit A. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 2-17-2016) 
Sec. 26-303. - Penalty. 
    There shall be one verbal or written warning for any first time offender of this article provided that compliance is immediately achieved. Subsequent violations of this article shall be punished consistent with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 2-17-2016) 
Secs. 26-304-26-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUNSCREEN 

Sec. 26-311. - Sale of sunscreen products containing oxybenzone or octinoxate, or both; prohibition; penalty. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
    "Octinoxate" refers to the chemical (RS)-2-Ethylhexyl (2E)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)prop-2-enoate under the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry chemical nomenclature registry; that has a chemical abstract service registry number 5466-77-3; whose synonyms include but are not limited to ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate, octyl methoxycinnamate, Eusolex 2292, Neo Heliopan AV, NSC 26466, Parsol MOX, Parasol MCX, Parsol MOX, and Uvinul MC80; and is intended to be used as protection against ultraviolet light radiation with a spectrum wavelength from 370 nanometers to 220 nanometers in an SPF sunscreen protection personal care product. 
    "Oxybenzone" refers to the chemical (2-Hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-phenylmethanone under the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry chemical nomenclature registry; that has a chemical abstract service registry number 131-57-7; whose synonyms include but are not limited to benzophenone-3, Escalol 567, Eusolex 4360, KAHSCREEN BZ-3, Uvasorb MET/C, Syntase 62, UV 9, Uvinul 9, Uvinul M-40, Uvistat 24, USAF Cy-9, Uniphenone-3U, 4-methoxy-2-hydroxybenzophenone and Milestab 9; and is intended to be used as protection against ultraviolet light radiation with a spectrum wavelength from 370 nanometers to 220 nanometers in an SPF sunscreen protection personal care product. 
    "SPF sunscreen protection personal care product" includes but is not limited to lotion, paste, balm, ointment, cream, solid stick applicator, brush applicator, roll-on applicator, aerosol spray, non-aerosol spray pump, and automated and manual mist spray." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or distribute for sale in the City of Key West any SPF sunscreen protection personal care product that contains oxybenzone or octinoxate, or both, without a medically-licensed prescription. 
(c)  Penalty. A first time violation of this section shall result in one written warning. Second and subsequent violations shall be punishable by the civil citation procedure pursuant to Ch. 2, Article VI, Division 3 of the Code of Ordinances for The City of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 2-5-2019) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633; sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 

ARTICLE I. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 30-1. - Fees for false alarms and fire code inspections. 
    Fees shall be charged for false fire alarms in accordance with the provisions of sections 30-2 to 30-8, herein. Fees shall be charged to the business owner for initial and annual fire prevention code inspections and reinspections performed on structures, buildings, or occupancies by the fire department in the amounts set forth in section 30-9, herein. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 1, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm user means any person occupying or controlling the premises of an occupancy that is protected by an automatic fire detection system. 
    Automatic fire detection system means any system employing heat detectors, smoke detectors, flame detectors or waterflow alarm elements for the purpose of detecting and automatically transmitting an alarm of fire. 
    Central station system means a system or group of systems in which the operation of circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from an approved central station having competent and experienced observers and operators who, upon receipt of a signal, notify the fire department and take such other action as is required by the fire prevention code of the city. 
    Central station systems contractor means a person, firm or corporation whose principal business is the furnishing and maintaining of a supervised signaling service known as a central station system. 
    False alarm signal means the transmission of a fire alarm signal indicating a fire emergency requiring the immediate response of a fire rescue department engine company or companies when a fire emergency does not exist and no evidence thereof is apparent to the senior fire rescue department officer arriving on the scene. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used; any building or complex of buildings which because of the nature of the occupancy or size of the building is regulated by the fire prevention code of the city. 
    Owner means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by entirety of the whole or of a part of a building or land. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 2, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 30-3. - Private fire detection, protection systems; identification decal. 
    Installations and maintenance of fire detection, protection systems that are required by local or state law shall be undertaken and completed according to local or state law, and permitted accordingly. Each private fire detection and/or protection system permit holder shall be issued a systems decal by the City of Key West Fire Department. This decal shall be displayed in a conspicuous place visible to the outside of the premises covered by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 3, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-4. - Prior to installation of alarm system. 
    Installations of alarms that are required by local or state law shall be undertaken and completed according to local or state law. Prior to installation, the following information shall be submitted to the fire prevention bureau and building department: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the system's user. 
(2)  Address and telephone number of the system's user's premises or building to be served by the system. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of the premises or building served by the system. 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity monitoring the system. 
(5)  With respect to permitting, a complete application shall be submitted to the building department for review and approval by the fire marshal or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 4, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-5. - Excessive false alarms declared a public nuisance. 
    The transmission of more than three false alarms signals by an automatic fire detection system protecting any occupancy within a 12-month period of time is excessive and constitutes a serious public nuisance, and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a violation of this section. No person shall allow, permit, cause, or fail to prevent the transmission, for any reason, by an automatic fire detection system used by him, or any such system serving a premises or a building occupied and controlled by such person, of more than three false alarms signals within any 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 5, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-6. - False alarm signal service charge; collection. 
    For response to excessive false alarms signals by the fire department, the alarm user shall be charged a service fee by the City of Key West of $100.00 for the fourth false alarm signal in any 12-month period; $200.00 for the fifth false alarm signal in any 12-month period; and $400.00 for the sixth and each successive false alarm signal in any 12-month period. The provisions of this section shall not apply for a period of three months from the date a permit is issued by the city for the installation of an automatic fire detection system. The fire chief or his or her designee shall determine whether a false alarm system signal has been transmitted and the frequency of such alarm signals, and the city shall notify alarm users of amounts owed to the city. In the event of nonpayment, the city may proceed with suit in a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a false alarm signal results in a code violation, any costs incurred by the fire department such as overtime, fuel expended, personnel hours or any other costs deemed to be reasonable by the code enforcement magistrate shall be taxed to the property owner and/or tenant in addition to the customary court costs. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 6, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-7. - Responsibility of central station system contractor to report fire alarm signals. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to relieve a central station systems contractor of the responsibility of promptly reporting all automatic fire detection signals signaling a fire alarm from an occupancy supervised by it to the Key West Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 7, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 30-8. - Automatic fire detection system to be supervised as required by the fire department. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to supervise an automatic fire detection system in a manner other than prescribed in the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 8, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 30-9. - Schedule of inspection fees. 
    The office of the fire marshal shall charge and collect for the various permits required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by reference in section 30-57 and made part of the ordinances of the city, as follows: 
(a)  Plans review. 
(1)  All buildings (including balconies, porches, additions, and garages, and accessory buildings): 
a.  For each $1,000.00 of value, or fractional part thereof, of enclosed space ..... $ 0.50 
b.  Minimum fee ..... 75.00 
(2)  New structures (other than buildings) including water towers, radio towers, water plants, cisterns, sea walls, docks, aboveground fuel storage tanks, belowground fuel storage tanks (including commercial LPG tanks): 
a.  For each $1,000.00 of value, or fractional part thereof ..... $ 0.50 
b.  Minimum fee ..... 75.00 
(3)  Repairs, renovations, or remodeling to building: 
a.  For each $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fractional part thereof ..... $ 0.50 
b.  Minimum fee ..... 75.00 
(b)  Applications. 
(1)  Development review committee applications ..... 50.00 
(2)  Application to board of adjustment ..... 50.00 
(c)  Inspections. 
(1)  Annual inspections. (Occupancy use as defined in the most current and adopted Florida Fire Prevention Code and Florida Building Code.) 
a.  Residential, transient and nontransient: 
1.  All residential ..... $50.00 
2.  Transient hotel/motel: 
(i)  1-24 units ..... 50.00 
(ii)  25-50 units ..... 100.00 
(iii)  51-100 units ..... 150.00 
(iv)  101 or more units ..... 200.00 
b.  Assembly ..... 50.00 
c.  All others including, but not limited to: Business, day care, educational, fuel storage and delivery facilities, health care facilities, marinas/boat yards, mercantile, storage/repair facilities ..... 50.00 
(2)  Annual fire inspection and follow up ..... 50.00 
(3)  Private fire detection and protection systems. 
a.  Fixed fire protection (NFPA 17) ..... 50.00 
b.  Automatic/manual fire detection (NFPA 72,101) ..... 25.00 
c.  Sprinkler/standpipe systems ..... 50.00 
d.  Fire pump ..... 25.00 
e.  Fire wells, per well ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 9, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-05, § 4, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Secs. 30-10-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-196 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-26. - Composition. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department and as many subordinate officers and employees as the city commission shall determine from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 31.117(a)) 
Sec. 30-27. - Powers and duties of chief. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of all officers and employees of the fire department, including determining the number of employees required for a full watch. 
(b)  The powers of the fire chief shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the city commission may prescribe or as may be prescribed by city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 31.117(b), (c)) 
Secs. 30-28-30-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 

Sec. 30-36. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this subchapter [division], the following definitions shall apply: 
    Advanced life support level 1: Advanced life support level 1 (ALS1) is the transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medically necessary supplies and services including the provision of an ALS assessment or at least one ALS intervention. 
    Advanced life support level 2: Advanced life support level 2 (ALS2) is the transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medically necessary supplies and services including: 
(1)  At least three separate administrations of one or more medications by intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion (excluding crystalloid fluids), or 
(2)  Ground ambulance transport, medically necessary supplies and services, and the provision of at least one of the ALS2 procedures listed below: 
  Manual defibrillation/cardioversion; 
  Endotracheal intubation; 
  Central venous line; 
  Cardiac pacing; 
  Chest decompression; 
  Surgical airway; or 
  Intraosseous line. 
    Basic life support services: The provision of treatment services rendered to patients which do not required invasive techniques, which include, but are not limited to, simple bandaging, minor splinting and simple immobilization, and may include transportation to a hospital. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 30-37. - Emergency medical service rates. 
(a)  The following service charges or fees are levied for the provision of emergency medical services: 
Basic life support transport fee ..... $600.00 
Advanced life support 1 transport fee ..... $750.00 
Advanced life support 2 transport fee ..... $950.00 
Mileage fee (per mile) ..... $14.50 
(b)  The city manager may adjust fees annually pursuant to the Inflation Index Charge (I.I.C.) which is used by Medicare to determine the appropriate fee charges. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 30-38. - Collection of emergency medical fees. 
(a)  The fire-rescue department shall utilize a billing agency to submit bills to patients or to the patient's insurance carrier for the provision of basic life support or advanced life support transportation. 
(b)  The city may collect delinquent charges through any and all available legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 3, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 30-39. - Resident waiver of emergency medical fees. 
    The city, through its billing agency, will seek reimbursement from third-party payers, including, but not limited to, liability insurance, automobile insurance, health care insurance, Medicare and Medicaid to offset EMS operational costs. 
    For qualifying individuals, the city commission may write off any or all balances remaining after receipt of third party payments. 
    Write-offs of out-of-pocket expenses will be completed pursuant to a formal collections policy adopted by city commission resolution. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 4, 3-3-2015) 
Secs. 30-40-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform minimum mandatory fire safety standards, F.S. §§ 633.022, 633.025. 

Sec. 30-56. - Enforcement of state fire marshal's regulations. 
    All rules and regulations issued by the state fire marshal under authority of F.S. § 633.15 shall be enforceable by the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department is authorized to perform within the corporate city limits any duties that may be imposed upon him by such law or in accordance therewith and to have such assistance as he may find necessary from other city officials in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1986, § 31.115) 
State Law reference- Local fire chief authorized to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121. 
Sec. 30-57. - Adoption of fire prevention and life safety codes. 
    The most recent Life Safety Code (NFPA 1), (NFPA 101), published by the National Fire Protection Association; the Florida Fire Prevention Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association; and the Florida Building Code as adopted by the State of Florida, are adopted and made a part of the Code of Ordinances for the purpose of encouraging and regulating fire prevention and life safety within the city. A copy of each such standard code shall be on file for inspection in the office of the chief of the fire department during regular office hours. 
(Code 1986, § 31.118; Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 30-58. - Definitions in fire prevention and life safety codes. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the codes adopted in section 30-57, it shall be construed to mean the City of Key West, Florida. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the codes adopted in section 30-57, it shall be construed to mean the attorney of this city. 
(Code 1986, § 31.120) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-59. - Penalty for violations of fire prevention and life safety codes. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the codes adopted in section 30-57 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 31.121) 
Secs. 30-60-30-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXPLOSIVES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Explosives, F.S. ch. 790. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-86-30-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-111. - Required. 
    No person shall use dynamite, nitroglycerin or other high explosive compounds within the city limits without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 31.122) 
Sec. 30-112. - Application; fee. 
    The city manager shall have prepared suitable applications and permit blanks as required by section 30-111. No permit shall be issued except upon payment to the city of a fee of $10.00. 
(Code 1986, § 31.123) 
Sec. 30-113. - Duration, renewal. 
    Permits required by section 30-111 shall be issued for a period of 14 days and may be renewed at the expiration of such time upon payment of the fee provided for in section 30-112. 
(Code 1986, § 31.124) 
Sec. 30-114. - Issuance. 
    The city manager shall issue permits to use dynamite, nitroglycerin or other high explosive compounds within the city limits to applicants therefor only if and when it has been shown to the city manager that such use will not cause damage to persons or property. 
(Code 1986, § 31.125) 
Sec. 30-115. - Maximum explosion generally. 
    Permits to use dynamite, nitroglycerin or other high explosive compounds within the city limits shall allow only a maximum number of four holes, each containing not more than four pounds of dynamite to be used in any one blast, unless the city manager has given his written approval that the number of holes and the amount of dynamite in each hole may be increased. The amount of such increase shall be clearly set forth in the written approval. 
(Code 1986, § 31.126) 
Sec. 30-116. - Maximum explosion near residences. 
    The number of holes and the amount of dynamite, nitroglycerin or other high explosive compound to be used in each hole shall be determined by the city manager before issuing a permit for blasting to be done within 400 feet of any residence, building or structure within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 31.127) 
Sec. 30-117. - Inspection of blasting operations. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager, with the assistance of the chief and members of the fire department, to make periodic inspections of the blasting operations allowed under a permit granted by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 31.128) 
Secs. 30-118-30-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-146-30-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAY PERMIT 

Sec. 30-171. - Required; term; supervision; character and location. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for any public display of fireworks within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  A permit shall be limited to a 24-hour period. 
(c)  Every such display shall be supervised by a representative of the fire department and shall be handled by a state-licensed pyrotechnician who is certified or licensed under state law for such operation and who is approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(d)  Every display shall be of the character and shall be located, discharged or fired as to be, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, after proper inspection, not hazardous to property or injurious to any person. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(a)) 
Sec. 30-172. - Application; limitations; transferability; revocation. 
(a)  A person who desires to operate a public fireworks display shall apply to the fire department for approval. Applications shall be made at least 30 days in advance of the display. The fire department shall issue an application form that incorporates the requirements of this division; furthermore, the fire department may adopt additional reasonable health and safety regulations for the issuance of permits. 
(b)  After a permit is issued, the sale, possession, use and display of fireworks shall be lawful for the purpose of the permit only. 
(c)  No permit shall be transferred to other persons or to other locations. 
(d)  A permit may be revoked for just cause. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(b)) 
Sec. 30-173. - Financial responsibility. 
    Before a permit shall be granted under this division, the applicant shall furnish proof to the city of financial responsibility sufficient to satisfy claims of property damage or personal injury arising out of any act or omission of a permit holder. The city may require of the applicant a bond or a certificate of insurance or both as is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(e)) 
Sec. 30-174. - Application fee. 
    There shall be an application fee of $100.00 for each permit application made under this division. In addition, a permit holder shall reimburse the city for the costs of additional fire protection deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(f)) 
Sec. 30-175. - Denial. 
    The fire department may deny an application for the permit required under this division that in all other respects is properly submitted if, in the opinion of the fire chief, one or more of the following criteria is present: 
(1)  A structure is within 1,000 feet of the launch site. 
(2)  The type or the size of the fireworks display presents a danger to persons or property. 
(3)  Weather conditions are not favorable for a fireworks display. 
(4)  Community opposition to the display, presented at a public hearing with an opportunity for rebuttal, is compelling. 
(5)  The fireworks display would pose a danger to person or property due to the physical nature of the island of Key West. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(c)) 
Sec. 30-176. - Restricted hours. 
    Permits sought under this division shall be for displays that shall occur not later than two hours after sunset or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later; provided, however, that such hour restrictions shall not be applicable to a Fourth of July celebration. By resolution, the city commission may relax the restrictions of this section for special occasions. 
(Code 1986, § 108.01(d)) 
Chapter 31 - LAW ENFORCEMENT ALARM REGULATION 

Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter of the Code of Ordinances only, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Alarm company means a person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems. 
    Alarm permit means a permit issued by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
    Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
    Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
    Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
    Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
    Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Key West Police Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Key West Police Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil/criminal penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
    City means the City of Key West or its agent. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Key West Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
    Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
    Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. 
    SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
    Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this ordinance, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-2. - Alarm permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the city. A fee of $50.00 is required for the initial registration. There will be no charge for the mandatory annual renewals if there have been no false alarms during the 12-month permit period. A fee of $50.00 is required for annual renewal if there has been any false alarm during the 12-month permit period. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. This permit shall be in addition to all electrical and other applicable authorizations required by the Key West Code of Ordinances and attendant regulations. 
(b)  Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the city. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the city. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable and require a new registration and fee upon a change in possession or alarm companies. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city within 30 days of the change. Failure to comply will constitute a violation and may result in a fine. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-3. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; and 
(b)  Provide the alarm company the permit number (the number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to insure dispatch). 
(c)  Make a solemn endeavor to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when notified by the Key West Police Department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; and 
(d)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(e)  An alarm user must obtain a new permit if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. Additionally, any change in the alarm service provider requires a new permit. Any new permit will be considered an initial registration and require payment of the applicable fee. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-4. - Duties of the alarm company. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the alarm business in the city, except in compliance with: 
(1)  F.S. ch. 489. 
(2)  Obtain and maintain the required state, county and/or city license(s). 
(3)  Be able to provide name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within two hours. 
(4)  Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user. 
(b)  Ninety days after enactment of this ordinance the alarm installation companies shall, on all new and upgraded installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(c)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(d)  Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(e)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Provide alarm user registration number to the communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. 
(4)  Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-5. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Key West Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-6. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms within a permit year may be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
Third, fourth and fifth false alarm ..... $150.00 
Sixth and seventh false alarm ..... 200.00 
Eighth and ninth false alarm ..... 350.00 
Tenth and over false alarms ..... 600.00 
Failure to register ..... 200.00 
(b)  Other civil penalty(ies). Violations other than those listed in paragraph 31-6(a) above shall be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in the amount of $100.00. 
(c)  Payment of civil penalty(ies). Civil penalty(ies) shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)  Civil noncriminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-7. - Alarm user awareness class. 
(a)  Alarm user awareness class. The city may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The city may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying one assessed fine. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and other enforcement decisions made under this ordinance may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Key West Police Department within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty (ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard by the special magistrate or other individual ("hearing officer") hired by the City of Key West to rule upon code compliance citations. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review in the manner provided by law in the circuit court. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. Upon any appellate finding that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the hearing officer may also assess a reasonable administrative fee based upon the evidence produced. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-9. - Confidentiality. 
    To the extent allowed by Florida's public records laws, and in the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 31-10. - Government immunity. 
    Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Key West Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Chapter 34 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; coastal construction and floodplain management codes, § 14-391 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; planning and development, ch. 54; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90; planning and development, ch. 108; policy for flood hazard areas, § 108-821 et seq.; resources protection, ch. 110; floodplain protection, § 110-461 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 13-05, adopted Mar. 19, 2013, repealed art. II, Flood damage prevention, consisting of §§ 34-26-34-121, deriving from the 1986 Code; and Ord. No. 04-11, adopted June 2, 2004. Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 13-05 enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 

Secs. 34-26-34-121. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-122. - General. 
(1)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the floodplain management ordinance of City of Key West, hereinafter referred to as "this ordinance." 
(2)  Scope. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including, but not limited to, the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(3)  Intent. The purposes of this ordinance and the flood load and flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(a)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce/access and public service during times of flooding; 
(b)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(c)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(d)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(g)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(h)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(4)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This ordinance is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(5)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring the city to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this ordinance. 
(6)  Disclaimer of liability. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of city commission of the City of Key West or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-123. - Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Areas to which this ordinance applies. This ordinance shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Key West, as established in section 34-123(4) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Monroe County, Florida, and Incorporated Areas dated February 18, 2005, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this ordinance and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas that have been delineated on the printed FIRM as subject to wave heights between one feet and three feet shall be established as Coastal A Zones. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the FEMA Coordinator/Floodplain Administrator located at the City of Key West Planning Department, Key West, Florida. 
(a)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 34-127 of this ordinance the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida-licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
1.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this ordinance and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(4)  Other laws. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including, but not limited to, land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or, the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This ordinance shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this ordinance. 
(6)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-125. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  Designation. The FEMA Coordinator is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(2)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this ordinance consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this ordinance without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 34-129 of this ordinance. 
(3)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(a)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(b)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance; 
(c)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(d)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(e)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(f)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(g)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code when compliance with this ordinance is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; 
(h)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for building permits for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(4)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, shall: 
(a)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to submit appraisals - not older than one year - of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(b)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(c)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; for proposed work to repair damage caused by flooding, the determination requires evaluation as specified in the definition of "substantial damage"; and 
(d)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this ordinance is required. 
(e)  When determining costs as described in this subsection, pursuant to FEMA desk reference P-758, the floodplain administrator shall include: 
i.  Materials, labor, including the estimated value of donated or discounted materials and owner or volunteer labor as explained in Secs. 4.4.4 & 4.4.5 of FEMA desk reference P-758; 
ii.  Site preparation related to the improvement or repair; 
iii.  Demolition and construction debris disposal as explained in Sec. 4.4.6 of FEMA desk reference P-758; 
iv.  Labor and other costs associated with demolishing, moving, or altering building components to accommodate improvements, additions, and making repairs as explained in Secs. 4.4.6 & 4.4.7 of FEMA desk reference P-758; 
v.  Costs associated with complying with any other regulations or code requirement that is triggered by the work, including costs to comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as explained in Sec. 4.4.8 of FEMA desk reference P-758; 
vi.  Costs associated with elevating a structure when the proposed elevation is lower that the Base Flood Elevation; 
vii.  Construction management supervision; 
viii.  Contractor's overhead and profit; 
ix.  Sales tax on materials; 
x.  Structural elements and exterior finishes; 
xi.  Interior finish elements; 
xii.  Utility and service equipment; 
xiii.  In the event of an owner/builder, paragraphs i through xii shall be estimated as fair market value in the City of Key West; 
(5)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 34-129 of this ordinance. 
(6)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
(7)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 34-128 of this ordinance for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(8)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 34-125(4) of this ordinance; 
(b)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(c)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(d)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code and this ordinance to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete and include photographs that at a minimum show the front and rear of the building and its foundation; 
(e)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of City of Key West are modified; and 
(f)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(9)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this ordinance and the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this ordinance; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this ordinance and the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the City of Key West Planning Department, Key West, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 34-126. - Permits. 
(1)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this ordinance, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(2)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this ordinance for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(a)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this ordinance: 
1.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
2.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
3.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
4.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
5.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
6.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
7.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
8.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
b.  In accordance with "Appendix G" of the current Florida Building Code. 
(3)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(a)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(b)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(c)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(d)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 34-127 of this ordinance. 
(e)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(f)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(g)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(h)  Applications utilizing the Building Height Exception under section 122-1149, requires specific floodplain approval ensuring enclosures below Base Flood Elevation do not exceed 299 square feet, and remain subject to the usage limitations specified in section 1612 of the Florida Building Code. 
(4)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this ordinance shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this ordinance, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(5)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(6)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(7)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(b)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(c)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(d)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(e)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(f)  For properties identified by the U.S. Wildlife Service on FEMA's species focus area maps and/or RE list as potentially containing suitable habitat for specific endangered species, the U.S. Wildlife Service shall first render its approval and/or conditions. 
(g)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 34-127. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(1)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this ordinance shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(a)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(b)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance section 34-127(2)(b) or (c) of this ordinance. 
(c)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 34-127(2) of this ordinance. 
(d)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(e)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(f)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(g)  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(h)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(i)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this ordinance but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(a)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(b)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(c)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
1.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
2.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(d)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida-licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(3)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida-licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(a)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 34-127(4) of this ordinance. 
(b)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(4)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida-licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-128. - Inspections. 
(1)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(a)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(b)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
1.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida-licensed professional surveyor; or 
b.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 34-127(2)(c)2. of this ordinance, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 34-128(1)(b)1. of this ordinance. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-129. - Variances and appeals. 
(1)  General. The planning board shall hear and decide on requests for variances from the strict application of this ordinance. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the planning board shall hear and decide on requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(2)  Appeals. The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The planning board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 34-129(6) of this ordinance, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 34-129(7) of this ordinance, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The planning board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance. 
(4)  Historic buildings. For structures listed on the city historic preservation survey, exemption variance from the flood-resistant construction/elevation requirements is authorized for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for exception under the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The proposed repair, improvement, addition, development or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the work is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building, and 
(b)  Machinery, power distribution panels and other equipment subject to damage from floodwaters shall be elevated at or above the base flood elevation, except that, 
1.  Pursuant to the historic architectural review commission's guidelines, the commission or its staff may exempt such equipment or machinery from compliance with subsection (b) above, when it is determined that compliance with that elevation requirement conflicts with the intent of preserving a structure's historic fabric and/or character. 
(5)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this ordinance, is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this ordinance, considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(6)  Considerations for issuance of variance. In reviewing requests for variances, the planning board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this ordinance, and the following: 
(a)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(d)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(e)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(f)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(g)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(h)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(i)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(j)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(7)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(a)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this ordinance or the required elevation standards; 
(b)  Determination by the planning board that: 
1.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
2.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
3.  The variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this ordinance, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(c)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(d)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-130. - Violations. 
(1)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this ordinance, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(2)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(3)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-131. - Definitions, general. 
(1)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(2)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(3)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-132. - Definitions, specific. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance, or a request for a variance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled "Flood Resistant Design and Construction" that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Building. (See structure) 
    Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. [Note: The FBC, B defines and uses the term "flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" and the FBC, R uses the term "coastal high hazard areas."] 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
2.  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Dry floodproofing. See floodproofing, dry. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 5, 1974. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 5, 1974. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
2.  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this ordinance. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodproofing, Dry. Floodproofing method used to render a structure envelope substantially impermeable to the entrance of floodwater, outside of type "V" flood zones. 
    Floodproofing, Wet. The permanent or contingent measures applied to a structure and/or its contents that prevent or provide resistance to damage from flooding by allowing flood waters to enter the structure. 
    Flood damage resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters, without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letter of map change include: 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
1.  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
2.  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
3.  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this ordinance, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance and the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 5, 1974 (or date as may subsequently be modified by FEMA) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 5, 1974. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01] 
    Public restrooms in SFHAs. "Public restroom" in a special flood hazard area is a structure designed and constructed to meet the sanitary needs of the public when visiting coastal and non-coastal properties. Such structures may include toilet rooms, changing rooms, shower stalls, required plumbing including backflow preventers, a minimum service drop for electrical equipment for lighting and receptacles, grinder pumps. Public restrooms shall provide the above elements only, and may also be called "comfort stations", "bath houses" or "bathrooms". Public restrooms shall be designed and constructed to withstand hydrodynamic, hydrostatic and wave load impacts, and extended periods of flood inundation. Such structures shall meet or exceed the NFIP, IBC, FBC and the ASCE/SEI24-05 standards for construction in A zones and V zones when constructed either above or below BFE. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01) 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA). Land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year; area delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AE, A1-30, A99, AR, AO, AH, Coastal A, V, VO, VE, or V1-30. 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Structure. For floodplain management purposes: 
A structure with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; or 
A manufactured home (a "manufactured home," also known as a mobile home, is a structure built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or 
A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. 
A gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, which is known as a "repetitive loss." Accumulated deterioration or decay contributes toward substantial damage. 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement or alteration of a building or structure, taking place during a five-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the five-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to 1986. The five-year period is extended if the improvements are not completed within this time, until all the improvements pass all final inspections. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. Structures that have been moved, or structures that have new, replaced, or substantially modified foundations are considered to be substantially improved. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified and cited by a duly authorized city official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, if cited prior to a Building Permit Application. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to section 34-129 of this ordinance, unless the building has been moved or the foundation replaced. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, or the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
    Wet Floodproofing. See Floodproofing, Wet. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-07, § 3, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-07, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 34-133. - Flood-resistant development; buildings and structures. 
(1)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to section 34-126(2)(a) of this ordinance, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood-resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 34-139 of this ordinance. 
(2)  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(a)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(b)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this ordinance and ASCE 24. 
(3)  Public restrooms. 
(a)  Not structurally connected to another structure. 
(b)  Are permitted below the elevations specified in ASCE-24, Table 4-1, if constructed in accordance with the provision of this public restrooms section. 
(c)  Piles, pile caps, footings, mat or raft foundations, grade beams, columns and shear walls designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE/SEI 24-05, Section 4.5 shall not be required to meet the elevation requirements of ASCE-24, Table 4-1. 
(d)  Public restroom foundations must be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE/SEI 24-05, Section 4.5, to minimize forces acting on that system. 
(e)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be reasonably safe from flood damage: 
(i)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(ii)  Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(iii)  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and designed to account for the following: 
(1)  Waves breaking against the side or underside of the structure; 
(2)  Drag, inertia, and other wave-induced forces acting on structural members supporting elevated structures; 
(3)  Uplift forces from breaking waves striking the undersides of structures; 
(4)  Wave run-up forces including those deflected by the structure; and 
(5)  Erosion and scour. 
(6)  The structure must be protected to the maximum extent possible using an appropriate alternative flood protection technique, such as wet floodproofing provided that such structures represent a minimal investment and are designed to have a low damage potential with respect to the structure and contents. 
(7)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify the design and methods of construction to be used. 
iv.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(f)  Materials used in new construction in flood hazard areas shall have sufficient strength, rigidity, and durability to adequately resist all flood-related and other loads during installation. 
(g)  Plumbing systems shall be designed and constructed to withstand flood waters and to prevent contamination of surface waters in accordance with the provisions of ASCE/SEI 24-05, Section 7.3. 
(4)  Appliances. 
(a)  Appliances servicing a building, to be replaced or substantially repaired more than 50 percent of its salvage value, shall be installed at a minimum height of design flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-07, § 4, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 34-134. - Subdivisions. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(a)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed buildings and structures. 
(2)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(a)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
(b)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 34-127(2)(a) of this ordinance; and 
(c)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 34-135 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-135. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(a)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed buildings and structures. 
(2)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(3)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
[(4)]  [Reserved.] 
(5)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this ordinance, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(6)  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 34-127(3)(b) of this ordinance demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 34-139(8)(c) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-136. - Manufactured homes. 
(1)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this ordinance. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(2)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(a)  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this ordinance. 
(b)  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this ordinance. 
(3)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(4)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 34-136(4)(a) or (b) of this ordinance, as applicable. 
(a)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of section 34-136(4)(b) of this ordinance, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(b)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 34-136(4)(a) of this ordinance, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation. 
(5)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(6)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(7)  [Manufactured homes.] Manufactured homes are prohibited in coastal high hazard areas and coastal A zones. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-137. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(1)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(2)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 34-136(1) of this ordinance for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 34-136 of this ordinance for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-138. - Tanks. 
(1)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(2)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 34-138(3) of this ordinance shall: 
(a)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(b)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(3)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(4)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(a)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(b)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-139. - Other development. 
(1)  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(a)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(c)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(d)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(2)  [ Elevators. ] Elevators located within regulated flood zones shall have a default cab return to any floor at or above the design flood elevation. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(a)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(b)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(c)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
(6)  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(a)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(b)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(c)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(d)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(7)  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(b)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(c)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(8)  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
(a)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(b)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(c)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-07, § 5, 5-17-2016) 
Chapter 38 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; housing authority, § 2-351 et seq.; personnel policy, ch. 50; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Required information for housing, § 108-245; affordable housing, § 122-1466 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fair housing, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the housing authority designated as the fair housing board established by section 38-116. 
    Director means the fair housing director established by section 38-86. 
    Discrimination means any difference in treatment based on race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, national origin, handicap, familial status, or place of birth. 
    Executive director means the executive director of the housing authority and the fair housing board. 
    Gender identity or expression means having or being perceived as having a gender-related self-identity, self-image, appearance, expression or behavior whether or not such gender-related characteristics differ from those associated with the person's assigned sex at birth. 
    Housing, housing accommodation and dwelling mean any building, mobile home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction thereon of any such building, mobile home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof or any real property, as defined in this section used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this definition. 
    Lending institution and financial institution include any person engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
    Mortgage broker means an individual who is engaged in or performs the business or services of a mortgage broker as defined by state law. 
    Open market means the market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or mortgage broker, or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising or other methods directed to the public or any portion thereof indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
    Owner includes a lessee, sublessee, cotenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, governments, governmental agencies, governmental departments, governmental programs, political subdivisions, labor unions, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
    Real estate broker and real estate salesperson include any individual who, for a fee, commission, salary, or for other valuable consideration, with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting a fee, commission, salary, or other valuable consideration, lists, sells, purchases, rents, or leases any housing accommodation including options thereupon; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities; who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodations; or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for a collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real property includes buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1986, § 72.02; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-7-2003) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-27. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health, and general welfare to ensure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin, and to that end to eliminate discrimination in housing. 
(Code 1986, § 72.01) 
Sec. 38-28. - Unlawful practices. 
    In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which affects any housing operation on the open market or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall be unlawful within the city for a person, owner, financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesperson, or any representative of such to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person or evict a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(4)  Evict or refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(5)  Represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so available or refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin when such dwelling is in fact available to persons who are financially qualified; 
(6)  Make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be made, published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed any notice, statement or advertisement or announce a policy or sign or use a form of application for a sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation, or make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation, which indicates any discrimination or any intent to discriminate; 
(7)  Offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or lease knowing that a person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale, purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(8)  Induce or discourage or attempt to induce or discourage (i) the sale; (ii) the purchase; (iii) the rental; (iv) the lease or (v) the listing for items (i), (ii), or (iv) of this subsection of any housing accommodations in an area, by means of: 
a.  Causing panic; 
b.  Inciting unrest; or 
c.  Creating or playing upon fear, by representing that the presence or anticipated presence in that area of persons of any particular race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, physical handicap or national origin, will or may result in: 
1.  The lowering of property values in that area; 
2.  The increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or 
3.  A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area; 
(9)  For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loans or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; or 
(10)  Deny any person who is otherwise professionally qualified by state law access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, place of birth, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 1986, § 72.05; Ord. No. 03-02, § 2, 1-7-2003) 
Secs. 38-29-38-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 38-56. - Responsibility. 
    The city commission shall be responsible for the administration of this article and for seeing that its provisions are observed and enforced. The city commission is empowered to make all necessary rules to accomplish this responsibility, which rules shall not become effective until approved, and, by rule, to delegate administrative and investigative authority to the fair housing board. The city commission is directed and authorized to seek substantial equivalency rating and recognition from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and other necessary federal agencies for title VIII of the 1968 Civil Rights Act enforcement within the general services district. 
(Code 1986, § 72.03) 
Sec. 38-57. - Cooperation with federal, state and local agencies administering fair housing laws. 
    The city commission may cooperate with state, federal and other local agencies charged with the consent of such agencies, utilize the services of such agencies and their employees in carrying out this article. In furtherance of such cooperative efforts, the city commission may enter into written agreement with such local, state and federal agencies to make available such appropriated funds as are necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, but all such agreements shall be executed by the mayor and city clerk and countersigned by the executive director of the fair housing board. 
(Code 1986, § 72.04) 
Secs. 38-58-38-85. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Fair Housing Director[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 

Sec. 38-86. - Office created, appointment. 
    The office and position of fair housing director is created and established. The director shall be appointed by and shall serve at the will of the executive director of the housing authority. Such director shall be chosen by the executive director on the basis of qualifications and experience. The fair housing director shall serve under the supervision of the executive director. 
(Code 1986, § 72.06) 
Sec. 38-87. - Assistants. 
    The executive director shall appoint such assistants to the fair housing director as may be necessary, subject to budgetary limitations, and shall provide the director required administrative support. 
(Code 1986, § 72.06) 
Sec. 38-88. - Duties and powers. 
    The duties, functions, powers and responsibilities of the fair housing director shall be to: 
(1)  Implement the this article and rules and regulations promulgated under this article and all city ordinances, codes, rules and regulations pertaining to housing discrimination. 
(2)  Receive, initiate and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of this article and take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent and/or initiate prosecution of any such violations. 
(3)  Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal housing opportunity. 
(4)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing discrimination. 
(5)  Subject to the approval of the fair housing board and the city commission, enter into written working agreements, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article, with federal, state, and county agencies involved in reducing housing discrimination. 
(6)  Keep the fair housing board fully and currently informed of all complaints alleging violations of this article and actions taken thereon and of other actions taken by the director under this section; and attend all meetings of the fair housing board. 
(7)  Implement recommendations received from the fair housing board concerning this article and in carrying out its purpose. When, in the opinion of the director, effectuating any such recommendation would be undesirable or infeasible, he will promptly so report to the board, with his reasons; any differences of judgment not susceptible to agreement between the board and director will be referred to the executive director for his determination, and the board may, if it feels the matter warrants, further carry any such disagreement to the city commission for decision. 
(8)  Make semiannual reports to the city commission, through the executive director, and to the fair housing board concerning the status of housing discrimination in the city and the enforcement of this article, and make recommendations concerning methods by which to reduce such discrimination. 
(9)  Perform such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the executive director. 
(Code 1986, § 72.07) 
Secs. 38-89-38-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Fair Housing Board[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 38-116. - Created, appointment of members. 
    The fair housing board is created and established. The housing authority is designated as the fair housing board and shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(a)) 
Sec. 38-117. - Qualifications of members. 
    Members of the fair housing board shall be permanent residents and electors of the city. Appointments shall be made on the basis of community representatives, civic pride, integrity, experience and interest in the area of equal housing opportunities. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(b)) 
Sec. 38-118. - Terms of office. 
    The terms of office of all members of the fair housing board shall be the same as for the housing authority as stipulated in F.S. § 421.05. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(c)) 
Sec. 38-119. - Organization. 
(a)  The members of the fair housing board shall elect the chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary or desirable, who will serve at the will of the board. 
(b)  Three members of the board constitute a quorum to hold a meeting or take any action. The majority vote of those present at a duly constituted meeting shall be sufficient for all actions. 
(c)  Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties upon approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(d)) 
Sec. 38-120. - Meetings; assistance. 
(a)  Meetings of the fair housing board shall be held monthly or more frequently. Notice of the time and place of the meetings shall be given to all board members and all parties scheduled to be heard and shall be made public. The chairperson may call an unscheduled meeting, and meetings may also be called by written notice signed by three members of the board. All meetings shall be public. 
(b)  The executive director shall provide adequate and competent clerical and administrative personnel, technical and legal personnel, and administrative and professional support as may reasonably be required by the board for the proper performance of its duties. The executive director of the housing authority shall provide a regular meeting place for the board. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(e)) 
Sec. 38-121. - Executive director. 
    The executive director of the housing authority shall perform as the executive director of the fair housing board and is responsible for providing administrative services and facilities for the enforcement of this article utilizing funds provided by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 72.08(f)) 
Sec. 38-122. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The fair housing board shall have the duty, power, function, and responsibility to: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the fair housing director for the enforcement of this article and for carrying out its purpose. 
(2)  Review the fair housing director's actions and decisions on all complaints of housing discrimination received by or initiated by him. 
(3)  Conduct public hearings and make determinations concerning the fair housing director's actions and decisions on such complaints upon appeal by either the complainant or respondent, at the request of the fair housing director, or when the board deems it desirable, on its own initiative. 
(4)  Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued by the chairperson of the board. 
(5)  Review and comment on the fair housing director's semiannual report, forwarding such comment to the city commission through the executive director. 
(6)  In coordination with the fair housing director, take other informational, educational, or persuasive actions to implement the purpose of this article. 
(b)  In carrying out the functions of subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section, the board shall have the power to uphold, rescind, reverse, or modify the actions, decisions, and recommendations of the fair housing director. 
(Code 1986, § 72.09) 
Secs. 38-123-38-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPLAINT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 38-151. - Computation of time. 
    The provisions of F.A.C. 1.090 shall govern the computation of any period of time prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(j)) 
Sec. 38-152. - Service of papers or pleadings. 
    All papers or pleadings required by this article to be served may be served by certified mail or in accordance with the provisions of F.A.C. 1.080(b). 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(k)) 
Sec. 38-153. - Filing of complaint. 
    Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article must file a written complaint with the fair housing director within 45 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurs. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(a)) 
Sec. 38-154. - Service of complaint. 
    Upon receipt of a complaint made pursuant to this division, the fair housing director shall serve upon the individual charged with a violation (referred to as "the respondent") the complaint and a written resume setting forth the rights of the parties, including but not limited to the right of the respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by the fair housing board. Such service may be by personal service or by certified mail. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(b)) 
Sec. 38-155. - Investigation and report. 
(a)  The fair housing director shall immediately investigate the complaint made pursuant to this division. Within 60 days from the date of the receipt of the complaint, the director shall file a written report with the fair housing board, with findings of fact. 
(b)  Copies of the director's report shall also be sent to the complainant and the respondent. Either may, within ten days after such services, request a hearing before the board. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(c), (d)) 
Sec. 38-156. - Scheduling of hearing. 
    When the fair housing director, the complainant, or the respondent requests a hearing by the fair housing board or when the board itself determines that a hearing is desirable, the board shall call and conduct such hearing in accordance with section 38-161. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(e)) 
Sec. 38-157. - Review of report without hearing. 
    Where no fair housing board hearing is requested or directed under this division, the board will expeditiously review the report of the fair housing director and shall approve, rescind, reverse, or modify the director's findings and determinations of action. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(f)) 
Sec. 38-158. - Execution of actions. 
    The fair housing director shall carry into execution the actions specified in his report made pursuant to this article, as approved or altered by the fair housing board in its review, or, if a hearing is held, shall carry into execution the actions determined upon by the board in the hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(g)) 
Sec. 38-159. - Determinations. 
(a)  The fair housing director in his report, as reviewed by the fair housing board, or the board in its review or its hearing may determine: 
(1)  The complaint lacks grounds upon which to base action for a violation of this article; 
(2)  The complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties; 
(3)  The complaint can be dealt with by adjudicative orders issued by the director; or 
(4)  The case warrants filing charges against the offending party in the appropriate court. 
(b)  In some cases, both conciliation and adjudicative orders and initiation of court action may be indicated. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(h)) 
Sec. 38-160. - Failure to comply. 
    If the fair housing director, after review or hearing by the fair housing board, issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, conciliate, prevent, or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this article and the respondent refuses or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the director shall forthwith request that the state attorney file a complaint in the appropriate court. 
(Code 1986, § 72.10(i)) 
Sec. 38-161. - Hearings. 
(a)  When a hearing is required before the fair housing board, as specified in section 32-156, the board shall schedule the hearing and serve upon all interested parties a notice of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held promptly, but not less than 15 days after the service of such notice and of the fair housing director's written report as provided in section 38-155(b). 
(b)  The parties or their authorized counsel may file such statements with the board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. The parties may appear before the board in person or by duly constituted representative and may have the assistance of attorneys. The parties may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross examine witnesses shall be preserved. All testimony shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity, but due process shall be observed. The board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which record shall be public and open to inspection by any person. Upon request by any principal party to the proceedings, the director shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at cost. The constitutional rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself shall be scrupulously observed. 
(c)  The board shall make a finding of fact and a determination of action to be taken under section 38-159. 
(d)  The board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to the complaint at issue. 
(e)  Upon written application to the board, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the board, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the city commission itself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(f)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the board shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the state courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of the respondent shall be paid by him, unless he is indigent, in which case the city shall bear the cost of the fees. 
(g)  Within ten days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The board shall grant the petition if it finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance, at any unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that is does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h)  If a person refuses to obey a subpoena, the board or the person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Code 1986, § 72.11) 
Sec. 38-162. - Additional remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 72.12) 
Sec. 38-163. - Report of violation or failure to comply with order to state. 
    If a real estate broker, a real estate salesperson, or an employee thereof has been found to have committed an unlawful practice in violation of this article or has failed to comply with an order issued by the fair housing director, the director shall, in addition to the other procedures and penalties set forth in this article, report the facts to the state real estate commission. 
(Code 1986, § 72.13) 
Secs. 38-164-38-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISCRIMINATION GENERALLY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-191. - Title. 
    This article may be cited as the "Key West Human Rights Ordinance." 
(Code 1986, § 72.24) 
Sec. 38-192. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bona fide occupational qualification means that an employer can demonstrate that a particular characteristic or the absence thereof is reasonably necessary to the essence of the employer's business and that all or substantially all persons with or without the characteristic, as the case may be, are unable to perform the duties of the position in question. 
    Credit transaction means the grant, denial, extension or termination of credit to an individual. 
    Disability means: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of such impairment; or 
(3)  The perception of having such an impairment. 
The term does not include persons who have current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined by F.S. § 893.02, as enacted or amended. A disabled individual is "qualified" with respect to employment if such individual can perform the essential functions of the job in question with reasonable accommodations. As used in this definition, the term "major life activities" means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. As used in this division, the term "substantially limited" means likely to experience difficulty in securing, retaining or advancing in employment because of a disability. 
    Employee means an individual who is engaged to work for or under the direction and control of another for monetary or other valuable consideration. 
    Employer means any person employing 15 or more employees for each working day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and any agent of such person, but such term does not include the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States. 
    Employment agency means a person who undertakes to procure employees or opportunities to work for potential employees, either through interviews, referrals, advertising or any combination thereof. 
    Gender identity or expression means having or being perceived as having a gender-related self-identity, self-image, appearance, expression or behavior whether or not such gender-related characteristics differ from those associated with the person's assigned sex at birth. 
    Labor organization means any person who exists and is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of representing employees in dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment. 
    Marital status means the legal status of being single, married, divorced, separated or widowed. 
    Parental status means the status of living with one or more dependent minor or disabled children. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, corporation, labor organization, partnership or other organization, association or group however organized. 
    Public accommodation means a place, business establishment or agency that sells, leases, provides or offers any product, facility or service to the general public, regardless of ownership or operation: 
(1)  By a public body or agency; 
(2)  For or without regard to profit; or 
(3)  For a fee or not for a fee. 
An institution, club, association or other place of accommodation which has more than 100 members and provides regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, accommodations, facilities or services from or on behalf of nonmembers for the furtherance of trade or business shall be considered a place of public accommodation for purposes of this article. 
    Religion means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief. 
    Sexual harassment means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for any employment decision affecting the individual; or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
    Sexual orientation means the actual or perceived state of heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. 
    Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual supports himself and his dependents. 
(Code 1986, § 72.25; Ord. No. 03-02, § 3, 1-7-2003) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-193. - Penalties; enforcement by civil action. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall, upon written citation, be subject to the penalties provided in article VI of chapter 2. 
(b)  This article may additionally be enforced by civil action, including action for equitable relief, by any aggrieved person in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 72.27) 
Sec. 38-194. - Construction of article; alternative remedies. 
    The sections of this article shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of the purpose of this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit rights granted under the laws of the state or the United States. Nothing in this article shall be construed to waive the right of any person to file a charge with any agency with the authority to investigate or act upon the complaint. 
(Code 1986, § 72.29) 
Sec. 38-195. - Unlawful waiver. 
    Any written or oral agreement which purports to waive any section of division 2 of this article is against public policy and void. 
(Code 1986, § 72.28) 
Secs. 38-196-38-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 

Sec. 38-221. - Conditions of or for employment. 
    No person shall directly or indirectly discriminate against any individual in hiring, classification, grading, discharge, discipline, compensation or other term or condition of employment because of the individual's race, color, sex, gender identity or expression, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, or source of income. No employment agency shall directly or indirectly discriminate against any individual in classification, processing, referral or recommendation for employment because of the individual's race, color, sex, gender identity or expression, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, or source of income. The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Using an individual's unfavorable discharge from military service as a valid employment criterion where the affected position of employment involves the exercise of fiduciary responsibilities and the reasons for the unfavorable discharge relate to his fiduciary capacity. 
(2)  Hiring or selecting between individuals for bona fide occupational qualifications. 
(3)  Giving preferential treatment to veterans and their relatives as required by federal or state law or regulation. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(a); Ord. No. 03-02, § 4, 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 38-222. - Sexual harassment. 
    No employer, employee, agent of an employer, employment agency, or labor organization shall engage in sexual harassment. An employer shall be liable for sexual harassment by nonemployees or nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(b)) 
Sec. 38-223. - Religious beliefs, observances and practices of employee. 
(a)  No employer shall refuse to make all reasonable efforts to accommodate the religious beliefs, observances and practices of an employee unless the employer demonstrates that the employer is unable to reasonably accommodate the employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business. Reasonable efforts to accommodate include but are not limited to allowing an employee to: 
(1)  Take a day of paid leave or vacation, where applicable under the employee's employment agreement; 
(2)  Be excused from work without pay and without discipline or other penalty; or 
(3)  Elect to take the day off with pay in order to practice the employee's religious beliefs, and make up the lost work time within the same pay period of the employer at a time and date consistent with the operational need of the employer's business. 
(b)  Any employee who elects such deferred work shall be compensated at his regular rate of pay, regardless of the time and date at which the work is made up. The employer may require that any employee who plans to exercise the option in subsection (a)(3) of this section provide the employer with notice of the employee's intention to do so no less than ten days prior to the date of absence. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(c)) 
Sec. 38-224. - Credit transactions and bonding. 
    No person shall discriminate against any individual in any aspect of any credit transaction or in any terms and conditions of bonding because of the individual's race, color, sex, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, or source of income. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(d)) 
Sec. 38-225. - Public accommodations. 
    No person who owns, leases, rents, operates, manages or in any manner controls a public accommodation shall withhold, deny, curtail, limit or discriminate concerning the full use of such public accommodation by any individual because of the individual's race, color, sex, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, or source of income. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which is distinctly private in nature, such as restrooms, shower rooms, and dressing rooms. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(e)) 
Sec. 38-226. - Retaliation. 
    No person shall retaliate against any individual because that individual in good faith has made a charge, has testified or has assisted or participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(f)) 
Sec. 38-227. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No section of this article shall be construed to prohibit restricting rental or sale of housing accommodation to a person of a certain age group when: 
(1)  Such housing accommodation is authorized, approved, financed or subsidized in whole or in part for the benefit of the age group by a unit of state, local or federal government; 
(2)  Such restriction is allowed pursuant to the Fair Housing Act, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. or 42 USC 3601 et seq.; or 
(3)  The duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or association limits such housing accommodations to persons above a certain age, provided that a person or the immediate family of a person owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of the age restriction as long as the person or the person's immediate family continues to own or reside in the housing accommodation. 
(b)  No section of this article shall apply to a person or owner who wishes to rent a portion of a single dwelling unit to an individual of the same sex when such persons live in the single dwelling unit. 
(Code 1986, § 72.26(g)) 
Secs. 38-228-38-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIDS DISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 38-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AIDS means infection with or seropositivity to the virus known as human immunodeficiency virus, and includes conditions including but not limited to AIDS-related complex (ARC), progressive generalized lymphadenopathy syndrome, and any other medical condition which a person contracts as a result of infection with such virus. 
    Business establishment means any entity, however organized, which furnishes goods or services to the general public; provided, however, that an otherwise qualifying establishment which has membership requirements is considered to furnish services to the general public if its membership requirements consist: 
(1)  Only of payment of fees; 
(2)  Of requirements under which a substantial portion of the city residents could qualify; or 
(3)  Of an otherwise unlawful business practice. 
    Employer means any person regularly employing one or more persons or any person acting as an agent or the legal representative of an employer, directly or indirectly, including the city. 
    Employment agency means any person undertaking for compensation to procure employees or opportunities to work. 
    Housing services means services connected with the use or occupancy of a rental unit including but not limited to utilities, including light, heat, water and telephone; ordinary repairs or replacement; maintenance, including painting; provision of elevator service; laundry facilities and privileges; common recreational facilities; janitor service; resident manager; refuse removal; furnishings; food service; parking; and any other benefits, privileges or facilities. 
    Labor organization means any organization which exists and is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employees concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection. 
    Person and anyone mean any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or a group, however organized. 
    Rent means the consideration, including any bonus, benefits or gratuity, demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use or occupancy of a rental unit, including but not limited to monies demanded or paid for the following: meals where required by the landlord as a condition of the tenancy; parking; furnishings; other housing services of any kind; subletting; or security deposits. 
    Rental units means all dwelling units, efficiency dwelling units, guestrooms, and suites rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes; the land and buildings appurtenant thereto; and all housing services, privileges, furnishings and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, including garage and parking facilities. This term does not include housing accommodations which a government unit, agency or authority owns, operates, or manages and which are specifically exempted from municipal regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation. 
(Code 1986, § 72.14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-257. - Employment practices. 
(a)  Unlawful employment practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer, employment agency or labor organization or any agent or employee thereof to do or attempt to do any of the following as a result of the fact, in whole or in part, that a person has AIDS or associated conditions: 
(1)  Fail or refuse to hire, discharge any person, or otherwise discriminate against any person with respect to compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment. 
(2)  Limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for employment in any manner which would deprive or tend to deprive any person of employment opportunities, or adversely affect his employment status. 
(3)  Fail or refuse to refer for employment any person, or otherwise discriminate against any person. 
(4)  Fail or refuse to include in its membership or otherwise discriminate against any person; limit, segregate or classify its membership; or classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any person in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive such person of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect such person's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment. 
(5)  Discriminate against any person in admission to or employment in any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including any on-the-job training program. 
(b)  Bona fide occupational qualification. Procedures for a bona fide occupational qualification and the burden of proof shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit selection, rejection or dismissal based upon a bona fide occupational qualification. A bona fide occupational qualification exists under this section where a defendant can demonstrate that the absence of AIDS is reasonably necessary to the essence of the employer's business and that all or substantially all persons with AIDS are unable to perform the duties of the position in question without harm to themselves or others. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit selection, rejection, or assignment where, because a person has AIDS, he is unable to perform his duties or cannot perform such duties in a manner which would not endanger his health or safety or the health and safety of others. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit selection or rejection where it can be demonstrated that the employer, employment agency or labor organization is unable to reasonably accommodate a person who has AIDS, without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business. 
(4)  In any action brought under this subsection, if a party asserts that an otherwise unlawful discriminatory practice is justified as a bona fide occupational qualification, that party shall have the burden of proving that: 
a.  The discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a bona fide occupational qualification; and 
b.  There exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the occupational qualification. 
(c)  Exceptions. It shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to observe the conditions of a bona fide employee benefit system, provided such system or plan is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of this section, provided that no such system shall provide an excuse for failure to hire any person. 
(Code 1986, § 72.15) 
Sec. 38-258. - Housing. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person having a housing accommodation for rent or lease or for any authorized agent or employee of such person to do or attempt to do any of the following acts as a result of the fact, in whole or in part, that a person has AIDS or associated conditions: 
(1)  Refuse to rent or lease a rental unit, refuse to negotiate for the rental or lease of a rental unit, evict from a rental unit, or otherwise deny to or withhold a rental unit from any person. 
(2)  Rent or lease a rental unit on less favorable terms, conditions or privileges, or discriminate in the provision of housing services to any person. 
(3)  Represent to any person that a rental unit is not available for inspection, rental or lease when such rental unit is, in fact, available. 
(4)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, sign, advertisement, application, or contract with regard to a rental unit that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(b)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the rental or leasing of any housing unit in which the owner or lessor or any member of his family occupies the same living unit in common with the prospective tenant. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit any rental or occupancy of any dwelling unit or commercial space otherwise prohibited by law. 
(c)  Defense. The health and safety exception set forth in section 38-261 shall constitute a defense to any violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 72.16) 
Sec. 38-259. - Business establishments. 
(a)  Unlawful practices. It shall be an unlawful business practice for any person to deny any individual the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of any business establishment, including but not limited to medical, dental, health care and convalescent services of any kind whatsoever; restaurants; motels; hotels; and ambulance services on the basis that such person has the medical condition AIDS or an AIDS-related condition. It shall further be an unlawful practice for any person to make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, sign, advertisement, application, or contract with regard to such businesses that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination with respect to the fact that a person has the medical condition AIDS or an AIDS-related condition. 
(b)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall apply to any blood bank, blood donation facility, sperm bank, sperm donation facility, surrogate mother or surrogate mother facility, or to any like service facility or establishment engaged in the exchange of products containing elements of blood or sperm. 
(c)  Defense. The health and safety exception set forth in section 38-261 shall constitute a defense to any violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 72.17) 
Sec. 38-260. - City facilities and services. 
(a)  Unlawful practices. It shall be an unlawful practice for any person to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of or to impose different terms and conditions on the availability of any of the following as a result of the fact, in whole or in part, that a person has AIDS or associated conditions: 
(1)  Use of any city facility or city service. 
(2)  Any service, program or facility wholly or partially funded or otherwise supported by the city. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to any facility, service or program which does not receive any assistance from the city or which is not provided to the public generally. 
(c)  Defense. The health and safety exception set forth in section 38-261 shall constitute a defense to any violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 72.18) 
Sec. 38-261. - Health and safety exception, defense. 
    The affirmative defense described in this article shall be applicable to sections 38-258 through 38-260. In any action brought under sections 38-258 through 38-260, if a party asserts that an otherwise unlawful discriminatory practice is justified as necessary to protect the health or safety of a person who has AIDS or associated conditions or the health and safety of the general public, that party may establish a defense by proving that: 
(1)  The discriminatory act is necessary to avoid an imminent and substantial risk to the person who has AIDS or associated conditions; or 
(2)  The discriminatory act is necessary to avoid a danger to others significantly greater than that posed by persons without AIDS; and 
(3)  There exists no less discriminatory means of protecting health and safety. 
(Code 1986, § 72.19) 
Sec. 38-262. - Subterfuge. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice to do any of the acts mentioned in sections 38-257 through 38-260 for any reason which would not have been asserted, wholly or partially, but for the fact that the person against whom such assertions are made has AIDS or any condition related thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 72.20) 
Sec. 38-263. - Enforcement by civil action. 
    Sections 38-257 through 38-260 and 38-262 shall be enforceable solely by civil action, including action for equitable relief, by any aggrieved person or by the city attorney, in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 72.21) 
Sec. 38-264. - Unlawful waiver. 
    Any written or oral agreement which purports to waive any section of sections 38-257 through 38-260 is against public policy and void. 
(Code 1986, § 72.22) 
Secs. 38-265-38-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS 

Sec. 38-291. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Committed relationship means a family relationship, intended to be of indefinite duration, between two individuals characterized by mutual caring and the sharing of a mutual residence. 
    Declaration of registered domestic partnership means the document that is filed with the city clerk's office according to the procedures established in section 38-292. 
    Dependent is a person who resides within the household of a registered domestic partnership and is: 
(1)  A biological, adopted, or foster child of a registered domestic partner; or 
(2)  A dependent as defined under IRS regulations; or 
(3)  A ward of a registered domestic partner as determined in a guardianship or other legal proceeding. 
    Mutual residence means that the registered domestic partners share the same place to live. It is not necessary that the legal right to possess the place of residence be in both of their names. Two people may share a mutual residence even if one or both have additional places to live. Registered domestic partners do not cease to share a mutual residence if one leaves the shared place but intends to return. 
    Registered domestic partnership means [a] committed relationship between two persons who consider themselves to be a member of each other's immediate family and have registered their partnership in accordance with section 38-292. 
(Code 1986, § 72.31; Ord. No. 12-12, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-292. - Registration, amendment, termination and administration procedures. 
(a)  Registration. 
(1)  Declaration of registered domestic partnership. A declaration of registered domestic partnership shall be filed with the city clerk's office and shall contain the names and addresses of the applicants who shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that each partner: 
a.  Is at least 18 years old and competent to contract; 
b.  Is not married to or a member of another registered domestic partnership or civil union with anyone other than the coapplicant; 
c.  Agrees to share the common necessities of life and to be responsible for each other's welfare; 
d.  Shares his or her primary residence with the other; 
e.  Considers himself or herself to be a member of the immediate family of the other partner; and 
f.  Agrees to immediately notify the city clerk's office, in writing, of any change in the status of the registered domestic partnership. 
g.  Agrees to mutually support the other by contributing in some fashion, not necessarily equally, to maintain and support the registered domestic partnership. 
(2)  Each partner agrees to immediately notify the city clerk's office, in writing, if the terms of the registered domestic partnership are no longer applicable or one of the domestic partners wishes to terminate the domestic partnership. 
(b)  Amendment. A registered domestic partner may amend a registered domestic partnership previously filed with the city clerk to show a change in his or her household address or to add or delete dependents. Amendments shall be signed by both members of the registered domestic partnership under penalty of perjury. 
(c)  Termination. 
(1)  Termination statement. A registered domestic partner may terminate the registered domestic partnership by filing a termination statement with the city clerk's office. The person filing the termination statement shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that: 
a.  The registered domestic partnership is to be terminated; and 
b.  If the termination statement is not signed by both registered domestic partners, a copy of the termination statement shall be served, by certified or registered mail, on the other registered domestic partner, and proof of service shall be filed with the city clerk's office. 
(2)  Effective date. The termination shall become effective on the date of filing of the termination statement signed by both registered domestic partners or if the termination statement is not signed by both parties, on the date proof of service is filed with the city clerk's office pursuant to subsection 38-292(c)(1)b., above. 
(3)  Automatic termination. A registered domestic partnership shall automatically terminate in the event that one of the domestic partners dies, marries, or enters into a civil union with someone other than his or her registered domestic partner. 
(d)  Administration. 
(1)  Forms. The city clerk's office shall provide forms for the establishment, amendment, and termination of registered domestic partnerships. 
(2)  Certificate of registered domestic partnership. The city clerk's office shall issue to the registered domestic partners a certificate of registered domestic partnership no later than ten business days after the declaration of registered domestic partnership is filed. 
(3)  Maintain records. The city clerk's office shall maintain copies of the declaration of registered domestic partnerships, any and all amendments thereto, certificates of registered domestic partnership, and termination statements filed by registered domestic partners. 
(4)  Fees. The fee for registering the declaration of registered domestic partnership shall be $50.00, which shall cover all costs of registration. The fee for amending or terminating the declaration of registered domestic partnership shall be $25.00, which shall cover all costs of amendment or termination of the registered domestic partnership. 
(Code 1986, § 72.32; Ord. No. 12-12, § 2, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 38-293. - Rights and legal effect of registered domestic partnership. 
    To the extent not superseded by federal, state, or county law or ordinance, registered domestic partners shall have the following rights: 
(1)  Health care facility visitation. The term "health care facility" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, convalescent facilities, walk-in clinics, doctor's offices, mental health care facilities, and other short and long term facilities located within, or under the jurisdiction of, the City of Key West. All health care facilities operating within the City of Key West shall allow a registered domestic partner the same visitation rights as a spouse (or parent, if the patient is a dependent of the registered domestic partnership) of the patient. A dependent of a registered domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights as a patient's child. 
(2)  Correctional facility visitation rights. The term "correctional facility" includes, but is not limited to, holding cells, jails, and juvenile correction centers of any kind, located within or under the jurisdiction of the City of Key West. A registered domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights at all correctional facilities operating within the City of Key West as a spouse (or parent, if the person in custody is a dependent of the registered domestic partnership) of a person in custody. A dependent shall have the same visitation rights afforded to the child of a person in custody. 
(3)  Health care decisions. This section pertains to decisions concerning both physical and mental health. If a patient lacks the capacity to make a health care decision, the patient's registered domestic partner shall have the same authority as a spouse to make a health care decision for the incapacitated party. If the patient is a dependent of the registered domestic partnership, the registered domestic partners shall have the same authority to make health care decisions as a parent; however, if a biological parent of a minor dependent, whose parental rights have not been terminated, is available, willing, and competent to make the health care decision, the biological parents' authority to make health care decisions on behalf of the minor shall supersede that of a registered domestic partner who is not the biological parent of the minor dependent. 
(4)  Participation in education. A registered domestic partner shall have the same rights to participate in the education of a dependent of the registered domestic partnership as a parent to participate in the education of their child, in all educational facilities located within or under the jurisdiction of the City of Key West. This includes the right of a registered domestic partner to participate in the home schooling of a dependent in accordance with Florida law. 
(5)  Funeral/burial decisions. Following the death of a registered domestic partner, the surviving partner shall have the same rights to make decisions with regard to funeral/burial decisions and disposition of the decedent's body as a surviving spouse. 
(6)  Notification of family members. In any situation providing for mandatory or permissible notification of family members, including, but not limited to, notification of family members in an emergency, or when permission is granted to inmates to contact family members, "notification of family" shall include registered domestic partners. 
(7)  Preneed guardian designation. Any person who is registered as a registered domestic partner pursuant to this article shall have the same right as any other individual to be designated as a preneed guardian pursuant to F.S. § 744.3045, and to serve in such capacity in the event of his or her declarant registered domestic partner's incapacity. A registered domestic partner shall not be denied or otherwise be defeated in serving [as] the plenary guardian of his or her registered domestic partner or the partner's property, under the provisions of F.S. ch. 744, to the extent that the incapacitated partner has not executed a valid preneed guardian designation, based solely upon his or her status as the domestic partner of the incapacitated partner. 
(Code 1986, § 72.33; Ord. No. 12-12, § 3, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 38-294. - Limited effect. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to alter, affect, or contravene county, state or federal law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as recognizing or treating a registered domestic partnership as a marriage. 
(c)  All rights, privileges, and benefits extended to registered domestic partnerships registered pursuant to this article shall also be extended to all persons legally partnered in another jurisdiction. 
(d)  A registered domestic partner may enforce the rights under section 38-163 by filing a private action against a person or entity in any court of competent jurisdiction for declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or both. 
(Code 1986, § 72.34; Ord. No. 12-12, § 4, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 38-295. - Employment benefits. 
(a)  The city shall provide the same health and other employment fringe benefits to employees with domestic partners as to employees with spouses. As used in this section, the term "employees" refers to active and retired city employees who are eligible for benefits pursuant to state or municipal law, employment policies, or collective bargaining agreements. 
(b)  An employee must file a copy of the declaration of domestic partnership with the human resources department in order to obtain benefits under this section. On such declaration, the employee shall agree to notify the city promptly of any change in the status of the domestic partnership. 
(c)  The city shall provide health insurance and benefit coverage to an employee's domestic partner as it does to an employee's spouse and to the dependents of an employee's domestic partnership as it does to an employee's children. An employee may opt to decline health insurance coverage for his domestic partner, without forgoing the right to obtain health insurance coverage for his domestic partner at a later date. 
(d)  Upon termination of a domestic partnership by an employee, the domestic partner may be covered by health insurance and benefits as may be provided in the city's agreement with its health insurance provider. 
(e)  Upon termination of a domestic partnership by the death of an employee, the surviving domestic partner's health insurance and benefits coverage shall lapse as it would for the spouse of a married employee upon the death of that employee. 
(f)  An employee shall be granted a leave of absence, with pay, for the death of a domestic partner or family member of a domestic partner to the same extent as for a spouse or family member of a spouse. Use of the term "in-law" in employee handbooks shall include the relatives of a domestic partner. 
(g)  An employee shall be granted sick leave to care for a domestic partner to the same extent permitted to care for a spouse, and to care for a dependent of a domestic partnership to the same extent permitted to care for a child. 
(h)  An employee shall be entitled to take parental leave to take care of a child born to the domestic partner or a newly adopted child to the same extent as a married person. 
(i)  The city clerk or human resources department shall distribute copies of the following forms to those persons who request them: 
(1)  Declaration of domestic partnership. 
(2)  Domestic partnership information sheet. 
(3)  Amendment to the declaration of domestic partnership. 
(4)  Termination statement of the domestic partnership. 
(j)  The effectiveness of this section is conditioned upon the city's successful and cost-effective renegotiation of its life and health insurance plan and collective bargaining agreements, as the case may be, for which the city shall make best efforts. 
(Code 1986, § 72.35) 
Sec. 38-296. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to contravene the general laws of the state. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to impose liability upon a domestic partner for the health or health expenses of his domestic partner. 
(c)  All rights, privileges and benefits extended to domestic partnerships registered pursuant to this article shall also be extended to domestic partnerships registered pursuant to domestic partnership laws in other jurisdictions. If a conflict occurs between jurisdictions, this article shall govern in the city. 
(d)  When the term "spouse" or "married" or "marriage" is used in other sections of this Code or city ordinances and documents, it shall be interpreted to include a domestic partner. When the term "family" or "dependent" is used in other sections of this Code or city ordinances, it shall be interpreted to include domestic partnerships and dependents of domestic partnerships. When the term "divorce" or "legal separation" is used in other sections of this Code or city ordinances and documents, it shall be interpreted to mean termination of a domestic partnership. 
(Code 1986, § 72.36) 
Chapter 42 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Offense defined, F.S. § 775.08. 

Sec. 42-1. - Offenses under state law. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit within the city any act that is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(b)  Whoever shall violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by the same penalty as is provided by the laws of the state. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) the following misdemeanors under state law are eligible to receive a civil violation notice, at the discretion of a law enforcement officer, provided that such violations are not charged in conjunction with any charge that is a felony, driving under the influence, incident involving domestic violence, or violent crime, as those terms are defined under state law: 
(1)  Possession of Cannabis in an amount of 20 grams or less, as set forth in F.S. § 893.13(6)(b), as such may be amended from time to time; and/or 
(2)  Possession of Drug Paraphernalia, as set forth in F.S. §§ 893.146 and 893.147(1)(b), as such may be amended from time to time, which is associated with the use of cannabis. 
An individual issued a civil violation notice for a violation of subsection (c)(1) or (2) will be subject to the fine set forth herein. 
(3)  Penalties and enforcement. 
a.  [Penalty.] A person violating subsection (c)(1) or (2) shall receive a civil fine of $100.00. 
b.  Enforcement. The Key West Police Department shall enforce this section. This shall not preclude other law enforcement agencies from any action to assure compliance with this section and all applicable laws. If a police officer finds a violation of (c)(1) or (c)(2), the police officer will be authorized to issue a notice of violation. The notice shall inform the violator of the nature of the violation, amount of fine for which the violator is liable, instructions and due date for paying the fine, that the violation may be appealed by requesting an administrative hearing before a special master within ten (10) days after service of the notice of violations, and that the failure to appeal the violation within ten (10) days of service shall constitute an admission of the violation and a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
c.  Rights of violators; payment of fine; right to appear; failure to pay civil fine or to appeal; appeals from decisions of the special master. 
1.  A violator who has been served with a notice of violation must elect to either: 
i.  Pay the civil fine in the manner indicated on the notice of violation; or 
ii.  Request an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the notice of violation, which must be requested within ten (10) days of the service of the notice of violations. 
2.  The procedures for appeal by administrative hearing of the notice of violation shall be as set forth in section 30-72 and 30-73 of this Code. Applications for hearings must be accompanied by a fee as approved by a resolution of the city commission, which shall be refunded if the named violator prevails in the appeal. 
3.  If the named violator, after issuance of the notice of violation, fails to pay the civil fine, or fails to timely request an administrative hearing before a special master, the special master may be informed of such failure by report from the police officer. The failure of the named violator to appeal the decision of the police officer within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing before the special master, and shall be treated as an admission of the violation, for which fines and penalties shall be assessed accordingly. 
4.  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records, and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any real or personal property owned by the violator, which may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgement by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the violator's real or personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgement except for enforcement purposes. On or after the sixty-first (61st) day following the recording of any such lien that remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute upon the lien. 
5.  Any party aggrieved by a decision of a special master may appeal that decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
6.  The special master shall be prohibited from hearing the merits of the notice of violation or considering the timeliness of a request for an administrative hearing if the violator has failed to request an administrative hearing within ten (10) days of the service of the notice of violation. 
7.  The special master shall not have discretion to alter the penalties described herein. 
(Code 1986, § 81.01; Ord. No. 15-12, § 1, 9-1-2015) 
Case Law reference- A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So. 2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
See also Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 762, 151 So. 333 (1933); McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So. 2d 88 (Fla. 1954); and State v. Smith, 189 So. 2d 846 (Fla. 4th DCA 1966). 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; discharging firearms in public, F.S. § 790.15. See also F.S. general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors. 
Sec. 42-2. - Airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to abandon or discard or to permit to be abandoned or discarded on premises under his control any icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer or similar airtight unit having an interior storage capacity of 11/2 cubic feet or more from which the door has not been removed. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer or similar airtight unit which is crated or is securely locked from the outside or is in the normal use on the premises of a home or rental unit or is held for sale or use in a place of business. However, the term "place of business" as used in this subsection shall not be deemed to include a junkyard or other similar establishment dealing in secondhand merchandise for sale, on open unprotected premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any junkyard or secondhand furniture dealer with unenclosed premises used for display of secondhand iceboxes, refrigerators, deep-freeze lockers, clothes washers, clothes dryers or similar airtight units to fail to remove the doors on any such secondhand unit having an interior storage capacity of 11/2 cubic feet or more from which the door has not been removed. This section will not apply to any dealer who has fenced and locked his premises. 
(d)  Abandoned or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators, deep-freeze lockers, clothes washers, clothes dryers or similar airtight units from which the doors have not been removed are declared to be an attractive nuisance to children and a menace to their health and safety when accessible to them, whether or not such children are trespassers. 
(Code 1986, § 81.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. §§ 823.07, 823.08. 
Sec. 42-3. - Aggressive or obstructive panhandling. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressively beg means to beg with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods. 
    Beg means to ask or solicit for money or goods as a charity, whether by word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means. 
    Intimidate means to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether the actor intends to intimidate another person into giving money or goods are that the actor refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstance makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him whether the actor: 
(1)  Touches the person solicited; 
(2)  Follows the person solicited, and persists in begging after the person solicited has given a negative response; 
(3)  Directs profane or abusive language toward the person solicited; or 
(4)  Acts in a violent or threatening manner toward the person solicited. 
    Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take unreasonable evasive action to avoid physical contact. 
    Public place means an area accessible to the public and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, decks, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, school grounds, streets and other rights-of-way open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
    Unreasonable evasive action means causing a vehicle to depart from the lane of traffic in which it is traveling to change lanes, to straddle lanes, or to enter onto a swale to obtain passage; it also means causing a pedestrian to leave the sidewalk on which he is traveling or to make contact with a wall or fence bordering the sidewalk. 
(b)  A person shall be guilty of aggressive or obstructive interference if, in a public place, he intentionally (i) aggressively begs, or (ii) obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right of assembly and free speech and acts authorized by a permit or a special events license duly issued by the city or by lease of real property owned by the city shall not constitute a violation under this section. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the discretion of police, court personnel or judges from referring persons suspected, charged or convicted of a violation of this section to treatment programs or facilities that provide an alternative to prosecution or incarceration, if the alleged or convicted violator consents. 
(Code 1986, § 81.03) 
Sec. 42-4. - Price gouging during locally declared emergency. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set measures in place necessary for the protection of life and property threatened because of natural, technological, or other disasters and emergencies. This section is not intended to preempt or to preclude the application or enforcement of local emergency management measures already in effect or which will be effective upon a declaration of emergency by the governor. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Average retail price means the average price at which similar merchandise was being sold during the 30 days immediately preceding the declaration of a local emergency. 
    Consumer goods means any article, product, merchandise, or commodity of any kind or class which is customarily produced or distributed for sale at retail for consumption by individuals or for use by individuals, including but not limited to food, water, ice, clothing, lumber, hardware, chain saws, generators, home improvement materials and fuel products. 
    Fuel product means home heating oil, kerosene, propane, natural gas, diesel fuel, methanol and gasoline. 
    Local emergency means any occurrence or threat thereof, whether accidental, natural, in war or in peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property in the city. 
    Unconscionable. Prima facie evidence that a price is "unconscionable" is when the amount charged for the sale or rental or amount offered for the sale or rental of a consumer good, fuel product or other commodity grossly exceeds the average price of the consumer good, fuel product or other commodity during the 30 days immediately prior to a declaration of a local emergency and the increase is not attributable to additional costs incurred in connection with the rental or sale of the consumer good, fuel product or other commodity or national or international market trends. 
(c)  Prohibition against price gouging. Upon declaration of a local emergency by the mayor or the governor on behalf of local authorities and through the duration of such emergency, it shall be an unlawful method of competition and an unfair and deceptive trade act or practice for a person or his agent or employee doing business in the city to charge more than the average retail price for any consumer good, fuel product or other commodity. This section does not prevent the seller of consumer goods from charging an amount in excess of the average retail price, if such higher price is the direct result of, and limited to, any increased cost for the consumer goods from the manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler to the seller. In such instances, only the actual cost increase per item from the manufacturer, distributor or wholesaler may be added to the average retail price. This section does not interfere with the authority of government to acquire and to distribute consumer goods, supplies, materials, and facilities, with or without compensation. A price increase approved or authorized by a government agency, law, statute, or regulation shall not be a violation of this section's prohibitions. 
(d)  Enforcement. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1-15. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. Any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to administrative action, requests for temporary and permanent injunctions, and other civil action, may be used to enforce this section. 
(Code 1986, § 81.04) 
Sec. 42-5. - Spitting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon floors of churches, theaters, public conveyances, public halls or other public places within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 81.05) 
Sec. 42-6. - Tattoo establishments; temporary tattoos. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tattoo establishment in the practice of tattooing within the city. 
(b)  A person licensed to apply a temporary tattoo on a customer's skin in the City of Key West shall not adulterate the henna or other type of pigment or dye with paraphenylenediamine ("PPD") or other coal-tar product. All persons licensed to apply a temporary tattoo shall provide a written warning notice of potential detrimental health effects, as provided in subsection (c). For the purposes of this section, a "temporary tattoo" means a mark or design made by a process of ingraining an impermanent pigment or dye on the skin. 
(c)  A person licensed to apply a temporary tattoo on a customer's skin in the City of Key West shall post in plain view, at the location of the application of the temporary tattoo, on cardboard or other similar material, with dimensions of at least two feet by two feet and with at least half-inch block style letters, a sign which shall read as follows: 
1.  HENNA OR ANY OTHER TYPE OF PIGMENT OR DYE USED AT THIS LOCATION DOES NOT CONTAIN PARAPHENYLENEDIAMINE (PPD) OR OTHER COAL-TAR PRODUCT. 
2.  PPD MAY CAUSE SKIN IRRITATION, BLISTERING, INFECTION OR OTHER HARMFUL SKIN REACTIONS. 
3.  IN THE EVENT THAT YOU SUFFER AN ADVERSE SKIN REACTION FROM A TEMPORARY TATTOO, CONSULT YOUR PHYSICIAN IMMEDIATELY. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. In addition thereto, a person who applies or is found to have applied a temporary tattoo adulterated with PPD or other coal-tar product, shall be subject to business tax receipt suspension, as provided in section 66-105(a)(1) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 81.06; Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 8-1-2006; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-7. - Amusement rides. 
    Any person operating an amusement ride within the city must comply with state insurance requirements. In addition, such person must comply with sections 2-871 and 6-26, as applicable. 
(Code 1986, § 81.07) 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainment, ch. 6. 
Sec. 42-8. - Hitchhiking. 
(a)  Declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or position himself upon any county, state, federal or city street, highway, sidewalk, or road right-of-way lying within the city to solicit or attempt to solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(b)  Posting of signs. A sign shall be posted at the city limits stating that hitchhiking is prohibited in the city, and signs shall be placed in such other strategic locations as the department of public safety shall deem necessary. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. If any person violates this section, such person shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 81.08) 
Sec. 42-9. - Nudity; body painting. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nude or nudity means the exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the exposure of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple. A mother's breastfeeding of her baby does not violate this section. 
    Public place means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others and an individual does not have a constitutionally protected expectation of privacy. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. No person shall be nude in a public place or insufficiently clothed to prevent improper exposure of his or her person in a public place. 
(c)  Body painting. No person in a public place shall paint all or a portion of a human body that is in a state of nudity or partial nudity. Body painting establishments shall be screened from public view. During the week of Fantasy Fest (the preceding Monday through the Saturday of the parade), a person who has had his or her body painted shall not be considered nude, provided that such person not display genitalia or the pubic area in a public place. Body paint shall not be deemed to clothe or cover genitalia or the pubic area. This body painting exception to the nudity prohibition is applicable only to a person who is located within the boundaries of a "Fantasy Zone," the area designated by the city for the primary Fantasy Fest activities. For the purposes of this section, the meaning of "body painting" shall include "airbrushing." 
(d)  Exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) or (c) above, the city commission may by resolution or ordinance provide or set apart a public place specifically permitting nudity. 
(Code 1986, § 81.09; Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 10-5-2005; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 42-10. - Use of threat to induce sale. 
    Threats of bodily harm, assault, humiliation, arrest or prosecution to induce a sale shall be prohibited. No retailer shall threaten a customer with arrest or criminal prosecution when the customer refuses to accept any item of merchandise from the retailer because of a dispute over price, quality of goods, or other terms of sale in order to force or induce the customer to purchase the goods. 
(Code 1986, § 81.12) 
Sec. 42-11. - No panhandling/no solicitation areas. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Clinton Square shall mean that area of the historic district, including its streets and sidewalks, and its interior park, bounded by Whitehead Street from Greene Street to Front Street, Front Street from Whitehead Street/David Wolkowsky Street to Greene Street, and Greene Street from Front Street to Whitehead Street. 
    Core Commercial Tourist Area shall mean: 
(1)  All areas of public and semipublic sidewalks, streets and rights-of-way bordered by Whitehead Street to the west, the Atlantic Ocean to the south, Simonton Street to the east and the Key West Harbor to the north including all intersecting and side streets, more particularly described in Exhibit A; 
(2)  The entire length of Front, Caroline and Greene Streets; 
(3)  The area commonly known as the Key West Bight including all public and semipublic lease hold areas and common areas bordered by Caroline Street to the south, Elizabeth Street to the west, Trumbo Road to the east and the Key West harbor to the north including the Harborwalk from Front Street to Grinnell Street, more particularly described in Exhibit B; 
(4)  The entire length of Atlantic Boulevard extending to the Atlantic Ocean; Bertha Street from Atlantic Boulevard to S. Roosevelt Boulevard; and S. Roosevelt Boulevard from Bertha Street to Flagler Avenue, more particularly described in Exhibit C. 
    Mallory Square shall mean all public and semipublic areas of Mallory Square including its pier, parking lot, the Waterfront Playhouse, the Sculpture Garden, and that portion of any other structure facing Mallory Square; Tift Alley; and Wall Street bordered by Front Street to the south, Duval Street to the east, Clinton Square Market to the west and the Key West Harbor to the north, more particularly described in Exhibit D. 
    Panhandling shall mean begging or asking or soliciting money or goods for charity or personal gain, whether by word, bodily gestures, signs or other means. 
    Solicitation shall mean an offer by a person to perform a service or to sell a good in exchange for money or other type of compensation. For the purposes of this section, solicitation shall not mean such an offer by: 
(1)  A person who holds a business tax receipt issued by the city for a business location when the offer is made at such location; 
(2)  A person who holds a mobile vendor's license, a coconut palm frond permit, or other specific license or permit issued by the city; or 
(3)  A person who holds a street performer or street artist permit pursuant to section 6-2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Southernmost Point shall mean that area of the Historic District, including the Southernmost Point Monument and including the sidewalks and streets bounded by South Street from Duval Street to Whitehead Street and Whitehead Street from South Street to United Street. 
(b)  Prohibition. Panhandling and solicitation are prohibited (in) (at): 
(1)  Clinton Square, 
(2)  Mallory Square, 
(3)  The Core Commercial Tourist Area, 
(4)  The Southernmost Point, 
(5)  While under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance, 
(6)  Any city designated park, 
(7)  The fenced-in area of the city cemetery, 
(8)  White Street Pier from Atlantic Boulevard to the Atlantic Ocean, 
(9)  Within 20 feet of any: 
i.  Entrance to any financial institution or automatic teller machine, 
ii.  Parking meters or parking pay stations, 
iii.  Lawfully permitted outdoor dining area, 
iv.  Public or private transit stop, taxi stand, taxis while loading or unloading passengers, or public transit vehicles, 
v.  Any designated historic monument, site or tourist attraction. 
The city manager shall post signs in each area advising the public of this prohibition. 
(c)  Nonaggressive panhandling will be permitted at all other areas within the City of Key West not contained in paragraph (b) above. Nonaggressive panhandling will also be permitted within the Core Commercial Tourist Area[,] in designated zones at Mallory Square and on the south side of the 900 block of Caroline Street, more particularly described in Exhibit E. The city manager shall post signs prominently designating said permitted panhandling zones. The city commission for the City of Key West may change, alter or move permitted panhandling areas by passage of resolution. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 1-22-2003; Ord. No. 05-06, § 1, 2-15-2005; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-22-2012) 
Editor's note- Exhibits A-E are not set out herein but are available for inspection in the offices of the city clerk. 
Sec. 42-12. - Juvenile curfew; regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that requires immediate attention to care for or prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life, or significant property loss. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or an automobile accident. 
    Establishment means a privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, a place of amusement or a place of entertainment. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Parent means a person who has legal custody of a minor as a: 
(1)  Natural or adoptive parent; 
(2)  Legal guardian; 
(3)  Person who stands in loco parentis to the minor; or 
(4)  Person who has legal custody of the minor by order of the court. 
    Public place means a place to which the public has access, including but not limited to, streets, highways, public parks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means to stay unnecessarily in a particular place. 
(b)  Prohibitions; penalty. 
(1)  a.  A minor may not be or remain in a public place or establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, Sunday through Thursday, except in the case of a legal holiday. 
b.  A minor may not be or remain in a public place or establishment between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. 
(2)  A minor who has been suspended or expelled from school may not be or remain in a public place, in an establishment, or within 1,000 feet of a school during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. during any school day. 
(3)  A minor who violates this section shall receive a written warning for his or her first violation. A minor who violates this section after having received a prior written warning is guilty of a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00 for each violation. 
(4)  If a minor violates a curfew and is taken into custody, the minor shall be transported immediately to a police station or to a facility operated by a religious, charitable, or civic organization that conducts a curfew program in cooperation with the Key West Police Department. After recording pertinent information about the minor, the police department shall attempt to contact the parent of the minor, and, if successful, shall request that the parent take custody of the minor and shall release the minor to the parent. If the police department is not able to contact the minor's parent within two hours after the minor is taken into custody, or if the parent refuses to take custody of the minor, the law enforcement agency may transport the minor to his or her residence or proceed, if applicable, as authorized under child neglect and abandonment laws. 
(c)  Legal duty of parent; penalty. 
(1)  The parent of a minor has a legal duty and responsibility to ensure that the minor does not violate subsection (b). 
(2)  The parent of a minor has a legal duty and responsibility to supervise personally, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise, the minor so that the minor does not violate subsection (b). 
(3)  The parent of a minor who knowingly permits the minor to violate subsection (b) shall receive a written warning for a first violation. A parent who knowingly permits the minor to violate subsection (b) after having received a prior written warning is guilty of a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00 for each violation. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to a minor who is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his or her parent or by another adult authorized by the minor's parent to have custody of the minor; 
(2)  Involved in an emergency or engaged, with his or her parent's permission, in an emergency errand; 
(3)  Attending or traveling directly to or from an activity that involves the exercise of rights protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution; 
(4)  Going directly to or returning directly from lawful employment, or who is in a public place or establishment in connection with or as required by a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged; 
(5)  Returning directly home from a school-sponsored function, a religious function, or a function sponsored by a civic organization; 
(6)  On the property of, or on the sidewalk of, the place where the minor resides, or who is on the property or sidewalk of an adult next-door neighbor with that neighbor's permission; or 
(7)  Engaged in interstate travel or bona fide intrastate travel with the consent of the minor's parent. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 1, 6-18-2002) 
Sec. 42-13. - Habitation in wetlands prohibited; designated pathways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to camp in or otherwise to inhabit a wetlands area. Such a habitation for any length of time or for any purpose shall constitute an offense of trespass under the laws of the state. 
(b)  All persons entering wetlands located in Key West must traverse designated pathways. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of trespass under the laws of the state to depart from a designated pathway for any distance into a wetlands area. 
(c)  The city hereby adopts the state definition of "wetlands" contained in Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code, such definition is attached to and made a part of Ordinance No. 03-10. A map designating the city's wetlands is also adopted as part of that ordinance. When necessary, the city shall amend the map by resolution of the city commission to reflect the current status of wetlands in the city. The city clerk shall maintain both a copy of the definition of "wetlands" and a current wetlands map as an attachment hereto. 
(d)  The city manager shall post signs at wetlands areas advising the public of the prohibitions set forth in subsections (a) and (b). 
(e)  The enforcement of this section shall be withheld until the following occurs: (1) The Florida Department of Environmental Protection gives final approval to the attached wetlands map; and (2) the sooner of (i) a temporary or permanent emergency shelter with a minimum of 25 beds for homeless persons is established in Key West, or (ii) 120 days from the effective date of Ordinance [No. 03-10]. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1, 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 42-14. - Bridle path and swale; no camping. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Camp or camping means to pitch or to occupy a tent or other temporary shelter for sleeping or other habitation purposes. Camping shall include the placement of a recreational vehicle, as defined in F.S. 320.01(1)(b) upon the bridle path and swale. Camping shall also include sleeping or other habitation in a motor vehicle upon the bridle path and swale. 
(2)  Camp facilities means tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, boxes or cartons, hammocks, and portable stoves or other cooking paraphernalia. 
(3)  Bridle path and swale means the entire open area of real property adjacent to the Salt Ponds (to the north) and South Roosevelt Boulevard (to the south); and bounded to the west by Bertha Street and the east by Flagler Avenue. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall camp within or upon the bridle path and swale at any hour. Camping includes the use of camp facilities. The placement of a tent or a recreational vehicle within or upon the bridle path and swale shall be presumed to constitute camping and be a violation of this section. 
(c)  Exception. A person may apply to the city for permission to place a tent or other temporary shelter within or upon the bridle path and swale. At its discretion, the city commission may approve such exception, designating location and hours, by resolution. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 42-15. - Possession of airguns by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Air gun: Any gun, rifle or pistol by whatever name known which is designed to expel a projectile by the action of compressed air or gas, or by the action of a spring or elastic, but such term does not mean a firearm. 
(2)  Dealer: Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting air guns or projectiles therefore, and the term "licensed dealer" means any such person licensed under the provisions of this article, or any person regularly licensed to sell firearms. 
(3)  Minor: Any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  Dealer's license-Application, term, revocation/suspension. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer, except a licensed dealer, to sell, lend, rent or otherwise transfer any air gun or projectile therefore. Dealers who are licensed to sell firearms shall not be required to obtain the special license to sell air guns, but shall comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(2)  (A)  Any dealer, other than a dealer licensed to sell firearms, desiring a license to sell, lend, rent or otherwise transfer air guns or projectiles therefore shall make application to the license division, which shall provide the necessary forms and shall prescribe by reasonable rules and regulations the information to be contained in such application. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in such an application. 
(3)  There shall be an annual fee to obtain a dealer license of $200.00. This fee shall be prorated only for the initial application year payable to the license division. The city shall issue to the applicant a license to sell, lend, rent or otherwise transfer air guns or projectiles therefore, which license shall remain in force, subject to annual payment of the license fee, unless revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. No license shall be issued to any applicant within two years after the revocation of a previous license. 
(4)  (A)  Violation by a dealer of any provisions of this article shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the license issued under this article or any city issued license to sell firearms, after written notice to the dealer by the licensing division. The city manager shall determine the severity of the violation and if said violation warrants a suspension or revocation of the business license to sell, lend rent or otherwise transfer air guns. The license holder shall be granted an opportunity to be heard personally or by legal counsel by the city manager at said hearing. 
(B)  Final conviction of a violation of any provision of this chapter, state or federal laws relating to air guns or firearms shall automatically revoke and terminate any license issued under this article or any city-issued license to sell firearms. Upon a finding and judgment by a trial court against any dealer that he has been guilty of such a violation of any provision of this article, state or federal laws relating to air guns or firearms, the license of such dealer shall be automatically suspended pending the final disposition of any appeal from such finding and judgment. 
(c)  Sale or delivery to minors-Generally. It shall be unlawful for any licensed dealer to sell, lend, rent or otherwise transfer an air gun or projectile therefore to any person whom the dealer knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be a minor, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to give, sell, rent, lend or otherwise transfer any air gun or projectile therefore to a minor, except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil exists between such person and the minor. 
(d)  Same-False representation as to age. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as being over 18 years of age in order to purchase or otherwise obtain an air gun or projectile therefore. 
(e)  Minors not to carry in public places; exception. It shall be unlawful for any minor to carry any air gun on the streets, alleys, public roads or public lands of this city, unless accompanied by an adult. In such a case, the air gun shall be made reasonably safe, inoperable and secured in a sealed carrying apparatus until ready for immediate use consistent with this chapter. 
(f)  Discharging in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun from or across any street, sidewalk, alley or public road of this city, or on or across any public land, except on a properly constructed target range. 
(g)  Seizure and sale of air gun used in violation of chapter 42. Any officer making an arrest for a violation of any of the sections in this chapter shall immediately take possession of the air gun found upon or in the possession of the person so arrested or cited and shall retain the same until disposition of the offense. If the person is found guilty by a state, federal or municipal court, the air gun shall be forfeited and the proper department shall sell, at public sale or otherwise, or dispose of the same and account for and pay over the proceeds as in case of fines collected. If such person is acquitted, the air gun shall be returned to the adult parent, guardian or instructor of the offender upon demand therefore. 
(h)  Penalties. A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with chapter [section] 1-15 [of this Code of Ordinances] for each count. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 42-16. - Sale, display, offer for sale, and purchase with intent to sell herbal incense prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: "Herbal incense" shall mean aromatic plant material that is distributed in a loose, leafy, powder or granular form, or in compressed blocks that can be easily crushed to result in a powder or granular form, and can be placed into pipes, cigarette papers or other drug paraphernalia for purposes of ingestion by smoking, inhaling or other methods whether or not such product is labeled as not for human consumption. 
(b)  Sale, display, offer for sale and purchase with intent to sell herbal incense prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, offer for sale, or purchase with intent to sell any herbal incense as defined herein within the city limits of the City of Key West. 
(c)  Seizure and destruction of herbal incense. Herbal incense prohibited herein may be seized by law enforcement officers and may be destroyed in the same manner used to destroy narcotics and contraband substances, after its use for evidentiary purposes in any judicial proceeding is no longer required. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. The City of Key West shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or business violating the provisions of this section. In any action seeking an injunction, the city shall be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at the trial level and on appeal. 
(e)  Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 12-20, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 42-17. - Sale, display, offer for sale, and purchase with intent to sell prohibited of synthetic stimulant bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic amphetamines and other synthetic stimulants that mimic illegal drugs. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Structurally similar as used in this section shall mean chemical substitutions off a common chemical backbone associated with cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, 3,4- methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), 3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), methylmethcathinone, methoxymethcathinone, methylethcathinone, fluoromethcathinone, BZP (benzylpiperazine), fluorophenylpiperazine, methylphenylpiperazine, chlorophenylpiperazine, methoxyphenylpiperazine, DBZP (1,4-dibenzylpiperazine), TFMPP (3-Trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine), MBDB (Methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), 5-Hydroxy-alpha- methyltryptamine, 5-Hydroxy-N-methyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-N-methyl-N-isopropyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-alpha-methyltryptamine, methyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, 5-Methyl- N,N-dimethyltryptamine, Tyramine (4-Hydroxyphenethylamine), 5- Methoxy-N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine, DiPT (N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine), DPT (N,N-Dipropyltryptamine), 4- Hydroxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine, N,N-Diallyl-5- Methoxytryptamine, DOI (4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine), DOC (4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine), 2C-E (4-Ethyl-2,5- dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T-4 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4- isopropylthiophenethylamine), 2C-C (4-Chloro-2,5- dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T (2,5-Dimethoxy-4- methylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-2 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-7 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthiophenethylamine), 2C-I (4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), Butylone (beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylpropylamine), Ethcathinone, Ethylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-ethylcathinone), Naphyrone (naphthylpyrovalerone), N-N-Dimethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, N-N-Diethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone, 2-Bromo-3,4-Methylenedioxypropiophenone, 3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone-2-oxime, N-Acetyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, N-Acetyl-N-Methyl-3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone, N-Acetyl-N-Ethyl-3,4-ethylenedioxycathinone, Bromomethcathinone, Buphedrone (alpha-methylamino-butyrophenone), Eutylone (beta-Keto-Ethylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), Dimethylcathinone, Dimethylmethcathinone, Pentylone (beta-Keto-Methylbenzodioxolylpentanamine), (MDPPP) 3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinopropiophenone, (MDPBP) 3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinobutiophenone, Methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MOPPP), Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinohexiophenone (MPHP), Benocyclidine (BCP), benzothiophenylcyclohexylpiperidine (BTCP), Fluoromethylaminobutyrophenone (F-MABP), Methoxypyrrolidinobutyrophenone (MeO-PBP), Ethyl-pyrrolidinobutyrophenone (Et-PBP), 3-Methyl-4-Methoxymethcathinone (3-Me-4-MeO-MCAT), Methylethylaminobutyrophenone (Me-EABP), Methylamino-butyrophenone (MABP), Pyrrolidinopropiophenone (PPP), Pyrrolidinobutiophenone (PBP), Pyrrolidinovalerophenone (PVP), Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MPPP), or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, as amended, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. 
(2)  Synthetic stimulant bath salts as used in this section shall mean any substance, whether in powder, crystal, liquid, tablet or capsule form, containing a synthetic stimulant as defined herein or to which a synthetic stimulant has been added or applied, that can be ingested by smoking, inhaling or other method, regardless of whether the substance is marketed as not for the purpose of human consumption, and regardless of how the substance is labeled, including but not limited to bath salts, insect repellant, plant food, herbs, incense, iPod cleaner, nutrient, dietary supplement or spice. 
(3)  Synthetic stimulant as used in this section shall mean any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that has a stimulant effect on the central nervous system and is structurally similar to cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above, or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, as listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. "Synthetic stimulant" shall also include any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that mimics the pharmacological effects of cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above, or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. Packaging that indicates, suggests or implies that a product mimics the pharmacological effects of cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, ecstasy or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above, shall create a presumption that the product mimics the effects of the substance. 
"Synthetic stimulant" shall not include any substance currently listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Sale, display, offer for sale and purchase with intent to sell synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, offer for sale or purchase with intent to sell any synthetic stimulant bath salts as defined herein or any synthetic stimulants as defined herein within the city limits of Key West. 
(c)  Seizure and destruction of synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants. Synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants prohibited herein may be seized by law enforcement officers and may be destroyed in the same manner used to destroy narcotics and contraband substances, after its use for evidentiary purposes in any judicial proceeding is no longer required. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. The City of Key West shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or business violating the provisions of this section. In any action seeking an injunction, the city shall be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at the trial level and on appeal. 
(e)  Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 12-21, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 42-18. - Sexual orientation or gender identity change efforts. 
(1).  Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conversion therapy means any counseling, practice, or treatment performed with the goal of changing a person's sexual orientation or gender identity including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors, gender expression, or to reduce or eliminate sexual or romantic attraction or feelings toward a person of the same gender. Conversion therapy does not include counseling that: 
a)  Provides support to a person undergoing gender transition; or 
b)  Provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, if such counseling is not conducted with the goal of changing the person's sexual orientation or gender identity. 
    Minor means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Reparative therapy has the same meaning as conversion therapy defined in this section. 
(2).  Conversion therapy prohibited. 
    A person who is licensed by the State of Florida to provide professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or her professional training under Chapters 458, 459, 490, or 491 of the Florida Statutes, as such chapters may be amended, including, but not limited to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists, psychotherapists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, and licensed counselors, may not engage in conversion or reparative therapy with a minor. 
(3).  Enforcement; penalties. 
    A violation of Section 42-18 (2) shall be a civil infraction enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 2-677 through Section 2-680 of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 3-7-2017) 
Chapter 46 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT PLANS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; personnel policy, ch. 50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated employee contributions shall mean the sum of all amounts deducted from a member's compensation or picked up on behalf of a member, together with regular interest as provided in this plan. Accumulated employee contributions shall also mean any amounts paid by a member for the purchase of military service credits or other buybacks permitted in this plan. 
    Active membership shall mean membership in the retirement plan as an employee. 
    Actuarial equivalent shall mean equality in value of the aggregate amount or benefits under different forms of payment based upon the following actuarial assumptions: Where the actuarial equivalent calculation involves the determination of the present value of a benefit or a conversion from one form of periodic payment to another form of payment. Actuarial equivalent amounts will be based upon the 1994 Group Annuity Reserving Table, projected to 2002, based upon a fixed blend of 50 percent male mortality rates - 50 percent female mortality rates, per IRS Revenue Ruling 2001-62, set forward five years for disabled lives with interest at seven percent, compounded annually. 
    And shall have a conjunctive meaning. 
    Beneficiary shall mean any person receiving a retirement allowance or other benefit from the retirement plan. This term shall include retirees and survivors. 
    Benefit shall mean a retirement allowance or other benefit provided by the retirement plan. 
    Board or board of trustees shall mean the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
    Buy-back shall mean a member's contribution to the retirement plan for creditable service for which other than regular contributions have been made. Contributions required for buy-backs shall not be picked up by the city, but may be deducted from a member's compensation. Members may rollover funds from eligible retirement plans to pay for all or any portion of a buyback permitted under this plan. 
    Child shall mean the natural or adopted child of a member, but shall not include foster children or step-children. 
    City shall mean the City of Key West, Florida. 
    City commission or commission shall mean the City Commission of Key West, Florida. 
    Credited service shall mean membership credit upon which a member's eligibility to receive benefits under the retirement plan is based, or upon which the amount of such benefits is to be determined; leave used pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act. Unpaid leave shall not result in a break in service, but shall not count as credited service. 
    Disability shall mean the permanent and total incapacity to perform regular and continuous duties as an employee for the City of Key West, as determined by the board pursuant to the terms of the plan. 
    Early service retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from service under circumstances permitting the payment of a retirement benefit before such member is eligible for normal service retirement. 
    Earnable compensation shall mean a member's base salary and overtime, including pick-up contributions for all hours worked. Earnable compensation shall not mean bonuses, expense allowances, and unused, accumulated leave time. 
    Employee shall mean a person presently employed in the regular, permanent, and full-time classified service of the city, excluding police officers and firefighters. 
    Final monthly compensation shall mean a member's average monthly rate of earnable compensation from the city during the best 36 consecutive months out of the last 120 months preceding the date of retirement or termination from the plan; provided that if a member has been employed for fewer than 36 months, such average shall be taken over the period of actual employment. 
    Full-time shall have the meaning as set forth in the city's personnel rules and in any collective bargaining agreements applicable to members of the plan. 
    Fund shall mean the City of Key West Employees' Retirement Fund. 
    May shall mean a permissive term. 
    Member shall mean a person actively employed as a full-time probationary or permanent employee by the city for whom contributions to the retirement plan are made as required by this plan. 
    Minimum vesting shall mean ten years of credited service before the member is entitled to full retirement benefits and five years for half benefits except for service-incurred disability retirement income or service incurred death benefits. 
    Normal retirement date shall mean the earlier of the completion of 20 years of credited service or attainment of age 60 with ten years of service for a full benefit or attainment of age 60 with five years of service for a half benefit. 
    Option shall mean one of several choices available to members with respect to the manner in which a retirement benefit may be paid. 
    Pick-up amount shall mean employer contributions derived from a member's compensation through a reduction in the member's compensation. 
    Plan shall mean the City of Key West Employees' Retirement Fund. 
    Plan year shall mean the period from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
    Pre-existing condition shall mean a condition of health which pre-dated any period of city employment. 
    Regular contributions shall mean amounts picked-up by the city from the compensation of a member. Regular contributions shall not include buy-back contributions or any other amounts which may be deducted from a member's compensation pursuant to this division. 
    Retiree shall mean a former member who is in receipt of benefits from the plan. 
    Retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from service with a benefit granted to the member pursuant to the provisions of this plan. Retirement shall also mean entry into the deferred retirement option plan. 
    Retirement plan shall mean the City of Key West Employees' Retirement Plan. 
    Service shall mean active employment as an employee of the city. 
    Service retirement shall mean a member's retirement from service under circumstances permitting payment of a retirement benefit without reduction because of age, length of service, or both and without special qualifications such as disability. 
    Spouse shall mean the lawful husband or wife of a member or retiree at the time benefits commence, unless a new designation has been made in writing to the board in accordance with the provisions of this plan. This section shall be interpreted under Florida choice of law rules. 
    Surviving spouse shall mean the spouse of the member at the time death benefits commence unless a new designation has been made in accordance with the provisions of this plan. 
    Trustee shall mean a member of the board of trustees of the plan. 
    Vested benefit shall mean an immediate or deferred benefit to which a member has gained a non-forfeitable right under the provisions of this plan. 
    Vesting shall require completion of five years of credited service for a member to be entitled to 50 percent of their service retirement benefits, increasing by ten percent per year thereafter until 100 percent of their retirement benefits on and after completion of ten years of credited service. 
(Code 1986, § 5.023; Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-4-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-27. - Established; name; operative date. 
(a)  A retirement plan is hereby established and placed under the exclusive administration and management of a board of trustees for the purpose of providing retirement benefits pursuant to this article and for the payment of the reasonable expenses of the retirement plan. 
(b)  The retirement plan established by this section shall be known as the City of Key West, Employees' Retirement Plan. 
(c)  The retirement plan shall have an effective date of [June 17, 2003]. 
(Code 1986, § 5.022; Ord. No. 03-14, § 2, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-28. - Amendment or termination of system. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and the board that this plan shall constitute an irrevocable trust and no portion of the assets may revert to the employer until all other obligations of the plan, including the payment to the last surviving member and beneficiary has been paid. 
(b)  For termination or partial termination of the plan, each participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable (100-percent vested) to the extent funded. If the plan is terminated, the assets of the plan shall first be distributed to retired members and their beneficiaries. If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment to retired members and their beneficiaries, apportionment shall next be made to each member in service who has completed at least ten years of credited service, has contributed to the fund for at least ten years, and who is not otherwise eligible to retire. If there is any asset value after the apportionments to retirees and their beneficiaries and to vested members of the plan, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member in the service of the city in an amount not to exceed the total value of the member's contributions. In the event that there is any asset value remaining after full apportionment to all members and beneficiaries of the plan, the excess, if any, shall revert to the city. 
(c)  No amendment to the plan shall be made until the amendment has been referred to the board for review and the board has issued its comments, in writing, to the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 5.033; Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-29. - Vesting and termination. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all rights to benefits under this plan shall terminate when a member's employment terminates for any reason other than normal service retirement, early service retirement, or disability retirement. Any member who completes ten years of credited service and whose contributions remain in the plan has a vested right to accrued benefits from the plan. A member who has completed five years of credited service shall be 50 percent vested in the plan and shall receive an additional ten percent vesting each year thereafter. 
(b)  A member who shall leave the service of the city prior to eligibility for normal service retirement or early service retirement, but who has completed ten years of creditable service shall be entitled to receive retirement benefits commencing at the regular normal service retirement date. Such benefits will be based on final monthly compensation and credited service as of the date of termination. 
(c)  Every member shall have the right to elect to receive, in lieu of all benefits under the plan, a return of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(d)  A member who elects a lump sum return of contributions releases and discharges the city and the plan from the right to any other benefits from the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.030; Ord. No. 03-14, § 4, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-30. - Forfeiture of benefits. 
    Members are subject to the provisions of F.S. § 112.3173. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-31. - Assignability of rights. 
    The present or future right of a person to money in the fund or to a retirement allowance, an optional allowance, a death benefit, the return of contributions, or any other right accrued or accruing under the provisions of this plan shall not be assignable and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law or any other process of law whatsoever, except with respect to alimony, child support or medical payments to a former spouse. 
(Code 1986, § 5.036(a); Ord. No. 03-14, § 6, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-32. - Investigation of pensions obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension has been granted under any prior or existing law, or which may be granted in the future or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person who has been granted a pension under a prior or existing law, or who is hereafter granted a benefit under sections 46-26 through 46-112 if the granting of that pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent, or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has under any prior or existing law, or who may under sections 46-26 through 46-112 be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(Code 1986, § 5.036(b); Ord. No. 03-14, § 7, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-33. - Correction of errors in records. 
    If any change or error in plan records is discovered or results in any member or beneficiary receiving from the plan more or less than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall have the power to correct such error and, as far as possible, adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of a benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(Code 1986, § 5.036(c); Ord. No. 03-14, § 8, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-34. - Guardian of minor. 
    If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is under any other legal disability, the board shall have the power to withhold payment of benefits until they are presented with proof satisfactory of the appointment of a guardian. If the board becomes aware that any member or beneficiary is incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due under the plan, the board shall cause notice to be given to that participant or beneficiary, of a hearing to determine whether said benefits should continue to be paid until the appointment of a guardian. During the pendency of any such hearing, however, the board may continue to pay benefits to the member or beneficiary and that such payment shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Code 1986, § 5.036(d); Ord. No. 03-14, § 9, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-35. - Eligibility for future benefit changes. 
    Persons retiring on or after October 1, 1988, shall be eligible for any future benefit changes from the date of the change forward. The board, by uniform rule, shall determine those future plan changes which meet the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 5.036(e); Ord. No. 03-14, § 10, 6-17-2003) 
Secs. 46-36-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 46-61. - Administration of plan. 
    The sole and exclusive administration of, and the responsibility for, the proper effective operation of the retirement plan and for carrying out the provisions of this article is vested in a five-member board of trustees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(a); Ord. No. 03-14, § 11, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 1-17-2007) 
Sec. 46-62. - Composition. 
    The board of trustees shall consist of five persons. Three trustees shall be employees elected by a majority of the employees who are active members of the plan. One trustee, appointed by the mayor and city commission, shall be either an active or retired member of the plan or a non-member of the plan who is a resident of Monroe County. The fifth member of the board shall be selected by a majority of the other four trustees. The mayor shall appoint one commissioner as liaison to the board. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(b); Ord. No. 03-14, § 12, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-20, § 2, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-17-2007) 
Sec. 46-63. - Terms; vacancy. 
(a)  The elected active employee representative position expiring next after the passage of this ordinance shall be appointed for a term of three years. The two remaining elected active employee representatives shall be elected to a term of two years. The member appointed by the mayor and city commission shall be appointed to a term of three years. The member appointed by a majority of the board shall be appointed to a term of two years. 
(b)  If a vacancy shall occur prior to the expiration of a trustee's term, a replacement trustee shall be chosen in the same manner as the trustee who has left office. A replacement trustee shall serve a full term measured from the date of replacement. 
(c)  All trustees shall serve until their replacements are selected. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(c); Ord. No. 03-14, § 13, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 07-02, § 3, 1-17-2007) 
Sec. 46-64. - Election procedure for members. 
    The board of trustees shall prescribe a uniform election procedure for the selection of the active member trustees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(d); Ord. No. 03-14, § 14, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-65. - Compensation. 
    All trustees shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed from the fund for all necessary expenses authorized by the board. The board shall be permitted to prescribe uniform rules for reimbursement for travel expenditures. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(e); Ord. No. 03-14, § 15, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-66. - Officers. 
    The board of trustees by majority vote, shall annually select a chairperson and a secretary who shall execute all documents on behalf of the board. The board of trustees, by majority vote, shall annually select a co-chairperson, who shall act as chairperson, in the chairperson's absence. The board, by rule, may set the duties of the respective officers. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(f); Ord. No. 03-14, § 16, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-67. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and shall have full power to act under the terms of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(g); Ord. No. 03-14, § 17, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 07-02, § 4, 1-17-2007) 
Sec. 46-68. - Minutes of meetings and records. 
    The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings which shall be maintained and open to public inspection in accordance with chapters 119 and 286, Florida Statutes. Such records shall reflect a complete and comprehensive account of the discussions and actions taken by the board. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(h); Ord. No. 03-14, § 18, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-69. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board shall have the authority to make such uniform rules and regulations and to take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan and all decisions of the board of trustees, made in good faith, shall be final, binding and conclusive on all parties. No rule may conflict with the provisions of the city charter or code, state or federal law. No rule of the plan may conflict with the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement affecting members of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(i); Ord. No. 03-14, § 19, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-70. - Fiduciary responsibilities. 
    The board shall be deemed the named fiduciary of the plan and shall discharge its responsibilities solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries of the plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to the members and their beneficiaries and to defray the reasonable expenses of the plan. The trustees shall exercise those fiduciary responsibilities with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a similar character and with similar aims. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(j); Ord. No. 03-14, § 20, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-71. - Administrative duties. 
    The board shall have the administrative duty to: 
(1)  Maintain such records as are necessary for calculating and distributing retirement benefits. 
(2)  Maintain such records as are necessary for financial accounting and reporting of plan funds. 
(3)  Maintain such records as are necessary for actuarial evaluation of the plan, including investigations into the mortality, service and compensation experience of its members and beneficiaries. 
(4)  Compile such other administrative or investment information as is necessary for the management of the plan. 
(5)  Process, certify and/or respond to all correspondence, bills and statements received by the plan, as well as all applications submitted to the board for retirement benefits. 
(6)  Establish and maintain communication with city departments and other agencies of government as is necessary for the management of the plan, including preparing filing and distributing such reports and information as are required by law to be prepared, filed or distributed on behalf of the plan. 
(7)  Determine all questions relating to and process all applications for eligibility, participation and benefits. 
(8)  Distribute at regular intervals to employees, a comprehensive summary plan description and periodic reports, not less than annually, regarding the financial and actuarial status of the plan. 
(9)  Retain and compensate such professional and technical experience as is necessary to fulfill its fiduciary responsibilities. 
(10)  Make recommendations regarding changes in the provisions of the plan. 
(11)  Ensure the prompt deposit of all member contributions, city contributions, and investment earnings. 
(12)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations for the management of the plan. 
(13)  Take such other action as the trustees shall deem, in their sole and exclusive discretion, as being necessary for the efficient management of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(k); Ord. No. 03-14, § 21, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-72. - Advisors. 
(a)  The board shall have the authority to retain its own legal counsel, accountants, actuaries and other professional advisors to assist the board in the performance of its duties. The board may act without independent investigation upon the professional advice of the advisors so retained. 
(b)  The board shall retain a physician, as needed, to assist in the performance of its administrative duties with regard to consideration of medical questions arising under the plan. The physician shall conduct any required medical examinations or refer the examinee to a specialist or specialists. 
(c)  The board may employ a pension administrator to assist the board in the performance of its administrative duties. The pension administrator, subject to the approval of the board, may employ such staff as is necessary for the proper administration of the plan. The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of the pension administrator. The board shall, in selecting a pension administrator, exercise all judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence, exercise in the management of their own affairs. The pension administrator shall have a written contract of employment with the board, which shall include any tenure rights which the board, in its discretion, may grant. The position of pension administrator shall not be an employee position of the city. The pension administrator shall be a fiduciary of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(l); Ord. No. 03-14, § 22, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-73. - Protection of fund assets and board. 
    The board is authorized to prosecute or defend actions, claims or proceedings of any nature or kind for the protection of the fund assets or for the protection of the board in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(m); Ord. No. 03-14, § 23, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-74. - Liability; insurance. 
    Neither the board nor any of its individual members shall have any personal liability for any action taken in good faith. The trustees individually and the board as a whole shall be entitled to the protections in F. S. § 768.28. The trustees shall also be authorized to purchase from the assets of the fund, errors and omission insurance to protect the trustees in the performance of their duties. Such insurance shall not provide protection against a trustee's fraud, intentional misrepresentation, willful, misconduct or gross negligence. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(n); Ord. No. 03-14, § 24, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-75. - Misconduct, misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance. 
(a)  No trustee shall be responsible at his or her own expense, to take legal action to correct the misconduct of any other member of the board. A trustee shall have an affirmative obligation, however, to publicly reveal any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by a co-trustee, and upon making such revelation in a public meeting, shall be relieved of further individual responsibility of the actions of that co-trustee. 
(b)  The board shall establish uniform procedures for maintaining confidentiality of medical information as required by state and federal law. 
(c)  When consideration by the city commission is required for plan business, such business shall be placed on the agenda of the commission and heard at the next scheduled meeting, consistent with the agenda rules of the commission. 
(d)  The board and the city manager shall each provide the other with copies of all documents relating to the plan contemporaneously upon the making or receipt of such documents. All written communications relating to the plan from the board to the city shall be made directly to the city manager. All written communications to the board from the city manager shall be made directly to the board, with copies to the pension administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 5.024(o); Ord. No. 03-14, § 25, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-76. - Fund management and investments. 
(a)  The city employees' retirement plan is established as an irrevocable trust fund into which shall be deposited all of the assets of the plan or every kind and description. The plan is a defined benefit retirement fund. Vested members have an ownership right in benefits accrued as provided for in this plan. No member has an ownership right in the assets of the plan. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund shall be vested in the board. All assets of the plan may be commingled, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate accounts regarding the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members, both on an individual and aggregate basis. 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements. 
(3)  Benefit payments. 
(4)  All contributions from the city. 
(5)  All interest, dividends, gains and losses from investment. 
(6)  Such other entries as may be required for a clear, complete financial report of the status of the fund. 
(c)  The board shall maintain a written investment policy, with the advice and counsel of such advisors as the board deems necessary, and said investment policy shall set forth the types of securities and other types of investments into which shall be placed the assets of the fund. The policy shall further set forth appropriate limitations on those investments, including, but not limited to, anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment acceptable risk, and any other factor as required by law. The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets of the plan in such securities or property, real or personal, as the board deems appropriate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations of the United States or any of its agencies, or those guaranteed by the United States or for which the credit of the United States is pledged for the payment of the principal and interest or dividends thereof. 
(2)  Accounts or certificates of deposit in any bank or other financial institution incorporated under the laws of the state, or any national bank organized under the laws of the United States, or authorized to do business and situated in the state, to the extent that such certificates of deposit are secured by the deposits of securities of the United States that such certificates of deposit are secured by the deposits of securities of the United States government. 
(3)  Notes secured by first mortgages on real property insured or guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration or the Veterans Administration. 
(4)  Interest-bearing obligations with a fixed maturity of any corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States and District of Columbia; provided that such obligations are rated by at least two nationally recognized ratings services in any one of the four highest classifications approved by the comptroller of the currency for the investment of funds of national banks or, if only one nationally recognized ratings service shall rate such obligations, such ratings service must have rated such obligation in any one of the three highest rating classifications as set forth in this subsection. 
(5)  Bonds issued by foreign states. 
(6)  Venture capital, private placements and letter stocks which may be in the form of commingled ownership. 
(7)  Real estate, which may be in the form of commingled ownership and financial institutional futures, listed options, stock index futures, which may be used under specific instruction of managers. 
(8)  Common stock, preferred stock and interest bearing obligations of domestic corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States or any state or organized territory of the United States and the District Columbia. 
(9)  Common stock, preferred stock, and interest bearing obligations of foreign corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a foreign corporation. 
(d)  The board may determine the percentage of each type of investment to be held. 
(e)  The board shall be authorized to retain one or more money managers for the management of assets held in the plan, and the board shall convey property of the plan to such managers for investment and reinvestment in accordance with the terms this article and the investment policies established by the board. 
(f)  All money managers shall have a written contract with the board specifying the assets to be invested; the asset classes appropriate for utilization; expected performance; standard of care and resolution of disputes. All such contracts shall be governed in accordance with the laws of the state and shall have venue for resolution of disputes in Monroe County, Florida. All such contracts shall have a clause stating that the board retains the right, at all times, to terminate any money manager agreement, with or without cause. In the event that any money manager shall invest assets of the plan in a prohibited category of investment or shall otherwise breach the terms of the investment agreement, if such breach causes a loss to the trust, the contract shall require the money manager to make the trust whole for any losses incurred. Each money manager shall be a fiduciary of the plan. 
(g)  In the conduct of their affairs, all money managers shall exercise the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims. This provisions shall be incorporated in and constitute a part of all contracts with the board. 
(h)  The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of any money manager retained by the board. The board shall, in selecting a money manager or other investment counsel, exercise all judgment and care in the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(i)  Any money manager or investment advisor who has custody or control of any trust assets or who is otherwise employed, directly or indirectly, in the management of plan assets shall keep accurate and detailed accounts of all such activities, which records shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city, the board, or their designees. 
(j)  The board shall also keep accurate and detailed accounts of its assets and investments which shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city or its designees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.026; Ord. No. 03-14, § 26, 6-17-2003) 
Secs. 46-77-46-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTRIBUTIONS AND BENEFITS 

Sec. 46-106. - Contributions. 
(a)  Under the city employees' retirement plan, the city shall pick-up, rather than deduct from each member's pay, beginning with the date of employment, six percent of the member's basic earnable compensation. The monies so picked-up shall be deposited in the fund on a bimonthly basis. An account record shall be maintained continuously for each member. Pick-up contributions shall continue until death, disability or termination of service, whichever shall occur first. Contributions shall remain in the fund unless withdrawn as provided in the plan. No member shall have the option to choose to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city directly to the plan. All such pick-up contributions by the city shall be deemed and be considered as part of the member's accumulated contributions and subject to all provisions of the plan pertaining to accumulated contributions of members. The intent of this provision is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. For the purpose of accruing and calculating pension benefits, overtime compensation, percentage increases to base pay, longevity, years of service, payroll steps, and for such other purposes except as specified in this plan, the amount of employee contributions "picked-up" or paid by the city will be added to the amount distributed on a current basis in order to determine total wages, salary, pay or compensation. 
(b)  All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits at least equal in total amount to the member's accumulated contributions. 
(c)  The city shall make such contribution under the Florida Protection of Public Employee Retirement Benefits Act, which, together with contributions picked-up on behalf of members, plan earnings will maintain the fund on a sound actuarial basis, as determined by the board in consultation with its actuary. City contributions shall be deposited into the trust fund at least quarterly. Member contributions shall be deposited into the trust fund immediately after each pay period. 
(d)  Expenses, charges and fees attributable to the management of the plan shall be paid from the fund. 
(e)  The city shall have no right, title or interest in the fund or in any part thereof, and no contribution made thereto shall revert to the city, except such part of the fund, if any, which remains therein after the satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.025; Ord. No. 03-14, § 27, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-107. - Service retirement benefits. 
(a)  A member of the retirement plan may elect to retire on a service retirement upon the attainment of retirement eligibility as defined in this section. An election to retire shall be made upon a written application, prescribed by the board. Benefits shall be effective on the date the application is approved in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by the board. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible for a service retirement upon the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of: 
(1)  The date upon which the member completes 20 years of credited service, regardless of age; or 
(2)  The date upon which the member attains age 60 with five years of credited service for a half benefit and ten years of service for a full benefit. 
(c)  There shall be no mandatory retirement age. 
(d)  A normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying two and thirty-five-hundredths percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service; except, that the normal retirement benefit for members retiring at age 60 with five years, but less than ten years of service, shall be determined by multiplying one and seventeen [and] one-half hundredths percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. Normal retirement benefits for members retiring at age 60 with ten years of service shall be based on a multiplier of two and thirty-five-hundredths percent of final monthly compensation. Effective January 1, 2006, a normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying two and one-half percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service; except, that the normal retirement benefit for members retiring at age 60 with five years, but less than ten years of service, shall be determined by multiplying one and one-quarter percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. Effective January 1, 2006, normal retirement benefits for members retiring at age 60 with ten years of service shall be based on a multiplier of two and one-half percent of final monthly compensation. 
(e)  A service retirement benefit shall be payable on the first day of each month. The benefit shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the member's actual retirement and shall continue until the death of the member. In the event that a member shall retire in the middle of the month, the retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the following month, but the member shall receive credit for the partial month preceding the actual date that payment commenced. 
(f)  Early retirement shall be available to a member on the first day of the month coincident with or next following attainment of age 55 and the completion of ten years of credited service. 
(g)  The benefit shall be determined by multiplying two and thirty-five one hundredths percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. Effective January 1, 2006, the benefit shall be determined by multiplying two and one-half percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. This benefit shall be actuarially reduced for the number of actual years and months at which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. The actuarial factor employed shall be a uniform rate established by the board, with the advice of the actuary. 
(h)  The payment of the early retirement income shall be subject to the same conditions as normal retirement income. 
(i)  If a member elects early retirement, the benefit formula in effect on the early retirement date shall be applicable to the member. 
(j)  A member entitled to a normal or early retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date upon which the first payment is received to elect to have the benefit payable under one of the options provided in this plan. A member shall be permitted to revoke any such election and to elect a new option at any time prior to the receipt of the first payment. Each retirement option shall be the actuarial equivalent of the other retirement options available. Election of the retirement option shall be on a form prescribed by the board. 
(1)  Joint and last survivor option. A member may elect to receive a reduced benefit for life and to have 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent, or 50 percent of such benefit continued after the member's death and during the lifetime of a designated survivor. A designated survivor may be any natural person, but need not be the spouse of the member. In the event that the designated survivor dies before the member's benefit payments begin, this option shall be canceled automatically and a retirement income shall be payable to the member as if the election had never been made. 
(2)  Ten-year certain and life thereafter. A member may elect to receive a reduced life annuity with 120 guaranteed payments. If the member shall die prior to receiving 120 payments, the remaining benefits shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by the member. In the event that no beneficiary has been designated, the member's estate shall be the recipient of the remaining balance of payments. 
(k)  Effective January 1, 2006, the monthly benefit currently being received by every retiree, including disability retirees, DROP participants, joint pensioners or beneficiaries who were receiving benefits on or before January 1, 2006, is increased by two percent. 
(Code 1986, § 5.027; Ord. No. 03-14, § 28, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 06-01, § 2, 1-4-2006) 
Sec. 46-108. - Buybacks/reemployment. 
(a)  Any member of the plan who is employed by the city prior to entry into military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into military service in the Armed Forces of the United States and thereafter re-enters the employ of the city, and is vested, shall be entitled to purchase service credits for the period of absence by contributing the amount that would have been contributed had the member continued in city employment for the period of military service based on the salary in effect on the date of the leave of absence, for each year being purchased. 
(b)  A member who is receiving, or will receive a pension benefit for military service in any other pension plan supported by public funds, may not use that service for this plan. A member who is receiving, or will receive any other pension in which time served in the military was used by the employee in that other pension plan shall not be eligible for military buyback as provided in this section. 
(c)  The contribution for military buyback required of the employee may be made in one lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions in installments for a period of time which shall not exceed the number or years being purchased. An employee making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefit under this section. If installment payments are not completed at the time an employee retires, the employee shall not receive military credit for the remaining period for which payments were not made. An employee making installment payments shall pay an interest rate as established by a uniform rule of the board. 
(d)  Any member who has previously separated from service with the city and withdrawn his or her accumulated contributions shall be permitted to buy back all prior service credits as set forth in this section. Employees may purchase all past service credit, including time spent as a full-time employee in the program funded by the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) or as a full-time contract employee with the city. No service credit may be purchased for temporary, seasonal or part-time work. The employee shall pay the full cost of the buyback, including the employee contribution, the contribution, a uniform rate of interest as adopted by the board, and the actual administrative cost of the buyback, including, but not limited to, actuarial, accounting and legal fees. All buybacks shall be at the current contribution and salary rates as determined by the most recent actuarial valuation adopted by the board. Employees wishing to exercise the buyback right must do so within one year from the date of reemployment. Any employee who fails to have completed the application process and tender the full amount of the buyback within the time limits provided in this section, shall be deemed to have irrevocably waived the right of the buyback. The buyback under this section shall be made in a single sum payment at the time of application. If an employee who exercises the buyback rights under this section should again leave city employment and withdraw accumulated contributions, the employee shall only be entitled to a return of that portion of the buyback amount which would have represented the regular employee contribution had the employee made that contribution in the regular course of employment. Any monies paid as part of the buyback which represented the contribution, interest contribution, or the administrative cost shall not be refundable. 
(e)  At the time any buyback is made under this section, the member shall consent to a medical examination in a form to be determined by the board, which examination shall be at the cost of the member, for the purpose of determining the presence of any preexisting medical condition. Any preexisting condition determined to exist at the time of the buyback may not serve as the basis for a subsequent claim for service or non-service connected disability retirement. 
(f)  An employee choosing to exercise a buyback may purchase all or any portion of prior service credit, but said buyback may be exercised only one time by a member. 
(g)  Reemployment by the city, other than as a full-time employee shall not affect receipt of benefits from the plan. In the event that a retiree is reemployed as a full-time employee in a position covered by this plan, receipt of benefits shall be suspended for the period of reemployment. Upon ending the period of reemployment, benefits shall be recalculated, taking into account, any additional credited service or change in final monthly compensation. 
(Code 1986, § 5.028; Ord. No. 03-14, § 29, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 06-01, § 3, 1-4-2006; Ord. No. 09-04, § 3, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-109. - Disability. 
(a)  A member shall be disabled under the terms of the plan if the member has suffered an illness, injury or disease which renders the member permanently and totally incapacitated, physically or mentally, from performing regular and continuous duties as an employee for the city. Disability shall not be determined based solely on the fact that a member cannot perform the duties of his or her classification as set forth in the job description. The city shall be required to accommodate disabled workers in accordance with state and federal law and shall not withhold assignment to vacant positions on the basis that the member is not capable of performing all of the tasks of a particular classification. A disability benefit cannot be based upon a condition which preexisted membership in the plan unless the cause of the disability would reasonably be expected to give rise to a disability as defined in this section in a person without the pre-existing condition. In order to determine the existence or non-existence of medical conditions, the board, by uniform rule may require members to submit to a pre-entry physical exam. The results of the physical exam shall not bar any person from membership in the plan, but shall only be used to determine the question of pre-existing conditions in the event of an application for disability retirement. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible for a service-incurred disability retirement from their entry date into the plan. A service-incurred disability retirement shall mean that the disability arose as a result of an act occurring in the performance of service with the city. 
(c)  A member shall be eligible for a non-service incurred disability retirement upon the completion of ten years of credited service. A non-service incurred disability shall be an illness, injury, or disease, which did not occur as a result of an act in the performance of service with the city. 
(d)  The service connected disability benefit shall be paid in equal monthly installments in an amount which shall be the greater of: 
(1)  42 percent of the member's final monthly compensation; 
(2)  The benefit supported by the single sum value of the deferred monthly retirement income beginning at normal retirement date which has accrued to the date of termination of service due to disability; or 
(3)  The benefit supported by 18 times the member's rate of final monthly compensation at the date of termination of service for disability. 
    In no instance shall the monthly amount computed in subsection (d)(3) exceed 60 percent of the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income commencing at normal retirement date. 
(e)  The non-service incurred disability benefit shall be paid on a monthly basis in an amount equal to the greater of: 
(1)  The benefit supported by the single sum value of the deferred monthly retirement income beginning at normal retirement date which has accrued to the date of termination of service due to disability; or 
(2)  18 times the member's rate of final monthly compensation at the date of termination of service for disability. 
    For the purposes of a nonservice incurred disability benefit, the final monthly compensation shall be determined as of the last day the member was actively at work for the city. 
(f)  Disability benefits shall be paid on the first day of each month. No benefit shall be paid until the board has actually considered and voted upon entitlement to disability. 
(g)  Disability retirement income shall continue until the death of the member or recovery from disability. In the event of the death of a member who is retired on a disability benefit and has not received 120 payments, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to a designated beneficiary selected by the member and communicated to the board on the form prescribed by the board. In the event that there is no designated beneficiary, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to the estate of the deceased member. During the period of disability, member contributions shall be suspended unless the member is receiving a pay supplement in addition to disability benefits provided under the Florida Workers' Compensation Act. In such event, there shall be a member contribution from that amount representing the supplemental pay. In the event a member's disability is converted to a service retirement as set forth in this section, the member shall be accorded credited service for the period of disability. 
(h)  No member shall be eligible to receive disability benefits from the plan during any period of time that the member is receiving a salary from the city. This section shall not apply to the receipt of worker's compensation benefits. 
(i)  Application for disability retirement shall be made on a form prescribed by the board. The member shall execute such medical releases as are necessary to permit the board to review the medical records needed to determine the question of disability and to discuss said records at a public meeting. Upon receipt of an application for disability, the board shall refer the application to its physician(s) for review. The applicant for disability shall be required to submit to such medical examinations as the board appointed physician(s) shall deem necessary. The board appointed physician(s), and any referring specialists, shall report their findings to the board, which shall include a determination, to the extent reasonably possible, of the origin of the disability, whether the disability is permanent, and whether the disability is total. In making these determinations, the physician(s) shall be bound by the definition of disability set forth in this plan. The city shall provide to the board and the physician(s) any documents relating to those cases where an applicant has been terminated from employment due to physical inability to perform the member's duties as an employee, as well as any attempts to provide alternate employment within the member's classification. 
(j)  Upon receipt of the report of the physician(s), the trustees shall schedule a public hearing at which time the board shall review all reports of the physician(s), together with any such documentary evidence as the applicant may wish to submit. The board shall conduct a preliminary determination as to whether the member is permanently and totally disabled based upon the written documentation presented. If the board does not grant the application based on the written documentation, it shall inform the member in writing of the reasons for the denial of the application. The member may, within 30 days of receipt of the board's preliminary denial, request a full evidentiary hearing before the board. Said hearing will be conducted consistent with the principles of due process and the rules of evidence generally applicable to administrative proceedings shall apply. This means that formal rules of evidence and civil procedure used in civil judicial proceedings shall not apply. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas compelling the attendance of witnesses. At said hearing the applicant may present such oral and written evidence as the applicant deems necessary to establish its burden of proof. The board may appoint special counsel as an advocate to cross-examine witnesses and to offer argument in opposition to the application. All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The attorney for the board shall not serve both as advocate and as advisor to the board in the same proceeding. The applicant and the board shall have the right to examine and cross-examine all witnesses. Medical reports and depositions may be accepted in lieu of live testimony, at the board's discretion. The decision of the board shall be based solely upon the evidence presented and the law applicable to this plan. The record in a case governed by this section shall consist only of a tape recording or transcript of the hearing; evidence received or considered; all notices, pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings; and any decisions, opinions, proposed or recommended orders or reports by the board. Making a verbatim record of the proceedings is not the duty of the board, but may be made by the member. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render an opinion in writing setting forth the reasons for the grant or denial of the benefit. In the event that the disability benefit is denied, the applicant shall have the right to judicial review by complaint for common law certiorari in the Circuit Court of Monroe County. 
(k)  The board may prescribe rules of procedure to implement the provisions of this plan relating to the conduct of disability hearings. 
(l)  No member shall be granted a disability pension upon a determination by the board that the disability resulted from: 
(1)  Excessive and habitual use of drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Intentionally self-inflicted wounds, injuries or ailments. 
(4)  Any occurrence arising from compensable employment unrelated to regular city employment, and such employment having been undertaken without prior permission of the appropriate department head having been granted to such member in writing. 
(5)  Any injury, illness or disease which preexisted membership in the plan unless the cause of the disability would have disabled the member notwithstanding the preexisting condition. 
(Code 1986, § 5.029; Ord. No. 03-14, § 30, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-110. - Death benefits. 
(a)  If the death of a member occurs prior to the normal retirement date, there shall be payable to the member's designated beneficiary, on a ten-year certain and life thereafter basis a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of death which shall be supported by the greater of: 
(1)  The single sum value of the participant's deferred monthly retirement income beginning at his normal retirement date which has accrued to the date of the member's death, based on the participant's number of years of credited service and final monthly compensation at the date of death; or 
(2)  The smaller of 18 times the member's rate of final monthly compensation at time of death or 100 times the member's anticipated monthly retirement income commencing at the normal retirement date based upon the participant's number of years of credited service and final monthly compensation at the time of death. 
    The amount of the benefit shall be computed as though the member had retired on the date of death and had chosen the 100-percent joint and survivor option. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the beneficiary unless the member has designated otherwise. The actuarial value of any other form of benefit may not exceed the actuarial value of the 100-percent joint and last survivor option. 
(b)  If the death of a member occurs after the normal retirement date, but prior to actual retirement or entry into the DROP, there shall be payable to his beneficiary a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of death which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the single sum value of the retirement income based upon the final monthly compensation and number of years of credited service at the date of death. 
(Code 1986, § 5.031; Ord. No. 03-14, § 31, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 09-04, § 4, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-111. - Compliance with Internal Revenue Code. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and of the board that the plan remain at all times a qualified plan, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  No member's annual benefit may exceed the maximum amount allowable under section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. In the event that a benefit shall exceed the maximum amount, the city shall establish an excess plan as permitted by law. 
(c)  Compensation in excess of limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation on compensation for an eligible employee shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. The term "eligible employee" means an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1996. 
(d)  In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the later of April 1 following the calendar year in which the member attains age 701/2, or April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which the member retires. 
(e)  When a distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in a lump sum, the distribution will be made in one or more of the following ways: over the life of the participant and designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary. 
(f)  If the distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
(g)  The method of distribution, if the participant dies before distribution is commenced, must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed within five years after the participant's death; 
(2)  Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either: (i) within five years after the participant's death; or (ii) over the life of the beneficiary, or over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant died or, if a designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 701/2. 
(h)  This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  "Eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
a.  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually), made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee, or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; 
b.  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
c.  The portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(2)  "Eligible retirement plan" is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(3)  "Distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
(4)  "Direct rollover" is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Code 1986, § 5.032; Ord. No. 03-14, § 32, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-112. - Distribution of marital interests. 
(a)  If the board of trustees is served with a domestic relations order or other legal process purporting to require the payment of any portion of a member's benefit to another person as a result of a dissolution of marriage, the board shall cause such order to be reviewed to determine compliance with the provisions of the plan. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to intervene in any such dissolution of marriage proceeding to ensure that such domestic relations order is otherwise consistent with the distribution of an interest in a public employee's retirement plan under state law. 
(c)  Any cost associated with the modification or correction of such domestic relations orders shall be the responsibility of the plan member. 
(d)  The board shall be authorized to seek intervention as provided by law in any legal proceedings which, in the opinion of the board, affects the substantial interests of the plan. 
(e)  The parties may consent to the entry of an order distributing benefits in a manner not otherwise inconsistent with the terms of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.034; Ord. No. 03-14, § 33, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 46-113. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  A deferred retirement option plan (DROP) is hereby created. 
(b)  Eligibility to participate in the DROP is based upon eligibility for service retirement or early retirement in the plan. 
(c)  Participation in the DROP must be exercised within the first 30 years of employment; provided, however, that participation in the DROP, when combined with participation in the plan as an active member may not exceed 30 years. The maximum period of participation in the DROP is five years. 
(d)  Upon exercising the right to participate in the DROP, an employee's creditable service, accrued benefits and final monthly compensation shall be frozen and 60 highest months of the 120 months immediately preceding participation in the DROP shall be utilized as the compensation basis. 
(e)  Payment shall be made into the employee's DROP account as if the employee had terminated employment in the city in an amount determined by the employee's selection of Options 1 and 2 as enumerated in section 46-107(j). 
(f)  An employee's account in the DROP program shall earn or lose interest based upon the actual earnings of the plan for the preceding year. 
(g)  An employee shall terminate service with the city at the conclusion of five years in the DROP. 
(h)  All interest shall be credited to the employee's DROP account at the end of the DROP period. 
(i)  Upon termination with the city, an employee shall receive payment within 45 days of the member's request for payment. 
(j)  Payments from the DROP may be received as a lump sum, or by rollover to an eligible retirement plan; provided, however, that at all times, the DROP shall be subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(k)  No payment may be made from the DROP until the employee actually separates from service with the city. 
(l)  If an employee dies during participation in the DROP, the employee shall be treated as any other vested member in the plan who dies prior to retirement. 
(m)  Upon commencement of participation in the DROP, the member shall no longer be eligible for disability retirement from the plan. If a member becomes disabled during the DROP period, the member shall be treated as if he/she retired on the day prior to the date of disability. 
(Code 1986, § 5.035; Ord. No. 03-14, § 5, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 09-04, § 5, 3-17-2009) 
Secs. 46-114-46-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLICE OFFICER AND FIREFIGHTER RETIREMENT PLAN OF 1964 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-141-46-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE OFFICERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 

Sec. 46-166. - Benefits extended to police officers. 
    It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of July 1, 1964, to employees and officials thereof in the position of police officers and not excluded by law nor excepted in this division the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto and by F.S. ch. 650, as amended, and to cover by such plan all of their services which constitute employment, as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city, except "none." 
(Code 1986, § 5.008) 
Sec. 46-167. - Employee referendum. 
    The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency and to request the governor to authorize an employee referendum, for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by such system of old-age and survivors insurance to the employees and officials of the city as specified in this division, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and proper and, subject to employee referendum, shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after July 1, 1964. 
(Code 1986, § 5.009) 
Sec. 46-168. - Withholdings authorized. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in this division are authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1986, § 5.010) 
Sec. 46-169. - City's contribution. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general revenue fund, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions, assessments and referendum costs required by the city as applicant or employer by state or federal laws or regulations for the purpose of this division, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1986, § 5.011) 
Sec. 46-170. - Records. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for the purpose of this division and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1986, § 5.012) 
Sec. 46-171. - Custodian of sums. 
    For the purpose of this division, the finance director-comptroller is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the finance director-comptroller is made the withholding and reporting agent and is charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purpose of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 5.013) 
Sec. 46-172. - Effect of negative vote in referendum. 
    If a majority of the eligible employees, as the term "eligible employee" is defined in section 218(d)(3) of the Social Security Act, at a referendum held pursuant to the authority of this division do not vote in favor of making applicable the coverage authorized in this division, the effect of this division shall immediately cease and determine, and moneys withheld, if any, pursuant to section 46-168 shall be refunded. 
(Code 1986, § 5.014) 
Secs. 46-173-46-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIREFIGHTERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 

Sec. 46-201. - Benefits extended to firefighters. 
    It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of July 1, 1964, to employees and officials thereof in the position of firefighter and not excluded by law nor exception in this division the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto and by F.S. ch. 650, as amended, and to cover by such plan all of their services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02 performed in the employ of the city, except "none." 
(Code 1986, § 5.015) 
Sec. 46-202. - Employee referendum. 
    The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency for the purpose of this division and to request the governor to authorize an employee referendum, for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by such system of old-age and survivors insurance to the city employees and officials as specified in this division, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and proper and, subject to employee referendum, shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after July 1, 1964. 
(Code 1986, § 5.016) 
Sec. 46-203. - Withholdings authorized. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in this division are authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1986, § 5.017) 
Sec. 46-204. - City contribution. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general revenue fund, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions, assessments and referendum costs required of the city as applicant or employer by state or federal laws or regulations for the purpose of this division, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1986, § 5.018) 
Sec. 46-205. - Records. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for the purpose of this division and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1986, § 5.019) 
Sec. 46-206. - Custodian of sums. 
    For the purpose of this division, the finance director-comptroller is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the finance director-comptroller is made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purpose of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 5.020) 
Sec. 46-207. - Effect of negative vote in referendum. 
    If a majority of the eligible employees, as the term "eligible employee" is defined in section 218(d)(3) of the social security act, at a referendum held pursuant to the authority of this division, do not vote in favor of making applicable the coverage authorized in this division, the effect of this division shall immediately cease and determine, and moneys withheld, if any, pursuant to section 46-203 shall be refunded. 
(Code 1986, § 5.021) 
Secs. 46-208-46-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE OFFICER'S AND FIREFIGHTER'S RETIREMENT PLAN 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated employee contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from a member's compensation or picked up on behalf of a member. Accumulated employee contributions shall also mean any amounts paid by a member for the purchase of military service credits or other buybacks permitted in this plan. 
    Active membership means membership in the retirement plan as an employee. 
    Actuarial equivalent means equality in value of the aggregate amount or benefits under different forms of payment based upon the following actuarial assumptions: where the actuarial equivalent calculation involves the determination of the present value of a benefit or a conversion from one form of periodic payment to another form of payment. Actuarial equivalent amounts will be based upon the 1994 Group Annuity Reserving Table, projected to 2002, based upon a fixed blend of 50 percent male mortality rates - 50 percent female mortality rates, per IRS Revenue Ruling 2001-62, set forward five years for disabled lives. 
    And shall have a conjunctive meaning. 
    Beneficiary means any person receiving a retirement allowance or other benefit from the retirement plan. This term includes retirees and survivors. 
    Benefit means a retirement allowance or other benefit provided by the retirement plan. 
    Board and board of trustees mean the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
    Buyback means a member's contribution to the retirement plan for creditable service for which other than regular contributions have been made. Contributions required for buybacks shall not be picked up by the city, but may be deducted from a member's compensation. 
    Child means the natural or adopted child of a member, but shall not include foster children or step-children. 
    City commission and commission mean the city commission of Key West, Florida. 
    Credited service means membership credit upon which a member's eligibility to receive benefits under the retirement plan is based or upon which the amount of such benefits is to be determined. 
    Disability means the permanent and total incapacity to perform useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter for the city, as determined by the board pursuant to the terms of the plan. 
    Early service retirement means the first day of the month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service, with an actuarial reduction for the number of years and months by which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. 
    Earnable compensation means a member's base salary and overtime; compensatory time pay; assignment pay; educational incentive pay; percentage increases to base pay; experience, longevity and years of service pay; and licensure or training pay, including pick-up contributions for all hours worked. Earnable compensation shall not include payments for accrued sick leave; accrued vacation leave; accrued compensatory leave; holiday pay; the value of any employment benefits or nonmonetary entitlements; or any other form of remuneration. 
    Employee means a person presently employed in the regular, permanent, and full-time classified service of the city, as a police officer or firefighter. 
    Final monthly compensation means a member's average monthly rate of earnable compensation from the city during the best 36 consecutive calendar months out of the last 120 calendar months; provided that if a member has been employed for fewer than 36 months, the average shall be taken over the period of actual employment. 
    Full-time has the meaning as set forth in the city's personnel rules and in any collective bargaining agreements applicable to police officers and/or firefighters. 
    Fund means the City of Key West Police Officers' and Firefighters' Retirement Fund. 
    May means a permissive term. 
    Member means a police officer or firefighter for whom contributions to the retirement plan are picked up as required by this plan. 
    Membership service means service as an employee for which contributions to the retirement plan were made as required by this plan. 
    Minimum vesting means ten years of credited service before the member is entitled to retirement benefits except for service-incurred disability retirement income or service-incurred death benefits. 
    Noninvestment expenses shall exclude fees paid to money managers whose duty it is to invest and manage the assets of the plan and to report on the performance of those investments. Salaries for office staff, overhead, professional fees for actuaries, accountants, financial consultants, performance monitors and attorneys, and other similar nonbenefit costs are examples of noninvestment expenses. 
    Normal costs means the cost of benefits attributable to the current year. 
    Normal retirement age means age 55. 
    Normal retirement date means the earlier of the completion of 20 years of credited service or the attainment of age 55, with ten years of credited service. 
    Option means one of several choices available to members with respect to the manner in which a retirement benefit may be paid. 
    Pickup amounts means employer contributions derived from a member's earnable compensation through a reduction in the member's earnable compensation. 
    Plan means the City of Key West Police Officer's and Firefighters' Retirement Plan. 
    Plan year means the period from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
    Preexisting condition means a condition of health which predated any period of city employment. 
    Regular contributions means amounts picked up by the city from the earnable compensation of a member. Regular earnable contributions shall not include buyback contributions or any other amounts which may be deducted from a member's earnable compensation pursuant to this article. 
    Retiree means a former member who is in receipt of benefits from the plan. 
    Retirement means a member's withdrawal from service with a benefit granted to the member pursuant to the provisions of this plan. Retirement shall also mean entry into the deferred retirement option plan. 
    Service means active employment as an employee of the city. 
    Service retirement means a member's retirement from service under circumstances permitting payment of a retirement benefit without reduction because of age, length of service, or both and without special qualifications such as disability. 
    Spouse means the lawful husband or wife of a member or retiree at the time benefits commence, unless a new designation has been made in writing to the board in accordance with the provisions of this plan. This section shall be interpreted under Florida Choice of Law Rules. 
    Surviving spouse means the spouse of the member at the time death benefits commence unless a new designation has been made in accordance with the provisions of this plan. 
    Trustee means a member of the board of trustees of the plan. 
    Unfunded liability means the excess of the actuarial accrued liability of the plan over its present assets. 
    Useful and efficient service means the performance of the regular duties of a police officer or firefighter as assigned by the city. The board shall determine from the facts of each disability application whether the member is performing in accordance with this definition. 
    Vested benefit means an immediate or deferred benefit to which a member has gained a nonforfeitable right under the provisions of this plan. 
    Vesting means five years of creditable service before the member is entitled to 50 percent of his service retirement benefits, and ten years before the member is entitled to 100 percent of his service retirement benefits. 
(Code 1986, § 5.038; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 5-3-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-237. - Established; name; operative date. 
(a)  A retirement plan is established and placed under the exclusive administration and management of a board of trustees for the purpose of providing retirement benefits pursuant to this article and for the payment of the reasonable expenses of the retirement plan. 
(b)  The retirement plan established by this article shall be known as the city police officer's and firefighter's retirement plan. 
(c)  The retirement plan shall have an effective date of August 5, 1997. 
(Code 1986, § 5.037; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-238. - Amendment or termination of system. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and the board that this plan shall constitute an irrevocable trust, and no portion of the assets may revert to the employer until all other obligations of the plan, including the payment to the last surviving member and beneficiary, has been paid. 
(b)  For termination or partial termination of the plan, each participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable (100-percent vested) to the extent funded. If the plan is terminated, the assets of the plan shall first be distributed to retired members and their beneficiaries. If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment to retired members and their beneficiaries, apportionment shall next be made to each member in service who has completed at least ten years of credited service and has contributed to the fund for at least ten years and who is not otherwise eligible to retire. If there is any asset value after the apportionments to retirees and their beneficiaries and to vested members of the plan, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member in the service of the city in an amount not to exceed the total value of the member's contributions. If there is any asset value remaining after full apportionment to all members and beneficiaries of the plan, the excess, if any, shall revert to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions; provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the municipality and the state to the date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the municipality and the state. 
(c)  No amendment to the plan shall be made until the amendment has been referred to the board of trustees for review and the board has issued its comments, in writing, to the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 5.048; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-239. - Vesting and termination. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all rights to benefits under this plan shall terminate when a member's employment terminates for any reason other than normal or early service retirement, early service retirement, or disability retirement. Any member who completes ten years of credited service and whose contributions remain in the plan has a vested right to accrued benefits from the plan. A member who has completed five years of credited service shall be 50-percent vested in the plan and shall receive an additional ten-percent vesting credit each year thereafter until fully vested. 
(b)  A member who shall leave the service of the city prior to eligibility for normal service retirement or early service retirement, but who has completed ten years of creditable service, shall be entitled to receive retirement benefits commencing at the regular normal or early service retirement date. Such benefits will be based on final monthly compensation and credited service as of the date of termination. 
(c)  Every member shall have the right to elect to receive, in lieu of all benefits under the plan, a return of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(d)  A member who elects a lump-sum return of contributions releases and discharges the city and the plan from the right to any other benefits from the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.045; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-240. - Distribution of marital interests. 
(a)  If the board is served with a domestic relations order or other legal process purporting to require the payment of any portion of a member's benefit to another person as a result of a dissolution of marriage, the board shall cause such order to be reviewed to determine compliance with the provisions of the plan. 
(b)  The board shall be authorized to intervene in any such dissolution of marriage proceeding to ensure that such domestic relations order is otherwise consistent with the distribution of an interest in a public employees retirement plan under state law. 
(c)  Any cost associated with the modification or correction of such domestic relations orders shall be the responsibility of the plan member. 
(d)  The board shall be authorized to seek, intervention as provided by law in any legal proceedings which, in the opinion of the board, affects the substantial interests of the plan. 
(e)  The parties may consent to the entry of an order distributing benefits in a manner not otherwise inconsistent with the terms of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.049; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-241. - Assignability of rights. 
    The present or future right of a person to money in the fund or to a retirement allowance, an optional allowance, a death benefit, the return of contributions, or any other right accrued or accruing under the provisions of this plan shall not be assignable and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law or any other process of law whatsoever, except with respect to alimony, child support or medical payments to a former spouse. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(a); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-242. - Investigation of pensions obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally. 
    The board shall have the power to examine the facts upon which any pension has been granted under any prior or existing law or which may be granted in the future or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person who has been granted a pension under a prior or existing law, or who is granted a benefit under this article, if the granting of that pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent, or illegal for any reason, and to reclassify any pensioner who has under any prior or existing law or who may under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(b); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-243. - Correction of records. 
    If any change or error in plan records is discovered or results in any member or beneficiary receiving from the plan more or less than he would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall have the power to correct such error and, as far as possible, adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of a benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(c); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-244. - Guardian of minor. 
    If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is under any other legal disability, the board shall have the power to withhold payment of benefits until presented with proof satisfactory of the appointment of a guardian. If the board becomes aware that any member or beneficiary is incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due under the plan, the board shall cause notice to be given to that participant or beneficiary of a hearing to determine whether such benefits should continue to be paid until the appointment of a guardian. During the pendency of any such hearing, however, the board may continue to pay benefits to the member or beneficiary, and such payment shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(d); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-245. - Eligibility for future benefits. 
    Persons retiring on or after October 1, 1988, shall be eligible for any future benefit changes from the date of the change forward. The board, by uniform rule, shall determine those future plan changes which meet the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(e); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-246. - Post retirement supplement. 
(a)  In addition to the monthly retirement benefits provided by this plan, there shall be a supplemental payment of $269.00 per month. This benefit shall commence on the first day of the month following separation from service, providing the member is in a pay status with the plan, and shall cease in the month immediately preceding the member's 65th birthday. This benefit shall apply on a retroactive basis to all retirees who had attained the age of 62 prior to July 1, 2007, including retroactive payments for the retirees back to the time they had reached age 62. 
(b)  The board, by uniform rule, shall establish a procedure for the distribution of this benefit. The board may, in its discretion, provide for the direct payment of this benefit to an insurance provider or other tax qualified method of distribution. 
(Code 1986, § 5.051(f)(g); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-15-2008) 
Secs. 46-247-46-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 46-276. - Administration of plan. 
    The sole and exclusive administration of and the responsibility for the proper effective operation of the city police officer's and firefighter's retirement plan and for carrying out the provisions of this article is vested in a five-member board of trustees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(a); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-277. - Composition. 
    The board of trustees shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  Two trustees shall be selected by the mayor and city commission. Unless it is determined by a majority vote of the city commission that a suitable retiree cannot be found to serve on the board, one trustee shall be a retired member of the Key West Fire Department and the other trustee shall be a retired member of the Key West Police Department. Each trustee shall be a legal resident of the city or maintain a legal residence within 30 miles of its boundaries. 
(2)  Two trustees, one being a police officer, and one being a firefighter, shall be elected by a majority of the respective groups of employees who are active members of the plan. 
(3)  One trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the other four trustees, and such person's name shall be submitted to the mayor and city commission for appointment. The appointment of the fifth member by the mayor and city commission shall be a ministerial duty. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(b); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 09-24, § 1, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 46-278. - Terms of office; vacancies. 
(a)  The term of office for each trustee shall be two years. There is no limit to the number of terms a trustee may serve. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of a trustee's term, a replacement trustee shall be chosen in the same manner as the trustee who has left office. A replacement trustee shall serve a full term measured from the date of replacement. 
(c)  All trustees shall serve until their replacements are selected. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(c); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-279. - Election procedure for trustees. 
    The board shall prescribe a uniform election procedure for the selection of the active member trustees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(d); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-280. - Compensation. 
    All trustees shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed from the fund for all necessary expenses authorized by the board. The board shall be permitted to prescribe uniform rules for reimbursement for travel expenditures. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(e); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-281. - Officers. 
    The board of trustees, by majority vote, shall annually select a chairperson and a secretary, who shall execute all documents on behalf of the board. The board, by majority vote, shall annually select a co-chairperson, who shall act as chairperson in the chairperson's absence. The board, by rule, may set the duties of the respective officers. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(f); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-282. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and shall have full power to act under the terms of the plan. Three concurring votes shall be required for the board to take action. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(g); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-283. - Records of proceedings. 
    The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings which shall be maintained and open to public inspection in accordance with F.S. chs. 119 and 286. Such records shall reflect a complete and comprehensive account of the discussions and actions taken by the board. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(h); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-284. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board shall have the authority to make such uniform rules and regulations and to take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan. All decisions of the board, made in good faith, shall be final, binding and conclusive on all parties. No rule may conflict with the provisions of the city Charter or Code, state or federal law. No rule of the plan may conflict with the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement affecting members of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(i); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-285. - Fiduciary responsibilities. 
    The board shall be deemed the named fiduciary of the plan and shall discharge its responsibilities solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries of the plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to the members and their beneficiaries and to defray the reasonable expenses of the plan. The trustees shall exercise those fiduciary responsibilities with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a similar character and with similar aims. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(j); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-286. - Administrative duties. 
    The board shall have the administrative duties to: 
(1)  Maintain such records as are necessary for calculating and distributing retirement benefits. 
(2)  Maintain such records as are necessary for financial accounting and reporting of plan funds. 
(3)  Maintain such records as are necessary for actuarial evaluation of the plan, including investigations into the mortality, service and compensation experience of its members and beneficiaries. 
(4)  Compile such other administrative or investment information as is necessary for the management of the plan. 
(5)  Process, certify and/or respond to all correspondence, bills and statements received by the plan, as well as all applications submitted to the board for retirement benefits. 
(6)  Establish and maintain communication with city departments and other agencies of government as is necessary for the management of the plan, including preparing, filing and distributing such reports and information as are required by law to be prepared, filed or distributed on behalf of the plan. 
(7)  Determine all questions relating to and process all applications for eligibility, participation and benefits. 
(8)  Distribute at regular intervals to employees a comprehensive summary plan description and periodic reports, not less than annually, regarding the financial and actuarial status of the plan. 
(9)  Retain and compensate such professional and technical experience as is necessary to fulfill its fiduciary responsibilities. 
(10)  Make recommendations regarding changes in the provisions of the plan. 
(11)  Ensure the prompt deposit of all member contributions, city contributions, state contributions and investment earnings. 
(12)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations for the management of the plan. 
(13)  Take such other action as the trustees shall deem, in their sole and exclusive discretion, as being necessary for the efficient management of the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(k); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-287. - Advisors. 
    The board shall have the authority to retain its own legal counsel, accountants, actuaries and other professional advisors to assist the board in the performance of its duties. The board may act without independent investigation upon the professional advice of the advisors so retained. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(l); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-288. - Physician to be retained. 
    The board shall retain a physician, as needed, to assist in the performance of its administrative duties with regard to consideration of medical questions arising under the plan. The physician shall conduct any required medical examinations or refer the examinee to a specialist or specialists. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-289. - Protection of fund assets and board. 
    The board is authorized to prosecute or defend actions, claims or proceedings of any nature or kind for the protection of the fund assets or for the protection of the board in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(m); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-290. - Liability; insurance. 
    Neither the board nor any of its individual members shall have any personal liability for any action taken in good faith. The trustees individually and the board as a whole shall be entitled to the protections in F.S. § 768.28. The trustees shall also be authorized to purchase, from the assets of the fund, errors and omission insurance to protect the trustees in the performance of their duties. Such insurance shall not provide protection against a trustee's fraud, intentional misrepresentation, willful misconduct or gross negligence. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(n); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-291. - Misconduct, misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance. 
    No trustee shall be responsible, at his own expense, to take legal action to correct the misconduct of any other member of the board of trustees. A trustee shall have an affirmative obligation, however, to publicly reveal any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by a co-trustee and, upon making such revelation in a public meeting, shall be relieved of further individual responsibility of the actions of that co-trustee. 
(Code 1986, § 5.039(o); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-292. - Procedures for maintaining confidentiality of medical information. 
    The board shall establish uniform procedures for maintaining confidentiality of medical information as required by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-293. - Placing plan business on agenda. 
    When consideration by the city commission is required for plan business, such business shall be placed on the agenda of the commission and heard at the next scheduled meeting, consistent with the agenda rules of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-294. - Copies of documents; written communications. 
    The board and the city manager shall each provide the other with copies of all documents relating to the plan contemporaneously upon the making or receipt of such documents. All written communications relating to the plan from the board to the city shall be made directly to the city manager. All written communications to the board from the city manager shall be made directly to the board, with copies to the pension administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-295. - Employment of plan administrator. 
    The board may employ a pension administrator to assist the board in the performance of its administrative duties. The pension administrator, subject to the approval of the board, may employ such staff as is necessary for the proper administrator of the plan. The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of pension administrator. The board shall, in selecting a pension administrator, exercise all judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence, exercise in the management of their own affairs. The pension administrator shall have a written contract of employment with the board, which shall include any tenure rights which the board, in its discretion, may grant. The pension administrator shall not be an employee of the city. The pension administrator shall be a fiduciary of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-296. - Fund management and investments. 
(a)  The city police officer's and firefighter's retirement plan is established as an irrevocable trust fund into which shall be deposited all of the assets of the plan of every kind and description. The plan is a defined benefit retirement fund. Vested members have an ownership right in benefits accrued as provided for in this plan. No member has an ownership right in the assets of the plan. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund shall be vested in the board of trustees. All assets of the plan may be commingled, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate accounts regarding the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members, both on an individual and aggregate basis. 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements. 
(3)  Benefits payments. 
(4)  All contributions from the city. 
(5)  All insurance premium tax rebates pursuant to F.S. chs. 175 and 185. 
(6)  All interest, dividends, gains and losses from investment. 
(7)  Such other entries as may be required for a clear, complete financial report of the status of the fund. 
(c)  The board shall maintain a written investment policy, with the advice and counsel of such advisors as the board deems necessary, and such investment policy shall set forth the types of securities and other types of investments into which shall be placed the assets of the fund. The policy shall further set forth appropriate limitations on those investments, including but not limited to anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment, acceptable risk, and any other factor as required by law. The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets of the plan in such securities or property, real or personal, as the board deems appropriate, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations of the United States or any of its agencies, or those guaranteed by the United States or for which the credit of the United States is pledged for the payment of the principal and interest or dividends thereof. 
(2)  Accounts or certificates of deposit in any bank or other financial institution incorporated under the laws of the state or any national bank organized under the laws of the United States or authorized to do business and situated in the state, to the extent that such certificates of deposit are secured by the deposits of securities of the United States government. 
(3)  Notes secured by first mortgages on real property insured or guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration or the Veterans' Administration. 
(4)  Interest-bearing obligations with a fixed maturity of any corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States and the District of Columbia, provided that such obligations are rated by at least two nationally recognized ratings services in any one of the four highest classifications approved by the comptroller of the currency for the investment of funds of national banks or, if only one nationally recognized ratings service shall rate such obligations, such ratings service must have rated such obligation in any one of the three highest rating classifications as set forth in this subsection. 
(5)  Bonds issued by foreign states, to the extent permitted by law. 
(6)  Venture capital, private placements and letter stocks which may be in the form of commingled ownership. 
(7)  Real estate, which may be in the form of commingled ownership and financial institutional futures, listed options, stock index futures, which may be used under specific instruction of managers. 
(8)  Common stock, preferred stock and interest-bearing obligations of domestic corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States or any state or the District of Columbia. 
(9)  Common stock, preferred stock, and interest-bearing obligations of foreign corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a foreign corporation, to the extent permitted by law. 
(d)  The board may determine the percentage of each type of investment to be held. 
(e)  The board shall be authorized to retain one or more money managers for the management of assets held by the plan, and the board shall convey property of the plan to such managers for investment and reinvestment in accordance with the terms of this article and the investment policies established by the board. 
(f)  All money managers shall have a written contract with the board specifying the assets to be invested; the asset classes appropriate for utilization; expected performance; standard of care and resolution of disputes. All such contracts shall be governed in accordance with the laws of the state and shall have venue for resolution of disputes in the county. All such contracts shall have a clause stating that the board retains the right, at all times, to terminate any money manager agreement, with or without cause. In the event that any money manager shall invest assets of the plan in a prohibited category of investment or shall otherwise breach the terms of the investment agreement, if such breach causes a loss to the trust, the contract shall require the money manager to make the trust whole for any losses incurred. Each money manager shall be a fiduciary of the plan. 
(g)  In the conduct of their affairs, all money managers shall exercise the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims. This provision shall be incorporated in and become a part of any contract with the board. 
(h)  The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of any money manager retained by the board. The board shall, in selecting a money manager or other investment counsel, exercise all judgment and care in the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(i)  Any money manager or investment advisor who has custody or control of any trust assets or who is otherwise employed, directly or indirectly, in the management of plan assets shall keep accurate and detailed accounts of all such activities, which records shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city, the board, or their designees. 
(j)  The board shall also keep accurate and detailed accounts of its assets and investments, which shall be open for inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city or its designees. 
(Code 1986, § 5.041; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Secs. 46-297-46-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS AND CONTRIBUTIONS 

Sec. 46-321. - Contributions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the city shall pick up, rather than deduct from each member's pay, beginning with the date of employment, seven percent of the member's basic earnable compensation. The monies so picked up shall be deposited in the fund on a bimonthly basis. An account record shall be maintained continuously for each member. Pickup contributions shall continue until death, disability or termination of service, whichever shall occur first. Contributions shall remain in the fund unless withdrawn as provided in the plan. No member shall have the option to choose to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city directly to the plan. All such pickup contributions by the city shall be deemed and be considered as part of the member's accumulated contributions and subject to all provisions of the plan pertaining to accumulated contributions of members. The intent of this subsection is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. For the purpose of accruing and calculating pension benefits, social security benefits, overtime compensation, percentage increases to base pay, supplemental percentage payments for particular assignments, education, experience, longevity, years of service, payroll steps, licensure or training, and for paying social security taxes and for such other purposes except as specified in this plan, the amount of employee contributions picked up or paid by the city will be added to the amount distributed on a current basis in order to determine total wages, salary, pay or compensation. 
(b)  All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits at least equal in total amount to the member's accumulated contributions. 
(c)  The city shall make such contribution under the Florida Protection of Public Employee Retirement Benefits Act, which, together with contributions picked up on behalf of members, chapters 175 and 185 money, and plan earnings, will maintain the fund on a sound actuarial basis, as determined by the board in consultation with its actuary. City contributions shall be deposited into the trust fund at least quarterly. Member contributions shall be deposited into the trust fund immediately after each pay period. 
(d)  Expenses, charges and fees attributable to the management of the plan shall be paid from the fund. 
(e)  The city shall have no right, title or interest in the fund or in any part thereof, and no contribution made thereto shall revert to the city, except such part of the fund, if any, which remains therein after the satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan. 
(f)  Any monies received or receivable because of laws of the state for the express purpose of funding and paying for police and firefighter retirement benefits shall be deposited in the trust fund comprising this plan. Any such amount shall be deposited in the fund immediately and under no circumstances more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5.040; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-322. - Service retirement benefits. 
(a)  A member may elect to retire on a service retirement upon the attainment of retirement eligibility as defined in this section. An election to retire shall be made upon a written application, prescribed by the board. Benefits shall be effective on the date the application is approved in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by the board. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible for a service retirement upon the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the date upon which the member: 
(1)  Completes 20 years of credited service, regardless of age; or 
(2)  Attains age 55 with five years of credited service for a 50 percent vested benefit and ten years of credited service for a 100 percent vested benefit. 
(c)  There shall be no mandatory retirement age. 
(d)  A normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying 2.85 percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. Effective October 1, 2005, a normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying three percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. 
(e)  The normal form of retirement benefit shall be an unreduced life annuity with 120 guaranteed payments. If the member shall die prior to receiving 120 payments, the remaining benefits shall be paid to the beneficiary or beneficiaries, named jointly or sequentially, designated by the member. If no beneficiary has been designated, the member's estate shall be the recipient of the remaining balance of payments. A service retirement benefit shall be payable on the first day of each month. The benefit shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the member's actual retirement and shall continue, except as provided in this section, until the death of the member. If a member shall retire in the middle of the month, the retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the following month, but the member shall receive credit for the partial month preceding the actual date that payment commenced. 
(f)  Early retirement shall be available to a member on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service. An election to retire early shall be made upon a written application prescribed by the board. Benefits shall be effective on the date the application is approved in accordance with the administrative rules adopted by the board. 
(g)  The early retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying 2.85 percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. Effective October 1, 2005, a normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying three percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. This benefit shall be actuarially reduced for the number of actual years and months at which the starting date of the benefit precedes normal retirement date. The actuarial factor employed shall be a uniform rate established by the board, but which rate shall not exceed three percent per year. 
(h)  The payment of the early retirement income shall be subject to the same conditions as normal retirement income. 
(i)  If a member elects early retirement, the benefit formula in effect on the early retirement date shall be applicable to the member. 
(j)  A member entitled to a normal or early service retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date upon which the first payment is received to elect to have the benefit payable under one of the options provided in this plan. A member shall be permitted to revoke any such election and to elect a new option at any time prior to the receipt of the first payment. Each retirement option shall be the actuarial equivalent of the other retirement options available. Election of the retirement option shall be on a form prescribed by the board. 
(1)  Joint and last survivor option. A member may elect to receive a reduced benefit for life and to have 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent, or 50 percent of such benefit continued after the member's death and during the lifetime of a designated survivor. A designated survivor may be any natural person, but need not be the spouse of the member. If the designated survivor dies before the member's benefit payments begin, this option shall be canceled automatically, and a retirement income shall be payable to the member as if the election had never been made. 
(2)  Life annuity. A member may elect an enhanced life annuity, which shall cease upon the death of the member with no survivorship benefit, unless the member, at the time of death, has not received benefits equal to his employee contribution amount. 
(3)  Change of beneficiary. A member in receipt of a service retirement may change the designation of beneficiary or joint pensioner at any time provided the member produces evidence at the time of the change that both the new and to be deleted beneficiaries are alive and in good health. The substituted beneficiary shall be eligible to receive benefits which are the actuarial equivalent of benefits which would have been received had the original beneficiary remained. A retiree receiving a joint and survivor form of benefit shall be permitted to change his beneficiary, as provided in F.S. §§ 175.171, 175.333, 185.161 and 185.341. Upon failure of a member to designate a beneficiary, any remaining benefit shall be paid to the deceased member's estate. 
(Code 1986, § 5.042; Ord. No. 00-38, § 1, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 46-323. - Buybacks/reemployment. 
(a)  Any member of the plan who is employed by the city prior to entry into military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into military service in the armed forces of the United States and thereafter reenters the employ of the city, within one year from the date of his release from active service shall have up to five years of credited service added to his years of actual credited service with the city, at no cost to the member. The amount of credit to be added shall coincide with the member's actual time served in the military. Effective October 1, 2017, notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credits with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Furthermore, effective October 1, 2017, the survivors of any participant who dies on or after October 1, 2017, while performing qualified military service, are entitled to any additional benefits (other than contributions relating to the period of qualified military service, but including vesting service credit for such period and any ancillary life insurance or other survivor benefits) that would have been provided under the plan had the participant resumed employment on the day preceding the participant's death and then terminated employment on account of death. 
(b)  Prior Military - Any member who has successfully completed all of the terms of the probationary period for the City of Key West and who has served on active military duty in the Armed Forces of the United States prior to entry or re-entry into the plan may receive credit for a maximum of five (5) years of military service time in the plan, provided the member has not received and will not receive a benefit from another retirement plan based on such prior service, and provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the plan the full actuarial cost of the buyback. Members purchasing military service credit shall provide the Board of Trustees with proof of the prior service with honorable separation. 
(c)  Prior Police Service - Any member who is a police officer and who has successfully completed all of the terms of the probationary period for the City of Key West and who has been employed in a full-time position as a police officer with another government agency prior to entry or re-entry into the plan may receive credit for up to a maximum of five (5) years of such police officer employment in the plan, provided the member has not received and will not receive a benefit from another retirement plan based on such prior police officer employment, and provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the plan the full actuarial cost of the buyback. Members purchasing prior police officer employment credit shall provide the Board of Trustees with proof of the prior qualifying employment. 
(d)  Prior Firefighter - Any member who is a firefighter and who has successfully completed all of the terms of the probationary period for the City of Key West and who has been employed in a full-time position as a firefighter with another government agency prior to entry or re-entry into the plan may receive credit for up to a maximum of five (5) years of such firefighter employment in the plan, provided the member has not received and will not receive a benefit from another retirement plan based on such prior firefighter employment, and provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the plan the full actuarial cost of the buyback. Members purchasing prior firefighter employment credit shall provide the Board of Trustees with proof of the prior qualifying employment. 
(e)  The full actuarial cost of a military, police or fire service buyback, as described in sections (b)(c) and/or (d), above, shall be calculated pursuant to the following assumptions: 
(1)  Full actuarial cost shall be calculated by assuming 100 basis points below the plan's assumed rate of return at the time of the request, or six and one half percent (6.5%). 
(2)  There shall be an assumption of zero percent(0%) turnover in calculating the contribution payment. 
(3)  Should the member not complete the buyback, he or she shall be granted credited service in the amount that the contribution is made support the credited service. The actuary shall compute the amount of the credited service 
(f)  The contribution of the full actuarial cost for any military, police or fire service buyback under this subsection required of the employee may be made in installment payments correlated to the amount of years of service being purchased, up to five (5) years. The Plan actuary shall prepare the initial and subsequent calculations (if required) related to the cost of any military buyback under this section. The fee charged by the actuary for the calculation(s) shall be paid for by the member. There shall be no cost to the Plan or to the City for any such service credits purchased by the member. 
(g)  Purchased service shall only count toward retirement eligibility for those members retiring under normal or early provisions, and shall not count toward eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. 
(h)  Payment for additional service may be made via direct transfer or rollover of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified retirement plan as determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(i)  The maximum purchase under this section shall be five (5) years when combined with credited service purchased for prior service as a police officer or firefighter in a full-time position with another government agency. 
(j)  A member who is receiving or will receive a pension benefit for military service in any other pension plan supported by public funds may not use that service for this pension plan. A member who is receiving or will receive any other pension in which time served in the military was used by the employee in that other pension plan shall not be eligible for military buyback as provided in this section. 
(k)  Reemployment by the city, other than as a full-time civil servant, shall not affect receipt of benefits from the plan. If a retiree is reemployed as a full-time civil service employee in a position covered by this plan, receipt of benefits shall be suspended for the period of reemployment. Upon ending the period of reemployment, benefits shall be recommenced, taking into account any additional credited service or change in final monthly compensation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a police officer member retires from the plan, and is subsequently reemployed as a firefighter, or if a firefighter retires from the plan, and is subsequently reemployed as a police officer, the reemployed member may continue to receive their retirement benefit from the plan, and shall be enrolled in the plan as a newly hired member. 
(l)  The Board of Trustees has the authority to adopt administrative rules to implement military and prior service buybacks. 
(Code 1986, § 5.043; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 05-17, § 2, 7-19-2005; Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 5-3-2011; Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 10-18-2017; Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 4-4-2018) 
Sec. 46-324. - Disability. 
(a)  A member shall be disabled under the terms of the plan if the member has suffered an illness, injury or disease which renders the member permanently and totally incapacitated, physically or mentally, from performing useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter. Disability shall not be determined based solely on the fact that a member cannot perform all the duties of his classification as set forth in the job description. The city shall be required to accommodate disabled workers in accordance with state and federal law and shall not withhold assignment to vacant positions on the basis that the member is not capable of performing all of the tasks of a particular classification. A disability benefit cannot be based upon a condition which preexisted membership in the plan unless the cause of the disability would reasonably be expected to give rise to a disability as defined in this section in a person without the preexisting condition. In order to determine the existence or nonexistence of medical conditions, the board of trustees, by uniform rule, may require members to submit to a preentry physical exam. The results of the physical exam shall not bar any person from membership in the plan, but shall only be used to determine the question of preexisting conditions if an application for disability retirement is made. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible for a service-incurred disability retirement from his entry date into the plan. A service-incurred disability retirement shall mean that the disability arose as a result of an act occurring in the performance of service with the city. In determining whether a disability arose in the line of duty, the board may consider evidence that the medical condition giving rise to the disability was a preexisting condition. 
(c)  A member shall be eligible for a non-service-incurred disability retirement upon the completion of ten years of credited service. A non-service-incurred disability shall be an illness, injury, or disease which did not occur as a result of an act in the performance of service with the city. 
(d)  The service-connected disability benefit shall be paid in equal monthly installments in an amount which shall be the greater of: 
(1)  Forty-two percent of the member's final monthly compensation; 
(2)  The benefit supported by the single sum value of the deferred monthly retirement income beginning at normal retirement date which has accrued to the date of termination of service due to disability; or 
(3)  The benefit supported by 18 times the member's rate of final monthly compensation at the date of termination of service for disability. 
(e)  The non-service-incurred disability benefit shall be paid on a monthly basis in an amount equal to the greater of: 
(1)  Twenty-five percent of the member's final monthly compensation at the date of disability; or 
(2)  The accrued benefit on the date of disability, if that benefit is greater than 25 percent of the member's final monthly compensation at the date of disability. 
For the purposes of a non-service-incurred disability benefit, the final monthly compensation shall be determined as of the last day the member was actively at work for the city. 
(f)  Disability benefits shall be paid on the first day of each month. No benefit shall be paid until the board has actually considered and voted upon entitlement to disability. Disability retirees shall be permitted to select any of the optional forms of payment available under section 46-322(j). 
(g)  Disability retirement income shall continue until the death of the member or recovery from disability. For the death of a member who is retired on a disability benefit and has not received 120 payments, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to a designated beneficiary selected by the member and communicated to the board on the form prescribed by the board. If there is no designated beneficiary, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to the estate of the deceased member. During the period of disability, member contributions shall be suspended unless the member is receiving a pay supplement in addition to disability benefits provided under the Florida Workers' Compensation Act. In such event, there shall be a member contribution from that amount representing the supplemental pay. If a member's disability is converted to a service retirement as set forth in this section, the member shall be accorded credited service for the period of disability. 
(h)  No member shall be eligible to receive disability benefits from the plan during any period of time that the member is receiving a salary from the city. This section shall not apply when the members sole payment from the city is the statutorily mandated workers' compensation payment, exclusive of any supplemental pay. 
(i)  Application for disability retirement shall be made on a form prescribed by the board. The member shall execute such medical releases as are necessary to permit the board to review the medical records needed to determine the question of disability and to discuss the records at a public meeting. Upon receipt of an application for disability, the board shall refer the application to its physician for review. The applicant for disability shall be required to submit to such medical examination as the board appointed physician shall deem necessary. The board appointed physician, and any referring specialists, shall report their findings to the board, which shall include a determination, to the extent reasonably possible, of the origin of the disability, whether the disability is permanent, and whether the disability is total. In making these determinations, the physician shall be bound by the definition of disability set forth in this plan. The city shall provide to the board and the physician any documents relating to those cases where an applicant has been terminated from employment due to physical inability to perform the member's duties as an employee, as well as any attempts to provide alternate employment within the member's classification of police officer or firefighter. 
(j)  Upon receipt of the report of the physician, the trustees shall schedule a public hearing at which time the board shall review all reports of the physician, together with any such documentary evidence as the applicant may wish to submit. The board shall conduct a preliminary determination as to whether the member is permanently and totally disabled based upon the written documentation presented. If the board does not grant the application based on the written documentation, it shall inform the member, in writing, of the reasons for the denial of the application. The member may, within 30 days of receipt of the board's preliminary denial, request a full evidentiary hearing before the board. The hearing will be conducted consistent with the principles of due process, and the rules of evidence generally applicable to administrative proceedings shall apply. This means that formal rules of evidence and civil procedure used in civil judicial proceedings shall not apply. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas compelling the attendance of witnesses. At the hearing, the applicant may present such oral and written evidence as the applicant deems necessary to establish its burden of proof. The board may appoint special counsel as an advocate to cross examine witnesses and to offer argument in opposition to the application. All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The attorney for the board shall not serve both as advocate and as advisor to the board in the same proceeding. The applicant and the board shall have the right to examine and cross examine all witnesses. Medical reports and depositions may be accepted in lieu of live testimony, at the board's discretion. The decision of the board shall be based solely upon the evidence presented and the law applicable to this plan. The record in a case governed by this section shall consist only of a tape recording or transcript of the hearing; evidence received or considered; all notices, pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings; and any decisions, opinions, proposed or recommended orders or reports by the board. Making a verbatim record of the proceedings is not the duty of the board, but may be made by the member. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render an opinion, in writing, setting forth the reasons for the grant or denial of the benefit. If the disability benefit is denied, the applicant shall have the right to judicial review by complaint for common law certiorari in the circuit court of the county. 
(k)  The board may prescribe rules of procedure to implement the provisions of this plan relating to the conduct of disability hearings. 
(l)  No member shall be granted a disability pension upon a determination by the board that the disability resulted from: 
(1)  Excessive and habitual use of drugs, intoxicants or narcotics; 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while wilfully and illegally participating in fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a crime; or 
(3)  With regard to police officers only, any occurrence arising from compensable employment unrelated to regular city employment, and such employment having been undertaken without prior permission of the appropriate department head having been granted to such member in writing. 
(m)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a member who receives a catastrophic injury which renders the member totally and permanently disabled from all gainful employment, shall receive a disability benefit equal to 75 percent of the member's compensation at the time of disability. For the purposes of this section, the term "catastrophic injury" shall have the same meaning as provided in F.S. § 440.02. 
(Code 1986, § 5.044; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-325. - Death benefits. 
(a)  If a member dies prior to the normal retirement date, there shall be payable to the member's designated beneficiary, for a period of ten years certain and life, a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of death, which shall be supported by the greater of: 
(1)  The single sum value of the participant's deferred monthly retirement income beginning at his normal retirement date or early reduced retirement date which has accrued to the date of the member's death, based on the participant's number of years of credited service and final monthly compensation at the date of death; or 
(2)  The smaller of 18 times the member's rate of final monthly compensation at the time of death or 100 times the member's anticipated monthly retirement income commencing at the normal retirement date based upon the participant's number of years of credited service and final monthly compensation at the date of death. 
(b)  If a member dies after normal retirement date, but prior to actual retirement or entry into the deferred retirement option plan there, shall be payable to his beneficiary a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of death which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the single sum value of the retirement income based upon the final monthly compensation and number of years of credited service at the date of death, which are payable in any of the benefit payment options set forth in section 46-322. 
(Code 1986, § 5.046; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-326. - Compliance with Internal Revenue Code. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and the board that the plan remain at all times a qualified plan, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  No member's annual benefit may exceed the maximum amount allowable under section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. If a benefit shall exceed the maximum amount, the city shall establish an excess plan as permitted by law. 
(c)  Compensation in excess of limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation on compensation for an eligible employee shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. The term "eligible employee" means an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1996. 
(d)  In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the later of April 1 following the calendar year in which the member attains age 701/2 or April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which the member retires. When a distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in a lump sum, the distribution will be made in one or more of the following ways: over the life of the participant; over the life of the participant and designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary. 
(e)  If the distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. The method of distribution, if the participant dies before distribution is commenced, must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed within five years after the participant's death. 
(2)  Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either: (i) within five years after the participant's death; or (ii) over the life of the beneficiary, or over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant died, or, if a designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 701/2. 
(f)  This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
1.  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually), made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee, or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distribution and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; 
2.  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
3.  The portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(b)  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. 
For distributions made after December 31, 2001, the definition of eligible retirement plan shall also include an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan and an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  Distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. Effective October 1, 2017, a distributee also includes a participant's nonspouse designated beneficiary. In the case of a nonspouse beneficiary, the direct rollover may be made only to a traditional IRA or Roth IRA that is established on behalf of the designated beneficiary and that will be treated as an inherited IRA pursuant to the provisions of Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") section 402(c)(11). Also, in this case, the determination of any required minimum distribution under IRC section 401(a)(9) that is ineligible for rollover shall be made in accordance with Notice 2007-7, Q & A 17 and 18, 2007-5 I.R.B. 395. 
d.  Direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Code 1986, § 5.047; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 18-08, §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2018) 
Sec. 46-327. - Share accounts. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of F.S. chs. 175 and 185, and to provide a mechanism to pay required "Chapter 175 and 185 monies" to police officers, firefighters and retirees based on the growth of premium tax revenue pursuant to F.S. chs. 175 and 185. The fund created by this section, hereinafter the City of Key West Police Officer's and Firefighter's Retirement Fund Share Plan, shall be derived exclusively from monies received from the state and not from any additional taxes levied by the city and shall be in addition to the police officer and firefighter defined benefit pension paid by the City of Key West Police Officer and Firefighter Retirement Fund. The share plan shall be administered by the board of trustees of the City of Key West Police Officer and Firefighter Retirement Fund (hereinafter the "retirement fund"). 
(b)  In each year, after receipt of the annual distribution of chapter money from the state, the board of trustees, with the advice of their actuary, shall determine the amount of nondedicated chapter money received by the city during the current fiscal year pursuant to F.S. §§ 175.131 and 185.11. The sum of these amounts shall be known as the "available funds." Allocation of shares shall be made within 30 days after approval by the board, or as soon as is practicable thereafter. With regard to the available funds for share plan distribution on or before June 1, 2008, retirees separated from employment with the city shall receive the sum of $5,000.00, and the remaining available funds shall be equally distributed between the active members and DROP participants. All subsequent distributions will be made in equal shares to all active and inactive members. 
(c)  An individual share account shall be established for each active and retired member on the effective date of this ordinance. Available funds for active members shall be invested by the board of trustees and may be commingled for investment purposes with the other assets of the retirement system. The individual balances and earnings or losses for each participant in the share plan shall be clearly identified on the monthly statements prepared by the plan administrator. Each active member will recognize investment gains or losses at the same rate as the rest of the plan's assets as invested by the plan investment managers. The calculation of interest and the rate shall clearly be identified each month on the statements prepared by the plan's administrator. The City of Key West shall not incur any financial obligation in any manner relative to the share plan. 
(d)  After premium tax distributions are received from the state, the expense of administering the share plan for the preceding year shall be determined by the board of trustees and charged against monies received during such year. 
(e)  Available funds shall be allocated to each qualified participant in shares. Available funds shall be allocated to each active member by credit to the active member's individual account. An active member will not be entitled to his or her share account until fully vested in the plan with ten years of service. Any members separating from service with less than ten years of service will forfeit their share account. Available funds shall be allocated and paid directly to each inactive member if he or she has retired under the terms of the retirement fund. 
(f)  The account balance for each active participant with at least ten years of credited service shall be payable to the active members within 30 days after retiring under the provisions of the retirement fund. 
(g)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to adopt any rules necessary for the administration of the share accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 11-5-2008) 
Secs. 46-328-46-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN 

Sec. 46-356. - Created. 
    A deferred retirement option plan (DROP) is created. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(a); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-357. - Eligibility to participate. 
    Eligibility to participate in the DROP is based upon eligibility for service retirement or early retirement in the plan. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(b); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-358. - Participation. 
(a)  Participation in the DROP must be exercised within the first 30 years of employment; provided, however, that participation in the DROP, when combined with participation in the retirement plan as an active member, may not exceed 30 years. The maximum period of participation in the deferred retirement option plan is five years. 
(b)  Upon exercising the right to participate in the DROP, an employee's creditable service, accrued benefits and earnable compensation calculation shall be frozen, and the 36 highest consecutive calendar months out of the last 120 consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the DROP shall be utilized to determine benefits. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(c), (d); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-359. - Termination of service with city. 
    An employee shall terminate service with the city at the conclusion of five years in the DROP. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(g); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-360. - Payments and interest. 
(a)  Payment shall be made into the employee's DROP account as if the employee had terminated employment in the city in an amount determined by the employee's selection of options 1 and 2 as enumerated in section 46-322(j). 
(b)  An employee's account in the DROP program shall earn or lose interest based upon the actual earnings of the plan for the preceding year. 
(c)  All interest shall be credited to the employee's DROP account at the end of the DROP period. 
(d)  Upon termination with the city, an employee has the option of receiving payment within 45 days of the member requesting payment or deferring payment until a time not later than the latest date authorized by section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(e)  Payments from the DROP may be received as a lump sum, installment payment or annuity; provided, however, that at all times the DROP shall be subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. No payments shall be distributed to a DROP participant once the DROP account has been exhausted by the participant. 
(f)  No payment may be made from the DROP until the employee actually separates from service with the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(e), (f), (h)-(k); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 01-15, § 2, 9-18-2001) 
Sec. 46-361. - Death during participation. 
    If an employee dies during participation in the DROP, the employee shall be treated as any other vested member in the plan who dies prior to retirement. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(l); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-362. - Termination of eligibility for disability retirement. 
    Upon commencement of participation in the DROP, the member shall no longer be eligible for disability retirement from the city police officer's and firefighter's plan. If a member becomes disabled during the deferred retirement option plan period, the member shall be treated as if he retired on the day prior to the date of disability. 
(Code 1986, § 5.050(m); Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 46-363. - Self-directed investment option. 
    The board may, by uniform administrative rule, adopt a self-directed investment option. 
(Ord. No. 00-38, § 2, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 8-7-2001) 
Chapter 50 - PERSONNEL POLICY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; human relations, ch. 38; pensions and retirement plans, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 85-19, adopted May 7, 1985, provides for the initial election and term of civil service board members under the 1984 Charter adopted by the city. Such provisions are not set forth herein, but are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Charter reference- Civil service, art. V. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act and civil service act mean the provisions of article V of the Charter. 
    Board means the civil service board of the city. 
    Charter means the Charter adopted by referendum on March 13, 1984. 
    Collective bargaining contract means a written contract with respect to agreements reached concerning terms and conditions of employment made between the city and an employee union. 
    Employee means any person holding a position of employment with the city. 
    Employee, part-time, means an employee of the classified or unclassified service serving in a position requiring less than 40 hours of employment within a seven-day work period. 
    Employee, permanent, means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary employment period. 
    Officer means an elected official, the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, and the head of each administrative department of the city under the city manager. 
    Service means the civil service of the city. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
(Code 1986, § 6.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-27. - Employees under civil service. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, all permanent city employees shall be declared to be members of the civil service system, and all earned employee vested rights are continued with the adoption of this article. 
(b)  As provided in section 50-56, to the extent that a collective bargaining contract establishes a grievance and arbitration procedure or another procedure to address an employment issue of a city employee, that employee shall not be entitled to appeal to the civil service board for resolution of the issue. 
(c)  The city manager and city attorney are appointed, disciplined and discharged solely by the city commission, in accordance with article IV of the Charter; therefore, these positions shall be exempt from purview and authority of the civil service board. The city clerk is a member of the civil service system. Department heads serve at the pleasure of the city manager and are exempt from the purview and authority of the civil service board. 
(Code 1986, § 6.08) 
Secs. 50-28-50-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Membership and terms of civil service board, § 5.01. 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 50-56. - Established; general authority. 
(a)  There is established a civil service board for the city employees. 
(b)  To the extent a conflict exists between rights granted employees under this article and under a collective bargaining contract, the contract shall prevail. A city employee who is subject to a collective bargaining contract that establishes a grievance and arbitration procedure shall not be entitled to grieve or appeal to the civil service board for resolution of employment issues covered by the contract. 
(Code 1986, § 6.03) 
Sec. 50-57. - Appointment; terms; residency; compensation; vacancies. 
(a)  The civil service board shall consist of five members, each of whom shall serve for a term of two years. The terms shall be staggered. 
(b)  All members shall be residents of the city. 
(c)  Nominations for appointment shall be made by the mayor and city commissioners upon the consent of a majority of the city commission. 
(d)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(e)  Appointments for vacancies shall be for the remainder of the existing term. 
(Code 1986, § 6.04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1985, provided that, "any elector of the city qualifying for the office of civil service board member shall pay to the city a qualifying fee of five percent of the annual salary of a civil service board member." 
Sec. 50-58. - Meetings; procedural rules. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the civil service board shall be held at least once per quarter. Special meetings shall be convened for the purpose of hearing an appeal or for any other specified board purpose. 
(b)  The civil service board shall be subject to the procedural rules for advisory boards set forth in division 2 of article V of chapter 2. 
(Code 1986, § 6.19; Ord. No. 02-011, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 50-59. - Quorum; majority. 
    Three voting members of the civil service board shall constitute a quorum. An affirmative vote of a majority of the whole membership shall be required to transact any business or to exercise any power vested in the board, provided that an exception is made pursuant to section 50-62. 
(Code 1986, § 6.22) 
Sec. 50-60. - Clerk. 
    The city manager shall assign an employee who is employed by the city to serve as clerk to the board. The clerk shall act as the secretary to the civil service board and shall prepare agendas and minutes for the board. 
(Code 1986, § 6.05) 
Sec. 50-61. - Legal counsel. 
(a)  The city attorney shall serve as counsel and legal advisor to the civil service board, representing the board in all legal matters. If, in the opinion of the city attorney, there arises a conflict between his representation of the city in a case before the board and his role as legal advisor to the board, he shall recommend the hiring of outside counsel to represent the board at a reasonable fee. 
(b)  From time to time, the city attorney may recommend to the city commission amendments to the rules and regulations of the civil service board based on changes in the law. Such recommendations by the city attorney need not conform to the time period set forth in section 50-91. 
(Code 1986, § 6.21) 
Sec. 50-62. - Appellate responsibilities. 
(a)  The civil service board shall be the appellate board for the civil service system. The board shall have the authority to issue subpoenas for documents and to command the presence of witnesses in the conduct of the appellate process as provided in this article. However, such board shall not exercise its powers under this subsection in any instance other than for the purpose of exercising its responsibility as the appellate board for the civil service system. Violations of this section by the civil service board or any of its members, officers, or employees or action that abuses the subpoena power or process shall constitute sufficient grounds for suspension or removal from office as provided by section 50-95. The board shall, within ten days of convening for the purpose of hearing the appeal, render its decision based upon findings of fact. 
(b)  The board shall provide its rules of conduct for appellate review to each individual filing an appeal. The board shall cause the proceedings to be recorded, and upon transcription the proceedings shall become part of the official records for the board. The legal counsel to the board shall act as parliamentarian to the board during the appellate process. 
(c)  The board shall not convene unless all members are present. If the board cannot convene with all members present within the timeframe specified within section 50-95, the available members shall submit to the city attorney a request for an extension. Such request shall outline, to the extent possible, the factual reason for requesting the delay. If the city attorney denies the request, the board shall convene with such available members present, provided that such available members present constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1986, § 6.17) 
Secs. 50-63-50-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-91. - Adoption. 
(a)  The civil service board shall recommend a code of rules and regulations that will prescribe policies and procedures for the method of selection, examination, qualification, promotion and retention of all city employees, based upon merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. Such recommended code or rules and regulations shall be submitted to the city commission not later than October 1 of each year. Within 90 days of receipt thereof and after making additions, revisions, or deletions it finds appropriate, the city commission shall approve the code. If the city commission fails to so act, the board shall put into effect its recommended rules and regulations as if the city commission had so approved. 
(b)  If the board fails to submit a recommended code of rules and regulations as provided in this section, the city commission shall forthwith propose and adopt rules and regulations for the civil service. 
(Code 1986, § 6.09) 
Sec. 50-92. - Personnel policy rules and regulations. 
    The city manager shall provide to all employees in the civil service the city personnel policy rules and regulations as approved by the city commission. The personnel policy and regulations shall include but are not limited to the city pay plan, the city annual and sick leave plan, hours of employment, classes of offenses and penalties for infractions, and the method of recording and accountability for sick and annual leave for all city employees. 
(Code 1986, § 6.24) 
Sec. 50-93. - Examinations. 
    The civil service board shall provide for written or oral examinations for applicants for and within the police department and fire department in accordance with its approved rules and regulations. The city commission by resolution may direct the board to provide examinations for other positions. 
(Code 1986, § 6.10) 
Sec. 50-94. - Probation. 
    No appointment, employment, or promotion of any employee for the city shall be deemed complete or permanent until the specified probationary period for such appointment, employment, or promotion has elapsed. The probationer may be discharged or reduced in rank at any time within the probationary period upon the recommendation of the city manager or any officer acting who has authority. If no discharge or demotion shall be made within such probationary time, the appointment, employment, or promotion shall be deemed complete. 
(Code 1986, § 6.12) 
Sec. 50-95. - Removal, suspension, demotion or discharge. 
    No employee within the civil service system shall be removed, suspended, demoted or discharged except for cause shown upon written charges or violation of the city's personnel policy rules and regulations. The city manager may suspend a subordinate for a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days for any cause which, in the opinion of the city manager, would be grounds for removal, suspension, demotion or discharge, provided that immediately upon such suspension being made, a report of such suspension and the cause therefor shall be given in writing to the suspended employee. Such report shall also be provided to the civil service board if the employee is entitled to appeal the action of the city manager to the board. If entitled and the employee files the proper grievance within ten days of action taken and follows the approved city grievance procedure, the civil service board shall, within seven working days of receipt of the grievance from the city manager, schedule within a reasonable time a hearing date to hear the grievance. If the board finds the action taken to be unwarranted, it shall certify its findings of fact to the city manager and may direct reinstatement of the employee. If the employee was suspended without pay and allowances, the board's direction to the city manager may include that such employee will be compensated for all the time to which he had been theretofore uncompensated. 
(Code 1986, § 6.13) 
Sec. 50-96. - Indefinite suspension or termination for criminal act. 
    The city manager may authorize in his discretion the indefinite suspension or termination of any city employee charged with a criminal act; provided, however, that the city manager may take such action if upon the preponderance of the evidence the city manager finds that the employee's action violated the city's personnel policy and procedures manual. Accordingly, the city manager shall conduct a hearing that conforms with due process. 
(Code 1986, § 6.14) 
Sec. 50-97. - Reduction in number of employees. 
    Whenever it shall appear to the city manager that an excessive number of persons are employed within any city department or, due to budget adjustments, there will be an excess of persons employed within any department, the city manager shall inform the city commission and shall include the reasons therefor that have caused or will cause an excess of employees within city government. 
(Code 1986, § 6.15) 
Sec. 50-98. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  The city manager shall provide for a grievance procedure for the presentation and mutual adjustments of points of disagreements regarding discipline of city employees and to ensure that disciplinary complaints will be considered fairly, rapidly, and without reprisal. 
(b)  A grievance shall be limited to disciplinary matters involving the suspension, demotion or termination of an employee. An employee's grievance may only be heard by the civil service board after the employee has timely followed the city's grievance procedure. The grievance shall be heard according to board rules. The board shall render a decision that constitutes final administrative action, and such decision shall be enforced by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 6.16) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90; historic preservation, ch. 102; performance standards, ch. 106; planned redevelopment and development district (PRD), ch. 107; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110; signs, ch. 114; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122; mixed use planned redevelopment/development district, § 122-536 et seq.; historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD), § 122-986 et seq.; 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local government comprehensive planning and land development regulation act, F.S. §§ 163.3161-163.3217. 

Sec. 54-26. - Adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, part III, pertaining to county and municipal planning and land development regulation, the city commission declares its intent to exercise its authority to plan for the area within its jurisdiction as granted by the act and adopts the city comprehensive plan, including the remedial actions cited in the stipulated settlement agreement signed June 15, 1993, between the state department of community affairs and the city which mandate additional policies addressing the following items: 
(1)  Established residential building permit allocation system; 
(2)  Redefined the high hazard area and established more restrictive land use policies in the Key West Bight area; 
(3)  Redefined the drainage system level of service to include water quality criteria; 
(4)  Redefined the package treatment plant level of service standards to include nutrient limiting standards for private sewage treatment facilities; 
(5)  Revised the traffic circulation element to include updated level of service information and criteria based on the state department of transportation's ART-PLAN level of service spreadsheet; striking reference to the "special transportation area" and including policy supporting establishment of a "transportation concurrency management are[a]" within the historic district; including the county in site plan review of development with transportation impacts transcending jurisdiction of the city; 
(6)  Updated the capital improvements program to include revenue sources and reflect updated program data; 
(7)  Established a transfer of development rights system to reflect updated program data; 
(8)  Delineated wetlands along Atlantic Boulevard and South A1A "conservation"; 
(9)  Clarified the concurrency management system policy; 
(10)  Provided updated affordable housing analysis, and included more restricted affordable housing criteria including a requirement that 30 percent of all residential units added to the housing stock be affordable units and mandated that a housing trust fund be established; 
(11)  Refined the analysis of hurricane evacuation including results of studies conducted by the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the state department of transportation, and the firm of Post, Buckley, Schuh & Jernigan, and the county regarding existing and future hurricane evacuation clearance times and the impacts of the countywide building permit allocation system; 
(12)  Provided for accessory units and single-room occupancies (SROs); 
(13)  Revised solid waste disposal policies to reflect actions of the city commission; 
(14)  Revised policies impacting the intensity of land use in the historic area; established off-street parking requirements within certain areas of the historic district and provided for an off-street parking trust fund; 
(15)  Refined policies for managing native vegetation; and 
(16)  Added policies to protect the freshwater lens by evaluating impacts of water wells. 
(b)  The comprehensive plan including these remedial actions is attached to Ordinance No. 93-36, on file in the city clerk's office, and is incorporated by reference. 
(Code 1986, § 34.01) 
Secs. 54-27-54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPACT FEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Permits, certificate of occupancy, variances, appeals, § 90-331 et seq.; concurrency management, ch. 94. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-56. - Impact fee reduction; sunset. 
(a)  All impact fees currently charged by the City of Key West shall be reduced by 25 percent from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  The reduction of impact fees shall continue for a period of eighteen months, unless earlier terminated as described in paragraph (c) below. 
(c)  This section shall expire 18 months from its effective date, unless the City of Key West does not receive a grant from the State Housing Trust Fund. In the event the City of Key West receives notification that it will not obtain funding from the State Housing Trust Fund pursuant to the 2008 General Appropriations Act, this section shall immediately expire. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 2-3-2009) 
Secs. 54-57-54-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC IMPACT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 

Sec. 54-81. - Title; scope. 
(a)  This division shall be known and may be cited as the "traffic impact fee ordinance." 
(b)  Each person who commences any traffic generating activity that creates an increased vehicular traffic shall pay a traffic impact fee in the manner and the amount set forth in this division. Such fees shall be collected and used by the city only in such manner as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13) 
Sec. 54-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment of a land use is presumed to occur during any period in which a building remains vacant or the property is not being devoted to the land use in any substantial manner. An intent to reopen, sell or lease the property shall not be taken into consideration in determining abandonment, except that if a building or structure is destroyed by fire or other casualty, the period of abandonment shall be tolled during the time in which construction activities are taking place. 
    Capital improvements includes planning, engineering, acquisition and construction, but not routine maintenance. 
    Feepayer means a person commencing vehicular traffic generating activity covered by this division. 
    Increased vehicular traffic means the amount of traffic projected to be generated by vehicular traffic generating activity less the traffic that had been generated by preexisting land uses being replaced by the new activity. 
    Preexisting land use means a land use that was in existence on November 20, 1985, or a land use that commenced after November 20, 1985, and for which impact fees were paid pursuant to this division. Proof of preexisting land use may be established by official city, county, or state records and licenses, affidavits, and photographs. The planning official is charged with the responsibility of determining whether a preexisting land use qualifies under this division. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning official may appeal that decision to the city commission by filing a notice with the city clerk within ten days. 
    Traffic system includes all facilities owned and controlled by the city that are part of the city's streets, highways, lanes and parking lots. 
    Trip end means either the origin or destination end of a trip as defined in the state department of transportation Trip End Generation Research Manual. Each trip has two ends. For a small study area where intrastudy area trips are negligible, the number of trips may equal the number of trip ends in the study area. However, the two terms are not interchangeable. 
    Vehicular traffic generating activity occurs upon the issuance by the building official of any building permit. 
    Vehicular trip end means a vehicle trip beginning or ending at the location of the building permit. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(a); Ord. No. 08-05, § 5, 5-20-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-83. - Payment of fee prerequisite to building permit and issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
    No building permit shall become final and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until any applicable traffic impact fee shall be paid according to this division and in the amount of $30.00 per vehicular trip end estimated traffic generation for the designated use of the development. The estimated generation rate shall be based on the estimates for the most nearly approximate use. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(b)) 
Sec. 54-84. - Payment; receipt. 
    The feepayer shall pay the traffic impact fees to the city manager. The city manager shall record receipt of the fee in the official public record of the city and, upon full payment of the fee, shall issue to the feepayer a certified copy of such record of receipt, which may be used by the feepayer as evidence of payment. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(c)) 
Sec. 54-85. - Use of fees. 
(a)  Traffic impact fees paid under this division shall be used by the city exclusively for the purpose of capital improvements to the city streets to meet the demand on that system new traffic generating activity creates. The city shall separately earmark traffic impact fees paid under section 54-84, which funds shall be disbursed only in accordance with the purposes of this division. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, the city may take all steps necessary to pool cash for the purpose of investments or accounting efficiencies; provided, however, that separate accounting controls are maintained sufficient to earmark such monies for the purpose specified. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(d)) 
Sec. 54-86. - Return of unexpended or unencumbered fee. 
    Any funds collected under this division not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar year immediately following six years from the date on which the certificate of occupancy for the development was issued may be returned to the feepayer, at his election, with interest at the rate of six percent per annum. However, any legal challenge to the payment of fees under this division shall toll the time under this section for repayment of the fees. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(e)) 
Sec. 54-87. - Responsibility under prior agreements. 
    A developer who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, agreed as a condition of development approval to pay a traffic impact fee shall be responsible for the payment of the fee under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(f)) 
Sec. 54-88. - Violations; enforcement. 
    A violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution or other civil remedy provided by law, the city or any person paying the traffic impact fee shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce this division. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(g)) 
Sec. 54-89. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not be applicable to the construction of an accessory apartment as defined in section 86-9. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(h)) 
Sec. 54-90. - Preexisting estimates. 
    In estimating the traffic that had been generated by a preexisting land use, the city manager shall use data derived by the state department of transportation, division of transportation planning, for comparable land uses unless actual traffic counts are available. 
(Code 1986, § 34.13(i)) 
Secs. 54-91-54-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLID WASTE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58. 

Sec. 54-116. - Title; scope. 
(a)  This division shall be known and may be cited as the "solid waste impact fee ordinance." 
(b)  Each person who shall commence any solid waste generating activity that creates an increased demand for city solid waste disposal services shall pay a solid waste impact fee in the manner and the amount set forth in this division. Such fees shall be collected and used by the city only in such manner as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17) 
Sec. 54-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital improvements includes planning, engineering, acquisition and construction, but does not include routine maintenance. 
    City solid waste disposal system includes all facilities owned and controlled by the city that are part of the city's collection, distribution, treatment and disposal of solid waste. 
    Feepayer means a person commencing solid waste generating activity covered by this division. 
    Solid waste generating activity occurs upon the issuance by the building official of any building permit. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-118. - Payment of fee prerequisite to building permit and issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
    No building permit shall become final and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until any applicable solid waste impact fee shall be paid according to this division and in the amount of $43.00 per pound per day estimated solid waste generation for the designated use of the development. The estimated generation rate shall be based on the estimates for the most nearly approximate use listed in table 5-4, "Estimate Amounts of Solid Waste," Solid Waste, Technical Assistance Manual, Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (1976). A copy of such table shall be kept on file for public view in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(b)) 
Sec. 54-119. - Payment; receipt. 
    The feepayer shall pay the solid waste impact fees to the city manager. The city manager shall record receipt of the fee in the official public record of the city and, upon full payment of the fee, shall issue to the feepayer a certified copy of such record of receipt, which may be used by the feepayer as evidence of payment. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(c)) 
Sec. 54-120. - Use of fees. 
(a)  Solid waste impact fees paid under this division shall be used by the city exclusively for the purpose of capital improvements to the city solid waste disposal system to meet the demand on that system which new solid waste generating activity creates. The city shall separately earmark solid waste impact fees paid under section 54-119, which funds shall be disbursed only in accordance with the purposes of this division. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, the city may take all steps necessary to pool cash for the purpose of investments or accounting efficiencies; provided, however, that separate accounting controls are maintained sufficient to earmark such monies for the purpose specified. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(d)) 
Sec. 54-121. - Return of unexpended or unencumbered funds. 
    Any funds collected under this division not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar year immediately following six years from the date on which the certificate of occupancy for the development was issued may be returned to the feepayer, at his election, with interest at the rate of six percent per annum. However, any legal challenge to the payment of fees under this division shall toll the time under this section for repayment of the fees. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(e)) 
Sec. 54-122. - Responsibility under prior agreements. 
    A developer who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, agreed as a condition of development approval to pay a solid waste impact fee shall be responsible for the payment of the fee under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(f)) 
Sec. 54-123. - Violations; enforcement. 
    A violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution or other civil remedy provided by law, the city or any person paying the solid waste impact fee shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce this division. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(g)) 
Sec. 54-124. - Estimates of preexisting activity. 
    In estimating the increased demand caused by any solid waste generating activity, the city manager shall estimate the demand of any preexisting activity according to the table referred to in section 54-118 unless actual measurements of usage are available. Preexisting activity includes activity that was taking place on the property on December 4, 1984, or activity that commenced after December 4, 1984, and for which impact fees were paid pursuant to this division. Proof of preexisting land use may be established by official city, county, or state records and licenses, affidavits and photographs. The planning official is charged with the responsibility of determining whether a preexisting land use qualifies under this division. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning official may appeal that decision to the city commission by filing a notice with the city clerk within ten days. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(h); Ord. No. 08-05, § 6, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 54-125. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not be applicable to the construction of an accessory apartment as defined in section 86-8. 
(Code 1986, § 73.17(i)) 
Secs. 54-126-54-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SANITARY SEWERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Sanitary sewer system, § 74-26 et seq. 

Sec. 54-151. - Title; scope. 
(a)  This division shall be known and may be cited as the "sewer impact fee ordinance." 
(b)  In addition to all other rates and charges described in chapter 74, each person who shall receive a building permit for development that creates an increased demand for the city sewer system services shall pay a sewer impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this division, and such fees shall be used by the city only in such manner as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44) 
Sec. 54-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital improvements includes planning, engineering, acquisition and construction, but does not include routine maintenance. 
    City sewer system includes all sewage works and sewage treatment plants owned and controlled by the city. 
    Feepayer means a person who is required to pay a sewer impact fee under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-153. - Building permit approval. 
    No building permit approval requiring payment of a sewer impact fee shall become final until any applicable sewer impact fee shall be paid according to this division. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(b)) 
Sec. 54-154. - Payment required prior to issuance of building permit or certificate of occupancy or connection to city sewer. 
(a)  No person shall receive a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, or connect to the city sewer system any property, building or structure until a sewer impact fee shall be paid in accordance with this division and in the amount required by this section. However, if a previously unavailable public sewer system is newly extended to a person with property, building or structure, bringing such public sewer system within 200 feet of the property line, such person shall have six months from the date of connection to pay for such connection. Payment shall be equally divided over the six-month period, payable in monthly installments with interest assessed at an amount equal to eight percent per annum on the monthly balance. 
(b)  The sewer impact fee shall be paid in the amount of $2.00 per gallon per day of sewage flow for the estimated use of the development. The estimated sewage flow shall be based upon 95 percent of actual water consumption averaged over the highest six months of consumption during the three years preceding hookup into the Sigsbee Force Main Extension, South Roosevelt Extension, Hilton Haven Extension or other extensions of the sanitary sewer system approved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. For those existing uses required to connect to the extended sewer systems, water consumption shall be based on Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority billing data. For all new development wherever located when actual water consumption data is not available for the required three-year period, estimated sewage flow shall be for the most nearly approximate use listed as F.A.C. ch. 10D-6.49, "System Size Determinations." A copy of such rules shall be kept on file for public view in the offices of the city clerk. Where actual water consumption data is used to estimate sewage flow, it shall be verified by the building official that Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority is the sole source of water supplied to a location. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(c)) 
Sec. 54-155. - Payment; receipt. 
    The feepayer shall pay the sewer impact fee to the city manager. The city manager shall record receipt of the fee in the official public record of the city and, upon full payment of the fee, shall issue to the feepayer a certified copy of such record of receipt, which may be used by the feepayer as evidence of payment. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(d)) 
Sec. 54-156. - Use of fees. 
(a)  Sewer impact fees paid under section 54-154 shall be used by the city exclusively for the purpose of capital improvements that expand the treatment capacity of the sewer system, including but not limited to expenditures for the rehabilitation or replacement of sewers to reduce saltwater infiltration and thereby expand the existing treatment capacity of the city sewer system so as to meet the increased demand on the city sewer system which such additional connections to the system create. The city shall separately earmark sewage treatment capacity expansion impact fees paid under section 54-154, which funds shall be disbursed only in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, the city may take all steps necessary to pool cash for the purpose of investments or accounting efficiencies; provided, however, that separate accounting controls are maintained sufficient to earmark such monies for the purpose specified. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(e)) 
Sec. 54-157. - Return of unexpended or unencumbered funds. 
    Any funds collected under section 54-154 not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years from the date on which the certificate of occupancy for the development was issued may be returned to the feepayer, at his election, with interest at the rate of six percent per annum. However, any legal challenge to the payment of fees under this division shall toll the time under this section for repayment of the fees. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(f)) 
Sec. 54-158. - Prior agreements. 
    A developer who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, agreed as a condition of development approval to pay a sewer impact fee shall be responsible for the payment of the fee under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(g)) 
Sec. 54-159. - Violations; enforcement. 
    A violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution or other civil remedy provided by chapter 74, the city or any person paying the sewer impact fee shall have the power to sue in a civil court to enforce this division. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(h)) 
Sec. 54-160. - Estimates of preexisting land use demand. 
    In estimating the increased demand created by a development, the city manager shall estimate the demand of any preexisting land use according to the table referred to in section 54-154 unless actual measurements of usage are available. A preexisting land use is a land use that was in existence on December 4, 1984, or a land use that commenced after December 4, 1984, and for which impact fees were paid pursuant to this division. Proof of preexisting land use may be established by official city, county or state records and licenses, affidavits and photographs. The planning official is charged with the responsibility of determining whether a preexisting land use qualifies under this division. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning official may appeal that decision to the city commission by filing a notice with the city clerk within ten days. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(i); Ord. No. 08-05, § 7, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 54-161. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not be applicable to the construction of an accessory apartment as defined in section 86-8. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(j)) 
Sec. 54-162. - Installment payments. 
(a)  Commercial customers located in the Bahama Village portion of the city's community redevelopment area, established in division 6 of article V of chapter 2, may opt to pay sewer impact fees on an installment payment plan basis. This option shall apply only to new businesses established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives (December 4, 1997). The owner of any business who opts to pay sewer impact fees on an installment payment basis shall execute a promissory note in favor of the city. The note shall state a term of years not to exceed ten years and an interest rate of four percent; provided, however, that the precise term of years shall be determined by the city manager. The note shall be secured by a lien against the property recorded in the public records. 
(b)  Any person located within the city boundaries who agrees to convert from septic tank use to the city sewer system may opt to pay sewer impact fees on an installment payment plan basis. This option shall apply only to persons or businesses who convert from septic tank use to the city's sewer system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives (December 4, 1997). Any person or owner of any business who opts to pay sewer impact fees on an installment payment basis shall execute a promissory note in favor of the city. The note shall state a term of years not to exceed ten years and an interest rate of four percent; provided, however, that the precise term of years shall be determined by the city manager. The note shall be secured by a lien against the property recorded in the public records. 
(c)  Installment payments under this section shall be made on a monthly basis as part of the customer's sewer bill. They are deemed payment of sewer services pursuant to F.S. ch. 159. 
(Code 1986, § 74.44(k)) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; unlawful deposits of solid waste or trash, § 26-131 et seq.; litter, § 26-161 et seq.; impact fees for solid waste, § 54-116 et seq.; utilities, ch. 74; level of service for solid waste, § 94-71; resources protection, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    Aluminum means aluminum cans, aluminum foil, and aluminum containers or trays used in packing, preparation or cooking food. 
    Annual rate resolution means the resolution establishing the rate at which a solid waste service assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a solid waste service assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
    Assessed property means all parcels of land included on the assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the solid waste collection and disposal services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment resolution or a subsequent preliminary rate resolution. 
    Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to a solid waste service assessment approved by a final assessment resolution or an annual rate resolution. 
    Authorized refuse receptacles means any city authorized recycling receptacles and city authorized rubbish receptacles. 
    Bulk waste means any tangible item such as furniture, appliances, bicycles, or similar property not having a useful purpose to the owner or abandoned by the owner and not included within the definitions of garbage, yard waste, or rubbish. 
    Cans means all containers composed in whole of iron or steel (so-called tin cans) used as containers in the packing or storage of various food and nonfood items, except containers that contain paint or petroleum-based solvents, and any pressurized aerosol cans. 
    Certificate of occupancy means the written certification issued by the city that a building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. 
    Collector refers to a person authorized by the city commission, under the provisions of a franchise agreement, to collect and transport solid waste within his respective service area. 
    Commercial means all nonresidential and industrial establishments, including but not limited to, and without regard to whether they are profit or nonprofit organizations, retail and/or wholesale establishments, motels, hotels, guesthouses, timeshares, stores, schools, churches, hospitals, office buildings, restaurants, service stations, garages, laundries, cleaning establishments, public or private institutions of all types, and all other businesses required to obtain a business tax receipt. Where a building is mixed use and both nonresidential and residential uses share the premises, the nonresidential use is deemed commercial for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Commercial establishment means any nonresidential building, including, but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
    Construction and demolition debris or C & D means materials generally considered to be not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, or asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction demolition project. 
    Container means receptacle for containing garbage, recycling or yard waste. 
    Corrugated cardboard means paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength, and which is commonly used to form cartons or boxes. 
    Dumpster means any waste receptacle whose capacity exceeds 96 gallons and is designed to be mechanically dumped. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or a portion thereof, which is located upon residential property and lawfully used for residential purposes, consisting of one or more rooms arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as living quarters for one family only. 
    Excess yard waste means any vegetative waste that because of its size cannot be broken down easily, including tree limbs and logs too large for a residential or commercial receptacle. Tree limbs and logs shall not exceed four feet in length, and must exceed six inches in diameter. 
    Final assessment resolution means the resolution which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of solid waste service assessments. 
    Garbage means materials resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food, market wastes, trimmings and other discarded matter from meat or produce, including containers in which packaged and any other matter, of any nature whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects, or any containers of the material defined in this chapter. 
    Garbage receptacle means any commonly available light gauge steel, plastic, or galvanized receptacle of a non-absorbent material, closed at one end and open at the other, furnished with a closely fitted top or lid and handle(s). Any receptacle including waste materials serving a single dwelling unit shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight unless the container is designed to be used with a mechanical device. 
    Glass containers means bottles and jars, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and limestone, being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or bottling various materials. This does not include plastics or glass products such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate glass, light bulbs, dishes or ceramics. 
    Hazardous waste means any solid waste that is required to be accompanied by a written manifest or shipping document describing the waste as "hazardous" pursuant to any state or federal law including, but not limited to, RCRA, 42 USC 7901; TSCA, 15 USC 2601; and CERCLA, 42 USC 9601. 
    Household recycling receptacle means a container designed for use by one household to store recyclable materials between pickups. 
    Improved property refers to all residential, commercial or industrial property that generates or is capable of generating solid waste. 
    Industrial wastes means the waste products of canneries, slaughterhouses or packing plants; condemned food products; agricultural waste products; waste and debris from brick, concrete block, roofing shingle or tile pieces; debris and wastes accumulated from land clearing, excavating, building, rebuilding, and altering of buildings, structures, roads, streets, sidewalks or parkways; and other solid waste products generated from industrial processing or manufacturing. 
    Initial assessment resolution means the resolution hereof which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the solid waste cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a solid waste service assessment. 
    Magazines means publications printed on glossy, clay-coated paper. 
    Minimum service as it applies to commercial units is defined as one 32-gallon container pickup per week. 
    Multifamily residence refers to a building or structure that is designed for and capable of housing conveniently two or more individuals or families in separate quarters. 
    Newspaper means newsprint-grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed, and includes all newspaper advertisement, comics and enclosures. This does not include newspaper soiled by food, paint, petroleum products, oil or oil solvents, or other solid wastes that are not recyclable. 
    Owner refers to the person owning an interest in improved property or refers to the person who has charge, care or control of any private property as agent or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner or any other person in a representative capacity. 
    Plastic means clear and color coated bottles and jugs made from high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastics. This includes plastics # 1-# 7. 
    Preliminary rate resolution means the resolution initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll and directing the reimposition of solid waste service assessments pursuant to an annual rate resolution. 
    Property appraiser means the Monroe County Property Appraiser. 
    Public way means any and all streets, roads, alleys, piers, bulkheads, boardwalks, lanes, trails, waters, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, beaches, parks and any and all recreational facilities operated by the state, county, federal government or special governmental district. 
    Recyclable materials means any type of refuse designated by the City of Key West through the rules and regulations issued under this chapter to be separated for recycling. 
    Refuse means all solid wastes, including but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, bulk waste, industrial wastes and yard waste. 
    Residential property means any structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one or more families or individuals and includes the classification "multifamily residence" as defined in this section. 
    Residential unit means a single-family dwelling, each living unit in a duplex or condominium dwelling or apartment house and each mobile home tie-down on a mobile home parcel or on a condominium parcel/site. 
    Rubbish means refuse accumulations of paper, excelsior, rags or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to operation of stores, offices and other business places, and any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water, may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, refuse, yard waste and other discarded solid or non-liquid materials, including materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural and community activities. The term "waste" shall be synonymous with the term "solid waste". 
    Solid waste cost means the amount necessary to fund the solid waste collection, disposal and recycling activities of the city allocable to assessed property during a fiscal year and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(A)  The cost, whether direct or indirect, of all services, programs or facilities provided by the city, or through contractual arrangements with the city relating to solid waste management and disposal activities; 
(B)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(C)  The cost of salaries, volunteer pay, workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(D)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(E)  The cost of training, travel and per diem; 
(F)  The recovery of unpaid or delinquent fees or charges advanced by the city and due for solid waste management and disposal services, programs or facilities allocable to specific parcels; 
(G)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal or other professional services; 
(H)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the solid waste service assessments or a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility or program, including any service charges of the tax collector or property appraiser; 
(I)  All other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or delivery of the services, programs or facilities funded by the solid waste service assessment, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the city commission; 
(J)  A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible solid waste service assessments; and 
(K)  Reimbursement to the city or any other person or entity for any monies advanced for any costs incurred by the city or such person or entity in connection with any of the foregoing items of solid waste cost. 
    Solid waste disposal system refers to the total plan for the collection, billing and disposal of solid waste within the city. 
    Solid waste facility means and includes land, equipment and buildings, constructed and maintained by the city to transfer and/or dispose of solid waste within the city. 
    Solid waste service assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the city against assessed property to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the assessed property. 
    Special waste means any solid waste that requires special handling and management; is not accepted at a landfill or other disposal facility or is accepted at a landfill or other disposal facility, but at a higher rate than is normally charged for refuse; or, is accepted at a landfill or other disposal facility, but with special delivery requirements. Special waste includes, but is not limited to, asbestos, refrigerant containing white goods, whole tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries, mercury-containing devices, contaminated soils, and bio-hazardous waste. 
    Tax collector means the Monroe County Tax Collector. 
    Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
    Transfer station means a site and equipment designated by the city for the purposes of transferring refuse from collection vehicles to long-haul transport vehicles. 
    Uniform Assessment Collection Act means sections 197.3632 and 197.3635, Florida Statutes, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    White goods means discarded washers, dryers, refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, small air conditioning units, and other similar domestic residential and commercial large appliances. 
    Yard waste means and includes all horticultural trimmings and all accumulations of grass, weeds, palm fronds, leaves, flowers, shrubs, vines, tree limbs, and other similar accumulations incidental to yard keeping. 
(Code 1986, § 73.01; Ord. No. 02-21, § 3, 8-6-2002; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-2. - Authority of franchisees to provide service. 
    No person, other than persons holding duly authorized franchises issued by the city commission, shall engage in or carry on within the city limits a private garbage collection service or enter into a business for the collection and disposal of garbage or white goods, nor shall any person other than a duly licensed franchise holder transport or cause to be transported along or over the city highways, roads, streets and thoroughfares any garbage, except as provided in this chapter. No franchise agreement between the city and any person shall be binding in any way upon the city until such agreement is approved by resolution of the city commission and as provided by the Charter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit non-franchised licensed haulers from hauling excess yard waste or C & D. 
(Code 1986, § 73.05; Ord. No. 02-21, § 4, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 58-3-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-31. - Container and receptacle requirements. 
(a)  All premises occupied as a dwelling, store or other place of business in the city shall have and maintain a proper watertight metal garbage container or plastic container for receiving garbage. It shall be provided with a good, tight and closely fitting metal or plastic cover, which cover shall be so constructed as to shed all rainwater and to prevent the access of flies to the contents of the can. Such cover shall be kept on at all times except when removed for the purpose of disposing of or removing garbage or for securing or airing the garbage can immediately after it has been emptied or before fresh garbage has been deposited in it. 
(b)  Residential and commercial receptacles for storage of refuse may not exceed 50 pounds unless the receptacles can be mechanically dumped. 
(c)  Garbage and rubbish may be placed in the same containers. Residential yard waste must be placed in its own separate container. Containers shall not exceed 50 pounds in capacity unless they are designed to be mechanically dumped. Any waste not containerized, with the exception of bulk waste and excess yard waste, shall not be placed out on city property (including the right-of-way). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a property owner or customer to fail to provide sufficient containers to contain all refuse between collections. No refuse will be collected unless placed in proper containers or unless it meets the requirements set forth for bulk and excess yard waste pickup in section 58-35. 
(e)  Infectious, inflammable and explosive materials and human wastes shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. Refuse, clothing, bedding, or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be disposed of under the supervision and direction of the county health officer. 
(f)  All containers, including recycling containers, placed upon city property, including the right-of-way, for pickup by the city's franchise hauler must not be placed on city property before 4:00 p.m. of the night before scheduled pickup and must be removed from city property by 8:00 p.m. of the day of such pickup. Bulk waste for pickup by the city's franchise hauler or by a non-franchised licensed hauler must not be placed on city property before 4:00 p.m. of the night before scheduled pickup. 
(g)  Any person placing for pickup on his property or city property, including the right-of-way, construction and demolition (C & D) debris shall contact the city's franchise hauler or a non-franchised licensed hauler to arrange for special pickup and disposal of such items. Items may not be placed upon city property, including the right-of-way, before 4:00 p.m. of the night before the scheduled pickup. 
(Code 1986, § 73.10; Ord. No. 02-21, § 5, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-32. - Dumpsters on public right-of-way. 
(a)  Any person or firm intending to place a dumpster on the public right-of-way shall apply to the city for a dumpster permit. A permitted dumpster located on the right-of-way shall bear a notice, to city specifications, identifying the address of the property using the dumpster and the expiration date of the permit. An applicant for a dumpster permit or renewal of permit shall pay a fee, as set forth in section 62-3. 
(b)  The permit issued under subsection (a) of this section shall be valid for 15 days from the date or issuance. The permit may be renewed for up to an additional 15-day period. If use of the dumpster on the public right-of-way is not complete by the expiration of the renewal period, the permittee may apply for a new permit. The city may deny a permit or permit renewal if the applicant has an outstanding charge or fine related to dumpster use. The city may also deny a permit or permit renewal if the location of the proposed dumpster would be intrusive upon or disruptive to the neighborhood, its traffic flow or parking. In such event, the applicant may appeal the denial to the city manager. The applicant shall be entitled to notice and hearing by the city manager. 
(c)  The placement of a permitted dumpster in the public right-of-way shall not substantially interfere with either pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow. A permitted dumpster located in the right-of-way shall bear the permit or a copy of the permit in plain view on the street side of the dumpster, near the top of the dumpster. 
(d)  If a temporary dumpster is to be placed in a public parking space, the permittee shall pay the sum of $20.00 per day for each obstructed parking meter. Payment shall be made in advance to the building department. 
(e)  Permits will not be granted to any firm intending permanently to place a dumpster on the right-of-way. Any dumpster scheduled for regular solid waste service shall not be placed on the right-of-way and must comply with requirements for placement set forth in subsection 58-31(f). 
(f)  Any firm failing to obtain a permit or failing to display a valid permit shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 pursuant to section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 73.11; Ord. No. 02-21, § 6, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 03-19, § 1, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-33. - Storage of garbage causing pollution. 
    No person shall permit his garbage to be so stored or kept in an exposed manner as to render the air or soil impure or unwholesome. 
(Code 1986, § 73.12) 
Sec. 58-34. - Unlawful disposal. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of any garbage, rubbish, offal or industrial waste, except through the franchise collector. City inhabitants may transport to the city dump tree limbs, cuttings, leaves, grass and weeds from their individual premises, provided that such persons using city facilities shall be required to pay the fee established by the city commission. 
(b)  No person shall place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that the refuse may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into occupied premises or unoccupied property within the city, except this shall not prohibit the placement of clean fill upon any private land. 
(c)  No person shall throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown, placed or deposited any rubbish, refuse, solid waste, offal, trash, junk, vehicle, garbage or filth of any kind into or on any of the public streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, lanes, thoroughfares, waters, canals, or vacant lots or upon the premises of any other person within the city limits. 
(d)  No person shall place, sweep or deposit any special waste anywhere within the city or into any receptacle being used for acceptable solid waste disposal. Special waste requires special handling and the disposal of such material must be arranged with a specialty contractor at the owner's expense. The city's franchise hauler is not required to handle special waste. 
(e)  No person or business shall dispose of their commercially or residentially generated rubbish, refuse or any manner of waste, in city owned waste receptacles provided primarily for pedestrian use and litter control. 
(f)  No person or business shall store or dispose of refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials, or any manner of waste within a vehicle parked on the public right-of-way or in a public place, unless such person or business is permitted under subsection (a) in this section to dispose of or haul such waste and unless such vehicle is being actively loaded for immediate hauling. 
(Code 1986, § 73.13; Ord. No. 02-21, § 7, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 10-12, § 1, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 58-35. - Requirements for bulk and excess yard waste pickup. 
(a)  Bulk waste and excess yard waste will be collected by the city's franchise hauler on a scheduled basis and will not require containerization if the requirements set forth in the following subsections are met. Customer must arrange to schedule a pick-up with the city's franchise hauler. 
(b)  Bulk waste such as furniture, household appliances, and bicycles may be placed out for pickup as set forth in section 58-31(f). Customer must arrange to schedule a pick-up with the city's franchise hauler. 
(c)  Excess yard waste not in containers may be set out on the right-of-way for pickup consistent with the requirements of section 58-31. The property owner shall make arrangements directly with the franchise hauler for excess yard waste pickup. With the exception of any property upon which the land use activity is classified as residential pursuant to Code of Ordinances section 86-9, any yard waste that can fit in a container must be containerized and this container must not exceed 50 pounds. Excess yard waste pickup is subject to a fee in the amount of the cost of collection and disposal or $75.00, whichever is greater. Payment shall be made to the franchise hauler. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit nonfranchised licensed haulers from hauling excess yard waste or C & D. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § 8, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 07-07, § 3, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 58-36-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 58-61. - Determination and levy of charge. 
(a)  The city commission shall determine, fix and levy upon all improved properties within the city a solid waste charge for the availability of waste collection, transfer and disposal service as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The fact that any residential or commercial unit located in the city is occupied or is capable of being occupied shall be prima facie evidence that garbage or solid waste is being produced or accumulated upon such premises. Temporary vacancy, regardless of duration, shall not constitute grounds for a refund or excuse the nonpayment of any solid waste charge. A solid waste charge for waste collection and disposal shall be levied against all existing and newly constructed residential or commercial units for which a certificate of occupancy is required. 
(Code 1986, § 73.02(a), (b)) 
Sec. 58-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-62, which pertained to monthly billing; due date, and derived from § 73.02(c) of the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 58-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-63, which pertained to delinquency and derived from § 73.02(c), (d) of the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 58-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-64, which pertained to dumping fee for navy-generated solid waste and derived from § 73.02(f) of the 1986 Code; Ord. No. 03-27, adopted Sept. 11, 2003; Ord. No. 10-18, adopted Sept. 22, 2010; and Ord. No. 12-34, adopted Sept. 18, 2012. 
Sec. 58-65. - Residential rates. 
    The annual solid waste charge levied upon residential units in the city for maximum solid waste collection, transfer, and disposal service shall be $356.28 per year. This rate may be adjusted each October 1, by resolution of the city commission, by up to 100 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI-(U), U.S. City Averages (as of June). The city commission shall enact an ordinance amendment to this section in order to increase the rate in excess of the CPI. 
(Code 1986, § 73.02(g); Ord. No. 03-27, § 1, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-34, § 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 14-17, § 1, 9-3-2014) 
Sec. 58-66. - Dumping fee for commercial establishments and licensed businesses. 
    Each commercial establishment and/or licensed business shall pay a maximum solid waste dumping or tipping fee of $168.11 per ton based on a conversion rate of 163 pounds per cubic yard for non-compaction containers. 
(Code 1986, § 73.02(h); Ord. No. 03-27, § 2, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 06-19, § 2, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 07-11, § 2, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 10-18, § 3, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-34, § 3, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 14-17, § 2, 9-3-2014) 
Sec. 58-67. - Annual adjustment of dumping or tipping fees. 
    All solid waste collection and dumping/tipping fees provided or referenced in this article, including without limitation those provided at sections 58-64 through 58-66, shall annually be administratively adjusted by a percentage equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for June of the current year of adjustment, compared with the index for June of the preceding year. The annual adjustment shall take effect October 1 of each calendar year and shall be implemented by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 73.02(i)) 
Sec. 58-68. - Commercial solid waste accounts. 
    All persons involved in a commercial use of property must register for and hold a commercial solid waste account with the city or its franchisee. All commercial units regardless of size or type must subscribe to at least minimum service. 
(Code 1986, § 73.03; Ord. No. 02-21, § 9, 8-6-2002; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-69, which pertained to fees to constitute a lien and derived from § 73.033 of the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 58-70. - New units. 
    Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy in the city, the building official shall notify the city manager of the name of the owner of such property and a description of the property and the nature of the improvement. The city manager shall affix the solid waste charge against such improved property in accordance with this article, and such property shall be added to the city's solid waste records. The solid waste charge shall be prorated to reflect the number of months of actual collection service remaining in the service year that the property became obligated to receive garbage and trash collection service. The property owner shall pay the solid waste charge prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1986, § 73.04) 
Sec. 58-71. - Trash haulers. 
(a)  Persons licensed by the city to transport yard waste or C & D, as defined in section 58-1, may establish monthly billing accounts with the city department of revenue for yard waste or C & D disposed of at the city's transfer station. Failure to pay such billings within 30 days shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(b)  When a person applies for a building permit and intends to use or uses a dumpster located either on private or public property, such person shall identify the trash hauler whose name shall then be placed on the building permit. 
(Code 1986, § 73.06; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-72, which pertained to the responsibility of owner and tenant for payment and derived from § 73.07 of the 1986 Code. 
Sec. 58-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-09, adopted June 18, 2013, rescinded § 58-73, which pertained to payment required for issuance of business tax receipt, and derived from § 73.08 of the 1986 Code; and Res. No. 06-292, adopted Sept. 6, 2006. 
Sec. 58-74. - Senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled residential fee adjustment. 
    The senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled residential fee adjustment shall mean a reduction of 15 percent of the residential rate imposed pursuant to section 58-65 to qualified senior citizens and other citizens who are totally and permanently disabled and who reside at the property where the reduction is sought. Any subscriber who is 60 years of age or older by October 1 of the year in which the senior citizens fee adjustment is established, or who is totally and permanently disabled, and whose total annual income does not exceed the maximum social security benefit amount established each year shall be entitled to the reduction upon submission of such proof of age, disability, residency, and income as the city manager may reasonably require. Proof of age may be submitted anytime after the October 1 date at which time the fee adjustment will be made effective from that day forward. 
(Ord. No. 09-11, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Secs. 58-75-58-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING PROGRAM 

Sec. 58-80. - Objective. 
    This ordinance has been created due to the growing environmental concerns of our island and its fragile ecosystem. It shall be the policy of the City of Key West to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and to require the recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent possible to reduce the amount of refuse sent to landfills and incinerators. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-81. - Recycling coordinator. 
    There shall be a person appointed by the city manager or his or her designee to be the recycling coordinator. The recycling coordinator shall organize and direct policy, determine appropriate recycling materials, develop marketing plans, set target dates and goals regarding the designation and collection of recycling materials with the assistance of any boards or committees so directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-82. - Residential recyclable materials. 
    The following materials shall be subject to the City of Key West's Residential Recycling Program, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Aluminum (cans, foils, trays and containers). 
(b)  Corrugated cardboard. 
(c)  Glass containers (clear, green and brown). 
(d)  Ferrous cans (steel or tin). 
(e)  Magazines. 
(f)  Newspapers. 
(g)  Office paper, thin cardboard and cardstock. 
(h)  Plastic containers marked "1" through "7" (including, but not limited to: milk, soda and water bottles). 
(i)  Residential yard waste, which will be collected on a separate day and must be containerized separately. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-83. - Mandatory separation of residential recyclable materials. 
    Each owner, occupier, caretaker or tenant of a residential dwelling unit in the City of Key West shall separate all designated recyclable materials and yard waste from other refuse in accordance with the provisions of this section irrespective of whether or not said dwelling unit receives paid solid waste services. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-84. - Collection containers of residential recyclable materials. 
    The City of Key West or its designee shall provide each single-family dwelling unit, duplexes and multifamily units with up to ten units with one recyclable materials container per unit. The container shall only be used to transport recyclable materials from the residential dwelling unit to the curbside for pickup. The containers shall remain at all times the property of the City of Key West and the resident, caretaker, owner or tenant of the unit shall take proper care to protect such container from loss, theft, damage or misuse. So long as they are available, each residential dwelling unit will be entitled to one replacement container. Subsequent replacement containers shall be provided at the expense of the dwelling owner, occupier, tenant or caretaker or whomever is listed on the solid waste bills or tax rolls. Any replacement containers provided by anyone other than the City of Key West shall be of the same or similar type construction, capacity and size of the city-issued container or any city-authorized recycling receptacle less than 50 pounds at full capacity. Replacement containers shall have consistent markings identifying it as a recyclable materials container. Collection containers shall be placed on the outer edge of the sidewalk, so as not to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians, or in such other place and on days specified by the recycling coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-85. - Multifamily residences and dwelling units. 
    The owner or manager(s) of any units described as a multifamily dwelling herein (excluding residences with less than 11 units) shall submit to the recycling coordinator a written recycling plan within 30 days of enactment of this ordinance. The recycling plan shall contain steps that the manager or owner shall take to ensure compliance with this article such as providing an area on the grounds for residents to deposit their recyclable materials, whether or not the owner or manager(s) will provide a recyclable materials-only dumpster and submit an affidavit that all unit owners, occupiers, tenants or caretakers of the building have been provided a written notice of the building's city-approved policy and the City of Key West's recycling ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-86. - Anti-scavenger clause. 
    All recyclable materials or white goods placed at the curbside for pickup shall be property of the City of Key West or its authorized agent. It is a violation of this section for any person not authorized by the City of Key West to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclables. Any and each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-87. - Sale and donation of material. 
    Any person who is an owner, occupier, tenant or caretaker may donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, partnership or corporation as long as the recycling individual or company submits documentation to the municipal recycling coordinator as described in section 58-81. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-88. - Reporting of recycling transportation tonnages. 
    All nonfranchised recycling haulers removing recycling from the City of Key West shall report the tonnage of recycling hauled from the city on a quarterly basis. Report shall be submitted to the recycling coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-89. - Enforcement. 
    After one year from the effective date of this ordinance, the city commission will revisit this ordinance. At such time it will determine and decide and measure the effectiveness of recycling in Key West and may amend this ordinance to effectuate reasonable and workable enforcement and/or penalties, if any, to achieve compliance. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 58-90. - Education. 
    Education will be conducted by city staff and a designated volunteer recycling education committee. City and/or the volunteer committee shall report monthly to the city commission during the first year of implementation. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 1-21-2009) 
Secs. 58-91-58-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANNUAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 58-100. - General authority. 
(A)  The city commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual solid waste service assessment to fund all or any portion of the solid waste cost upon benefitted property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities or programs. All solid waste service assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this article V, sections 58-100 through 58-115. 
(B)  The amount of the solid waste service assessment imposed in a fiscal year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the solid waste cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. 
(C)  Any unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments due the city for solid waste management and disposal services or facilities which are allocable to specific parcels of assessed property may be included in the annual solid waste service assessment for such parcels. In such an event, any existing lien on each affected parcel for unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments shall be supplanted by the lien resulting from the inclusion of such unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments in the amount of the solid waste service assessment. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-101. - Initial proceedings. 
    The initial proceeding for the imposition of a solid waste service assessment shall be the adoption of an initial assessment resolution by the city commission: 
(A)  Containing a brief and general description of the solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(B)  Determining the solid waste cost to be assessed; 
(C)  Describing the method of apportioning the solid waste cost and the computation of the solid waste service assessment for specific properties; 
(D)  Providing a summary description of the parcels of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) located within the city that receive a special benefit from the provision of solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs or describing a specific geographic area in which such service, facility, or program will be provided; 
(E)  Establishing an estimated assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(F)  Directing the city manager to: 
(1)  Prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by section 58-102 hereof, 
(2)  Publish the notice required by section 58-103 hereof, and 
(3)  Mail the notice required by section 58-104 hereof using information then available from the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-102. - Initial assessment roll. 
(A)  The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of all assessed property conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3)  The amount of the solid waste service assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of assessed property. 
(B)  The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the solid waste service assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-103. - Notice by publication. 
    Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the city manager shall publish, or direct the publication of, once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that at a meeting of the city commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the city commission will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(A)  A geographic depiction of the property subject to the solid waste service assessment; 
(B)  A brief and general description of the solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(C)  The rate of assessment; 
(D)  Notification that unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments due the City for Solid Waste collection and disposal services allocable to specific parcels will be additionally included in the annual solid waste service assessment; 
(E)  The procedure for objecting provided in section 58-105 hereof; 
(F)  The method by which the solid waste service assessment will be collected; and 
(G)  A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city manager and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-104. - Notice by mail. 
    In addition to the published notice required by section 58-103, the city manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed solid waste service assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the solid waste service assessment. Such notice shall include: 
(A)  The purpose of the solid waste service assessment; 
(B)  The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property; 
(C)  The unit of measurement applied to determine the solid waste service assessment; 
(D)  The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(E)  The total revenue to be collected by the city from the solid waste service assessment; 
(F)  A statement that failure to pay the solid waste service assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(G)  Notification that unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments due the city for solid waste management and disposal services allocable to specific parcels will be additionally included in the solid waste service assessment; 
(H)  A statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city commission within 20 days of the notice; and 
(I)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
    The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The city manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a solid waste service assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-105. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
    At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city commission, the city commission shall receive any written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city commission adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(A)  Confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the city commission; 
(B)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; 
(C)  Approve the inclusion of any unpaid or delinquent fees, charges, or assessments due the city for solid waste management and disposal services; 
(D)  Approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(E)  Determine the method of collection. 
    The adoption of the final assessment resolution by the city commission shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs to be provided and a legislative determination that the solid waste service assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. All objections to the final assessment resolution shall be made in writing, and filed with the city manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which solid waste service assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-106. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
    The solid waste service assessments for the initial fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the initial rate of assessment, the initial assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the solid waste service assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the final assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 58-114 hereof is used to collect the solid waste service assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-107. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(A)  The city commission shall adopt an annual rate resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which a solid waste service assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(B)  The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the city commission: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the solid waste cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establishing the estimated assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(4)  Authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(5)  Directing the city manager to: 
(a)  Update the assessment roll, 
(b)  Provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (F) of this section so require, and 
(c)  Direct and authorize any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the city. 
(C)  The annual rate resolution shall: 
(1)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year, and 
(2)  Approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the city commission deems just and right. 
    The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial assessment resolution, or any subsequent preliminary rate resolution, together with modifications, if any, that are provided and confirmed in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(D)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the manner provided in either or both sections 58-103 or 58-104 hereof. 
(E)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from establishing by resolution a maximum rate of assessment provided that notice of such maximum assessment rate is provided pursuant to sections 58-103 and 58-104 hereof. 
(F)  In the event: 
(1)  The proposed solid waste service assessment for any fiscal year exceeds the maximum rate of assessment adopted by the city commission and included in the notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 58-103 and 58-104 hereof, 
(2)  The purpose for which the solid waste service assessment is imposed or the use of the revenue from the solid waste service assessment is substantially changed from that represented by the notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 58-103 and 58-104 hereof, 
(3)  Assessed property is reclassified or the method of apportionment is revised or altered resulting in an increased solid waste service assessment from that represented by the notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 58-103 and 58-104 hereof, or 
(4)  An assessment roll contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, notice shall be provided by publication and first class mail to the owners of such assessed property. 
Such notice shall substantially conform with the notice requirements set forth in sections 58-103 and 58-104 hereof and inform the owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a solid waste service assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this ordinance. 
(G)  As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the solid waste service assessments) unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any prior fee, charge, or assessment imposed by the city or any solid waste service assessment not challenged within the required 20-day period for those solid waste service assessments previously imposed against assessed property by the inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(H)  The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 58-114 hereof is used to collect the solid waste service assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. If the solid waste service assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by any court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-108. - Lien of solid waste service assessments. 
    Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all solid waste service assessments shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until paid. The lien for a solid waste service assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a solid waste service assessment collected under the uniform assessment collection method shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a solid waste service assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 58-114 shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-109. - Revisions to solid waste service assessments. 
    If any solid waste service assessment made under the provisions of this ordinance is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city commission is satisfied that any such solid waste service assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city commission has omitted any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the city commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new solid waste service assessment against any property benefited by the solid waste costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this ordinance and in case such second solid waste service assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city commission may obtain and impose other solid waste service assessments until a valid solid waste service assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-110. - Procedural irregularities. 
    Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any solid waste service assessment under the provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any solid waste service assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such solid waste service assessment was duty levied, that the solid waste service assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such solid waste service assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this ordinance; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to a solid waste service assessment imposed pursuant to this ordinance must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-111. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(A)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, city manager, city commission, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a solid waste service assessment imposed by the city commission under the provision of this ordinance. 
(B)  When it shall appear that any solid waste service assessment should have been imposed under this ordinance against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of solid waste collection and disposal services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the city commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of the omitted parcel in the manner and form provided in section 58-104, impose the applicable solid waste service assessment for the fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable solid waste service assessment due for the prior two fiscal years. Such solid waste service assessment shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in section 58-113 and 58-114 hereof, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(C)  Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to a solid waste service assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the solid waste service assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the solid waste service assessment imposed under the provisions of this ordinance. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the city manager and not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(D)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-112. - Interim assessments. 
    An interim solid waste service assessment shall be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after adoption of the annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim solid waste service assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate resolution for the fiscal year in which the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim solid waste service assessment shall also include an estimate of the subsequent fiscal year's solid waste service assessment. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full payment of the interim solid waste service assessment is received by the city. Issuance of the certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the interim solid waste service assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the purpose of this provision, such interim solid waste service assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-113. - Method of collection. 
(A)  Unless otherwise directed by the city commission, the solid waste service assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this ordinance may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(B)  The amount of a solid waste service assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefitted property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program, provided: 
(1)  The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, 
(2)  Notice is provided to the owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and 
(3)  Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such solid waste service assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-114. - Alternative method of collection. 
    In lieu of utilizing the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city may elect to collect the solid waste service assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section: 
(A)  The city shall provide solid waste service assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the solid waste service assessment, 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the solid waste service assessment, 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel, 
(4)  The total amount of the solid waste service assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period, 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted, 
(6)  The date on which the solid waste service assessment is due, and 
(7)  A statement that the solid waste service assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(B)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the solid waste service assessments shall be recorded in the official records of the county. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(C)  The city shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent solid waste service assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A solid waste service assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her solid waste service assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city or its agent will either: 
(1)  Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent solid waste service assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property, or 
(2)  Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent solid waste service assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(D)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The city or its agent may join in one foreclosure action the collection of solid waste service assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, in collection of such delinquent solid waste service assessments, and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent solid waste service assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(E)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent solid waste service assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that: 
(1)  Notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this ordinance, and 
(2)  Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent solid waste service assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(F)  Notwithstanding the city's use of an alternative method of collection, the city manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to him or her or other county officials in section 58-111 hereof. 
(G)  Any city commission action required in the collection of solid waste service assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 58-115. - Government property. 
(A)  If solid waste service assessments are imposed against government property, the city shall provide solid waste service assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the solid waste service assessment, 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the solid waste service assessment, 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel, 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's solid waste service assessment for the appropriate period, 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted, and 
(6)  The date on which the solid waste service assessment is due. 
(B)  Solid waste service assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as all other solid waste service assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(C)  A solid waste service assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its solid waste service assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(D)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, in collection of such delinquent solid waste service assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent solid waste service assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(E)  As an alternative to the foregoing, a solid waste service assessment imposed against government property may be collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such government property in installments with a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of non-payment. The city commission may contract for such billing services with any utility, whether or not such utility is owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(5); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grade of any street in the City saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); art in public places board, § 2-481 et seq.; street closures for special events, § 6-56 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; moving buildings, § 14-146 et seq.; peddlers, § 18-541 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; waterways, ch. 82; handbills restricted in public places, § 106-92; sidewalks and improvements to enhance pedestrian movement, § 107-28; planning and development, ch. 108; site plans for pedestrian sidewalks, § 108-286; resources protection, ch. 110; posting notices, signs or advertising matter on trees, poles or public property, § 114-2; placing signs on surface of streets or sidewalks, § 114-4; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Deposits of oil, grease or other waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow to be caused any oil, grease or other waste matter to flow or otherwise be placed upon any right-of-way, street, alley, swale, public square or sidewalk within the city. Violations shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 76.01(b)) 
Sec. 62-2. - Obstructions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct the free, convenient and ordinary use of any public right-of-way, street, roadway, alley, sidewalk, swale or public square by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining the passage of either pedestrian or vehicular traffic or by endangering the safe movement of pedestrians or vehicles travelling thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the right of assembly or to any other purpose for which a government has issued a permit; provided, however, that a permit to use a public area for a commercial purpose does not authorize obstruction. 
(c)  Violations shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 76.03) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of streets, F.S. §§ 316.2035, 316.2045, 861.01, 861.011. 
Sec. 62-3. - Schedule of right-of-way permit fees. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee, on behalf of the city, shall charge and collect for right-of-way permits at the rate set forth below: 
(1)  Dumpster application fee ..... $10.00 
Dumpster permit fee ..... 10.00 
Dumpster renewal fee (15-day maximum) per day ..... 10.00 
(2)  Right-of-way construction application fee ..... 20.00 
Right-of-way construction permit fee ..... 50.00 
(3)  Maintenance of traffic application fee ..... 20.00 
Maintenance of traffic permit fee ..... 30.00 
(4)  Right-of-way license application fee ..... 20.00 
Right-of-way license permit fee ..... 20.00 
(5)  Overnight storage application fee ..... 10.00 
Overnight storage permit fee ..... 10.00 
(6)  Reinspection fee (if no compliance with the above permits, thus requiring reinspection) ..... 15.00 
(7)  Upon a third submittal of drawings in support of the above permit application(s), staff review time of revisions, per hour ..... 45.00 
(8)  Parking meter fee (if obstructed) per day ..... 20.00 
(b)  Exemptions. Governmental agencies shall be exempt from the permit fees of this section; provided, however, that such agencies must apply for and obtain all permits. Where a person or firm voluntarily installs a sidewalk in front of that person's or firm's property, pursuant to a duly issued permit, then the right-of-way construction fee and the maintenance of traffic fee, if any, shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, § 1, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 62-4. - No camping. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Camp or camping means to pitch or occupy a tent or other temporary shelter for sleeping or other habitation purposes. 
(2)  Camp facilities means tarpaulins, costs, beds, sleeping bags, boxes or cartons, hammocks, make-shift shelters, cardboard, and portable stoves or other cooking paraphernalia. 
(3)  Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated upon rails or guideway, but not including any bicycle, motorized scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device, or moped. 
(4)  Public place means the definition provided in section 1-2 of the Code of Ordinances. For purposes of this section, it also includes a beach within city limits. 
(5)  Safe zone means a public shelter provided for habitation by the city. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall camp in a public place in Key West. Camping may include the use of camp facilities. There [The] mere act of a person sleeping in a public place is not alone sufficient to constitute a violation of this section, unless there is indicia of camping, shelter or any barrier between an individual and the elements used for the purpose of sleeping or establishing a habitat. A written or verbal warning shall be issued for any first time offender of this section provided that compliance is achieved within a reasonable amount of time. Second or subsequent violations are subject to arrest pursuant to F.S. § 901.15. 
(c)  Personal property. In the event a person is arrested under this section, the arresting officer shall use best efforts to identify and preserve the personal property of the person. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Secs. 62-5-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 62-31. - Maintenance of area between property line and adjacent paved roadway. 
    It shall be the duty of owners and occupants of property to keep clean the area between their property line and the nearest adjacent paved roadway, including both the swale and sidewalk. This area shall be kept clean and free of weeds, trash, debris and other such obstructions, including garbage cans except as provided in section 58-31. Any planting in such area must be authorized by the city engineer and tree commission and thereafter maintained in such a way as to allow clear passage for pedestrians. Any owner or occupant who, after code enforcement notice, fails to comply with this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 76.01(a)) 
Secs. 62-32-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-61-62-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NAMES AND NUMBERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Identification numbers, F.S. §§ 334.044, 335.08. 

Sec. 62-86. - Assignment of street numbers in accordance with plats. 
    The city engineer is authorized and empowered to assign new and corrected street numbers to all houses and buildings existing and incorrectly numbered and to assign new street numbers to all houses and buildings constructed within the corporate city limits. Such corrected and new street numbers shall be furnished in accordance with street plats on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1986, § 76.09) 
Sec. 62-87. - Display of street number required; penalties. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any building or structure, residential or commercial, assigned a street number by the chief building official shall have affixed to such building or paneled upon glass or some metallic surface the assigned number, which shall be in Arabic numerals of a contrasting color and which shall be located in a position to be easily discernible from the street fronting the building or structure. 
(b)  The following additional requirements shall apply to the street numbers: 
(1)  For single-family dwellings, the numerals shall be at least three inches in height and one-half inch in stroke width and shall be affixed on, immediately above, or immediately to the side of the principal building entrance. 
(2)  For single-occupant commercial, multiunit residential, and multiunit commercial buildings having a single street number, the numerals shall be at least five inches in height but no greater than 31 inches in height and shall be affixed at the center or on either end of the building. Multiunit buildings, in addition, shall have numerical or letter unit designations displayed as required for single-family dwellings. 
(3)  For multiunit residential and multiunit commercial buildings having separate street numbers for each unit, the numerals shall be at least three inches in height and one-half inch in stroke width and shall be affixed on, immediately above, or immediately to the side of the principal building entrance. 
(c)  Owners or occupants of those buildings and structures subject to review by the historic architectural review commission (HARC) will be required to obtain approval from the historic architectural review commission for their street numbers. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to maintain the street numbers, once affixed, in good condition and to replace any number or portion thereof if it is removed for any reason. 
(e)  Whenever any building or structure shall be erected or located in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner or the contractor on behalf of the owner to make application and to procure a number designated and assigned to the building or structure by the city engineer and to affix the number in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the chief building official until the number is affixed as provided by this section. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall subject the violator to code enforcement proceedings under article VI of chapter 2 and F.S. ch. 162. 
(Code 1986, § 76.10) 
Secs. 62-88-62-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Street specifications and manual, F.S. § 337.401. 

Sec. 62-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Break means to pierce, as by digging, drilling, chopping, cutting, blasting, or excavating. 
    Public thoroughfare means a street, road, lane, alley, sidewalk, or any portion of any right-of-way upon which there is a public right to pass or travel by foot or vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-117. - Penalty for violation. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, persons violating this section shall be subject to penalties prescribed by section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(h)) 
Sec. 62-118. - Authorization to break surface required. 
    No person shall willfully break the surface of any public thoroughfare in the city except after submitting written application for and only within 45 days after receipt of written authorization signed by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(b)) 
Sec. 62-119. - Standards for issuing authorization. 
    The city manager's written authorization required under this article shall be issued only upon finding that: 
(1)  The applicant has posted with the city a cash deposit or readily negotiable bond which shall be sufficient to pay all costs of expert repair of the surface break; 
(2)  The applicant has represented in writing that the surface break will expeditiously be made and repaired and that during the period of work the break will be well marked and barricaded to protect the public; 
(3)  The purpose of the surface break is reasonably within the best interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens; and 
(4)  The applicant, if seeking to plant vegetation within any public thoroughfare, has met all requirements of this article and the applicant has: 
a.  Has first secured written approval of the engineering department regarding the appropriate planting location. 
b.  Has then secured the written approval of the landscape division regarding the appropriate plant materials and their installation. 
c.  Has by writing agreed to indemnify and make whole the city for any present or future damages caused by the vegetation. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(c); Ord. No. 01-18, § 1, 10-16-2001) 
Sec. 62-120. - Emergencies. 
    In emergencies presenting substantial imminent threat to person or property, any person may without prior authorization break the surface of a public thoroughfare, provided that this action is reasonably calculated to dissipate the threat. On the next business day following the break, the person shall file application with the city manager for after-the-fact authorization in accordance with section 62-119. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(d)) 
Sec. 62-121. - Prompt repair. 
    Any person who breaks the surface of any public thoroughfare in the city shall promptly and without avoidable delay restore the surface to the condition required by section 62-122. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(e)) 
Sec. 62-122. - City's use of deposit. 
(a)  The deposit or bond required by this article shall be returned to the applicant only upon the city manager's finding that the applicant has expeditiously caused the broken surface of the thoroughfare to be repaired and restored such that it is equivalent or superior, in function and appearance, to its previous condition. The city manager shall retain for the city's use: 
(1)  All or any portion of the deposit or bond necessary to finance prompt, expert restoration of the surface break to the equivalent of its previous condition; and 
(2)  Fifty dollars of the deposit for each 24-hour period of avoidable delay in repair of a break in a public thoroughfare surface not used by motorized vehicles or $150.00 for each such period if the affected surface is normally subject to motor vehicle use. 
(b)  Upon the applicant's written request delivered within seven days after notice of the city manager's decision regarding retainage under this section, the decision shall be reviewed by the city manager at an informal hearing held within 30 days of his receipt of the request. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(f)) 
Sec. 62-123. - Safety and sign requirements. 
    No person shall engage in work authorized pursuant to this article unless: 
(1)  The work site is well marked and barricaded in a manner sufficient to protect the public from harm; 
(2)  The work site, if located in or near any public thoroughfare lane used by motorized vehicles such that the work affects traffic flow in the lane, is occupied by a trained flagman assisting traffic flow between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.; 
(3)  The work site barricades carry operating warning lights between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and 
(4)  A sign is posted at the work site which carries in three-inch to five-inch letters the name of the person or public agency which has received authorization for the work, and which sign is readily visible from the nearest public thoroughfare used by motor vehicles; provided, however, that no sign shall be required for vegetation plantings in that portion of a public thoroughfare not used by motorized vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 76.04(g)) 
Secs. 62-124-62-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NEWS RACKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Distributor means any individual or business entity engaged in the dissemination of any publication utilizing a news rack located in the City of Key West, Florida. 
    Intersection , for purposes of this section, the term intersection shall mean that portion of public right-of-way intended for vehicular travel. Any reference to measurement from an intersection in this section shall be determined from the center of the intersection. 
    News rack means any type of unmanned device, including any online or electronic, self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser or stand, installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or dissemination of newspapers or other written periodicals or for the vending or free distribution of newspapers or other periodicals. 
    Public right(s)-of-way means any dedicated or undedicated public street, highway, sidewalk, parkway or alley located in the City of Key West, Florida. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk means any service area provided for that part of a public right-of-way designed and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
    Street means all of that area dedicated to public use for public traffic purposes and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Code 1986, § 76.08(a); Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-152. - Purpose and criteria. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of placement, type, appearance, and servicing of news racks on public rights-of-way so as to: 
(1)  Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; 
(2)  Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; 
(3)  Provide for public and property safety during severe weather conditions; 
(4)  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signals, hydrants, mailboxes and access to locations used for public transportation purposes; 
(5)  Relocate and/or replace news racks which result in a visual blight and/or excessive space allocation on the public rights-of-way, or which unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements, as well as to have abandoned news racks removed; 
(6)  Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties and prevent damage to right-of-way areas, greenery and landscaping; 
(7)  Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury or property damage; 
(8)  Treat all newspapers equally regardless of their size, content, circulation, or frequency of publication; 
(9)  Maintain and preserve freedom of the press; 
(10)  Cooperate and coordinate with newspaper publishers. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Secs. 62-153-62-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 62-176. - Label required. 
    No person shall install, affix, erect, construct or maintain a news rack on the public right-of-way without first obtaining a registration label for each news rack. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(a); Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-177. - Application. 
(a)  An applicant shall file with the city manager, or designee, a written application for a news rack registration label which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the newspaper or periodical to be contained in the news rack. 
(2)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the publisher, distributor and the agent of either, if any, responsible for the news rack. If an agent is named, the address and telephone number of the agent shall be supplied. 
(3)  The total number of news racks to be registered and their locations (with street address) and the type or brand of news rack. 
(4)  A photograph of each news rack at its present site, if it is to be re-registered. 
(5)  A photograph that shows the sidewalk/streetscape of each proposed site for a new registration. 
(b)  New permits shall be issued each year on or before October 1. 
(c)  Applications for locations will be submitted no later than July 15 each year. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(b)(1); Ord. No. 05-21, § 1, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-178. - Indemnification. 
    Prior to the issuance of a news rack registration label by the city manager, or designee, the applicant shall furnish to the city manager, or designee, a written statement, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby the distributor of the news rack agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, and employees from any loss, liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, maintenance and/or removal of a news rack within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(e); Ord. No. 05-21, § 2, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-179. - Fees. 
    There shall be a one-time only application fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each applicant plus a nonrefundable registration label fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each news rack registration label issued. Failed inspections are subject to a re-inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). All of the above fees will be used to defray administrative and compliance expenses related to this ordinance [Ord. No. 14-02]. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(f); Ord. No. 05-21, § 3, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-180. - Affixing label after issuance. 
    Upon issuance of a news rack registration label, the applicant shall permanently affix it to the news rack in a location that is readily visible either on the door or on the rear of the news rack, ensuring that the label number corresponds to the label number assigned to the news rack location on the application list. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(b)(2); Ord. No. 05-21, § 4, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-181. - Denial. 
    If an application for a news rack registration label shall be denied because of a defect in the application or the location, the applicant shall be notified thereof by the city manager, or designee, and shall be given the opportunity to correct the application or the location. No new or replacement news rack location shall be approved if four news racks exist already exist in that location. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(b)(3); Ord. No. 05-21, § 5, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-182. - Replacement procedure. 
(1)  If it becomes necessary to replace an existing labeled news rack, the distributor shall comply with the application procedure contained in this division. No news rack will be able to be put back, once removed, in a location that already has four news racks. In the event of more than four owners/publishers reapplying for the same location at the time of renewal, a lottery shall be held on the first Friday of September for the available locations. The city manager or designee shall devise a lottery system that ensures that all applicants have an equal opportunity to obtain a permit. 
(2)  If a distributor submits multiple publication applications for the lottery, the publication that is awarded the location in the lottery shall be placed at the location in a publications specific news rack. 
(3)  The lottery shall be conducted on the first Friday in September, or at such date selected by the city manager or designee that is as soon as practicable after that date. Should a news rack location awarded to a distributor through the lottery become available because the news rack at that location was abandoned, surrendered or was removed by the city pursuant to this ordinance [Ord. No. 14-02], then a lottery shall be conducted for that location should more than one distributor apply to place a news rack at that location. Otherwise, the location shall be awarded to any distributor who complies with this ordinance [Ord. No. 14-02]. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(b)(4); Ord. No. 05-21, § 6, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-183. - Location requirements. 
(a)  No news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained in the right-of-way: 
(1)  Within eighteen (18) inches of the back of curb with parking. For purposes of this subsection, "back of the curb" shall mean that vertical plane of a curb that abuts the sidewalk, pedestrian right-of-way or private property. 
(2)  At any location where the clear space for passageway of pedestrians would be reduced by the installation to an area of less than 36 inches. 
(3)  On or within two (2) feet of any bike rack, tree, traffic-related signs, street lights or utility poles located on the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) feet from any intersection. 
(5)  Within ten (10) feet of an active driveway. 
(6)  Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility. 
(7)  Within a median, except if a sidewalk is installed, which is defined as a landscaped or paved island in the center of the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Within five (5) feet of any handicap ramp/landing. 
(9)  Within a planter with or without vegetation. 
(10)  In violation of any section of this Code or existing city ordinance. 
(b)  No more than four news racks may be placed at any location; the news racks shall be placed immediately adjacent to each other in a horizontal line. 
(c)  News racks in groups of four (4) shall not be placed within seventy (70) feet of another grouping of news racks. 
(d)  News racks found in violation of above requirements shall be assessed a fifteen dollar ($15.00) re-inspection fee to ensure compliance. This fee shall be paid to the City of Key West within ten (10) business days of re-inspection to ensure compliance. 
(e)  Failure to achieve compliance of the provisions of this chapter shall result in the violation being forwarded to the code compliance magistrate in accordance with chapter 2, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(c); Ord. No. 05-21, § 7, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-184. - Relocation. 
    Once a news rack is registered to a location, the news rack shall not be relocated on the public right-of-way without the publisher, distributor or their agent(s) submitting in writing to the city manager, or designee, the new location of the news rack on the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(d); Ord. No. 05-21, § 8, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-185. - Installation, maintenance or use of news racks in violation of division. 
(a)  Upon determination by the city manager, or designee, that a news rack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of this division, an order to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the publisher, distributor or agent of the news rack. The order shall state the grounds for the violation. Such order shall be sent certified mail or by email to the publisher, distributor or agent (confirmed by a read receipt if the order is emailed). Failure to correct the offending condition or to appeal the order within five days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and a legal holiday, after its receipt shall result in the city removing the news rack, pending a hearing before the code compliance magistrate in accordance with chapter 2, article VI and subsection 62-183(f) and processing it as surplus as provided in section 62-212 if a violation is sustained by the code compliance magistrate. An appeal of such a determination can be made pursuant to F.S. 162.11. 
(b)  If the location or condition of a news rack constitutes an imminent and serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the city manager, or designee, may immediately remove the news rack from its location. The city shall provide immediate written notice of such action to the distributor or its agent and deem the news rack as surplus as provided in section 62-212. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  The city is not responsible for any loss or damage to any news rack. 
(Code 1986, § 76.07(g); Ord. No. 05-21, § 9, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-186. - News rack mounting standards. 
    A news rack shall be attached to a concrete base or concrete base and pedestal, with a net weight of not less than eighty (80) pounds, and the concrete base shall be the same dimensions as the news rack, and shall not be decorated or colored. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Secs. 62-187-62-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 62-211. - Determination of abandonment. 
    If a news rack remains empty or has been picked up and stored by the City of Key West for a period of thirty (30) days, it shall be deemed abandoned. The city manager, or designee, shall determine whether a news rack is abandoned and shall maintain a public record thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 76.08(b); Ord. No. 05-21, § 10, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 62-212. - Notice to publisher or owner; removal by city. 
    If a news rack is deemed abandoned as provided in section 62-211 or section 62-185, the city shall notify the publisher in writing by certified mail, providing five days from receipt of the notice to remove the identified news rack. If the publisher or owner is unknown, the city shall place an adhesive notice on the news rack providing notice of its abandonment, if on public property. If the publisher or owner does not remove the news rack within the prescribed time, the city may remove and temporarily store the news rack, including all materials used to anchor the news rack. The publisher or owner of the news rack shall be responsible to pay the city its costs associated with removal and storage. If the publisher or owner does not take possession of the news rack within thirty (30) days of issuance of the original notice of abandonment, the city shall consider the news rack as surplus property and sell or otherwise dispose of it, and no other permits will be issued for new news racks so long as existing news racks of the same publisher or distributor remain in city storage. 
(Code 1986, § 76.08(c); Ord. No. 05-21, § 11, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Secs. 62-213-62-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SALES AND DISTRIBUTION BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonprofit organization means a corporation that is expressly organized for nonprofit purposes, that is in good standing at the time of its application for a permit under this article, and that is deemed a tax exempt organization under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-242. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article is adopted in the wake of the decision of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida in One World One Family Now v. City of Key West. This article addresses nonprofit organizations engaged in the sale and distribution of merchandise bearing a statement that is inextricably intertwined with the message sought to be communicated by the organization or the purpose of the organization. This article is not intended to repeal any section of the city's peddling ordinance, contained in article X of chapter 18, which remains the primary regulatory authority for commercial peddlers who do not come within the limited scope of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(a)) 
Sec. 62-243. - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(j)) 
Secs. 62-244-62-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 62-271. - Required. 
    A permit is required of any nonprofit organization that intends to sell, rent, offer to sell, offer to rent or otherwise distribute message-bearing commercial merchandise on the public right-of-way. No other individual or organization may secure a permit under this division and is instead subject to the regulations set forth in articles VI and X of chapter 18 and this article. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(b)) 
Sec. 62-272. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required under this division may be obtained from the city clerk and shall be submitted to the city manager. Only those applications on city forms will be considered. The city may charge an application processing fee in the amount of $15.00 per application. In addition to the application form, as described in section 62-273, the applicant must provide the city with certified articles of incorporation, a certificate of good standing from its state of incorporation, and documentation of tax exempt status. If the application is complete and the applicant is eligible as a nonprofit organization, the application will be approved. 
(b)  An application shall be submitted to the city during the calendar month prior to the permit month. The term "permit month" shall mean the month duration during which the permit is valid. Permits are nontransferable. A separate application shall be submitted for each location sought by the applicant. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(c)) 
Sec. 62-273. - Application form. 
    The application for the permit required under this division shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the nonprofit organization; 
(2)  The names and social security numbers of persons in charge of organizing the sales activity, and their addresses and phone numbers where they may be reached during business hours; 
(3)  The names and social security numbers of persons who are to be involved in the sales activity at the location; 
(4)  The location at which the applicant desires to conduct the sales activity; 
(5)  The period of time for which the applicant seeks a permit; 
(6)  A description of the merchandise involved in the applicant's sales; and 
(7)  A certification by the persons to be involved in the sales activity that they have read and understood the requirements of this article and that they are participating in the sales activity of their own free will. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(d)) 
Sec. 62-274. - Issuance. 
    Permits required under this division shall be issued to applicants on a nondiscretionary basis, unless the number of applicants for a particular location exceeds the number of spaces available at the location, as set forth in section 62-302. In such event, the city shall hold a lottery during the week prior to the first day of the permit month. The city manager shall devise a lottery system that ensures that all applicants have an equal opportunity to obtain a permit. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(c)) 
Sec. 62-275. - Indemnification. 
    All holders of the permit issued pursuant to this division shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its respective officers, agents and employees from any suits, actions and claims arising out of or in any way connected with the activities permitted under the permit. However, the duty of the permit holder shall not include any claims or any liability arising from the negligence or misconduct of the city, its agents, officers or employees. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(i)) 
Secs. 62-276-62-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 62-301. - Hours of operation. 
    Nonprofit organizations that have obtained a permit under this article may engage in sales activities during daylight hours only and under no circumstance earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, and 9:00 p.m., Daylight Saving Time. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(e); Ord. No. 01-02, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-302. - Locations. 
(a)  The following locations shall be available pursuant to this article: 
(1)  The southwest corner of Southard and Duval Streets on Southard in front of what exists as a moped parking area. 
(2)  The southeast corner of Greene Street and Fitzpatrick on Greene east of the existing telephone booth. 
(3)  On Greene Street behind the property currently known as Strunks. 
(4)  The southwest corner of Olivia Street and Duval Street on Olivia. 
(5)  South of 801 Duval Street where a vacant lot currently exists. 
(6)  The northwest corner of United Street and Duval Street on United by the yellow line six feet from the corner. 
(7)  Smathers Beach near the restrooms. 
(8)  The southwest corner of Wall and Fitzpatrick off the sidewalk. 
(9)  Next to the First Union Bank Building on Duval Street, near Front Street, but not closer than 20 feet from the corner. 
(10)  Such other location which the city manager may approve upon application by a nonprofit organization and upon a finding that the sale of T-shirts by the nonprofit organization is consistent with section 122.1502. 
(b)  Qualified organizations shall be entitled to obtain in any permit month permits for a maximum of two locations. No more than two different permit holders may be located at any given permitted location. 
(c)  In addition to the location restrictions in this section, a permit holder shall ensure the following: 
(1)  A continuous, unobstructed pedestrian walkway; 
(2)  A minimum of four feet of clearance on both sides of a driveway and of a bicycle rack; 
(3)  A minimum of four feet of clearance around any wheelchair ramp and, additionally, conformity with all regulations of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act; 
(4)  A minimum of four feet of clearance around any fire hydrant; and 
(5)  A minimum of four feet of clearance around any crosswalk where, from the relationship of the sidewalk to the roadway, pedestrians would expect to stop before crossing a street. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(e); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-303. - Display of merchandise; obstructions. 
    All merchandise to be sold pursuant to this article shall be borne and displayed by the person engaged in offering it for sale in such a manner that the public right-of-way will not be used for tables, containers, boxes, racks or any other physical obstruction. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(f); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-304. - Possession of permit; identification. 
    The original of the permit issued under this article shall be carried by one person engaged in sales at the sales location. In addition, each member of the permit holder's organization who is engaged in sales activities at the permitted location shall at all times wear and keep visible a legible identification badge containing the name of the individual and the name and address of the organization. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(f); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-305. - Issuance of receipt for transactions. 
    Each holder of a permit issued under this article shall provide a receipt with each sales transaction. The receipt shall contain the name and address of the organization and the date of sale, the number and types of items sold, and the dollar amount of the transaction. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(f); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-306. - Litter. 
    Each holder of a permit issued under this article shall maintain the sales area free of litter. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(f); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Sec. 62-307. - Prohibitions. 
    A holder of a permit issued under this article shall not: 
(1)  Intentionally inflict emotional distress by verbal or physical harassment or coercion. 
(2)  Impede the flow of vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Interfere with the conduct of business by obstructing access to businesses and other properties, including but not limited to the obstruction of entryways or the prevention of free passage of pedestrians or vehicles to or from businesses. 
(4)  Interfere with pedestrian traffic by activities that prevent the free passage of pedestrians or cause unreasonable congestion. 
(5)  Engage in unsanitary practices. 
(6)  Create a fire hazard. 
(7)  Create excess noise in violation of the city's sound control requirements in article IV of chapter 26. 
(8)  Engage in fraudulent practices or solicitations, including but not limited to misrepresentation about any sale or solicitation, misrepresentation about the nature and type of the permit holder's organization, or misrepresentation or concealment of any material fact in the application process. 
(9)  Deface public property, including but not limited to cutting, breaking, injuring, defacing or disturbing any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, monument, fence, bench, sidewalk, structure or equipment; or marking, painting, posting or writing on any of such items of public property. 
(10)  Violate any other conditions imposed on the permit by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(g)) 
Sec. 62-308. - Merchandise standards. 
    The purpose and activity of the holder of the permit issued under this article and the nature or content of the merchandise to be sold must be inextricably intertwined. The merchandise must carry or convey a political, religious, philosophical or ideological message that is permanent and readable or recognizable and that is informative of the purpose of the permit holder and meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The message carried or conveyed on the merchandise must be physically part of the merchandise, indelible and not printed on a removable sticker; 
(2)  The message must be legible in the context of the size of the lettering, the color scheme, the location of the message and the graphics involved, and there shall be no intent to obscure the message by making the lettering unreasonably small or placing the message in an unreadable location; and 
(3)  The mere placement of an organization's name on merchandise or the city's name on the merchandise shall not qualify the merchandise as inextricably intertwined with the purpose and activity of the permit holder. 
(Code 1986, § 107.38(h); Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-6-2001) 
Secs. 62-309-62-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 62-401. - Short title. 
    This Article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Key West Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-402. - Findings, intent and scope. 
(a)  The City of Key West hereby makes and declares the following findings and declares its legislative intent as follows: 
(1)  The Public Rights-of-Way within the City of Key West are a unique and physically limited resource and important amenity that are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the City. 
(2)  The demand for telecommunications services has grown exponentially in recent years, requiring the continual upgrading of telecommunications equipment and services to satisfy such demand. 
(3)  The placement of telecommunications equipment and facilities in the public rights-of-way to satisfy the demand for telecommunications services raises important issues with respect to the City's responsibility to manage its public rights-of-way. 
(4)  The Public Rights-of-Way must be managed and controlled in a manner that enhances the health, safety and general welfare of the City and its citizens. 
(5)  The use and occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way by providers of communications services must be subject to regulation to ensure minimal inconvenience to the public, coordinate users, maximize available space, reduce maintenance and costs to the public, and facilitate entry of an optimal number of providers of cable, telecommunications, and other services in the public interest. 
(6)  Section 166.041, Florida Statutes, provides for procedures for adoption of an ordinance which is a regulation of general and permanent nature and enforceable as local law. 
(7)  Section 337.401, Florida Statutes, provides that because federal and state law require the nondiscriminatory treatment of providers of telecommunications services and because of the desire to promote competition among providers of communications services, it is the intent of the Florida Legislature that municipalities and counties treat providers of communications services in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner when imposing rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public roads or rights-of-way. 
(8)  The City finds that, to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, it is necessary to (i) provide for the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way within the City limits, (ii) adopt and administer reasonable rules, regulations and general conditions not inconsistent with applicable state and federal law, (iii) manage the placement and maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way by all Communications Services Providers, (iv) minimize disruption to the Public Rights-of-Way, and (v) require the restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way to original condition. 
(9)  The City's intent is that these rules and regulations must be generally applicable to all providers of communications services and, notwithstanding any other law, may not require a provider of communications services to apply for or enter into an individual license, franchise, or other agreement with the City as a condition of placing or maintaining communications facilities in its roads or rights-of-way. 
(10)  It is also the City's intent to exercise the City's retained authority to regulate and manage the City's roads and rights-of-way in exercising its police power over Communications Services Providers' placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
(b)  This Article shall apply to any public or private entity who seeks to construct, place, install, maintain or operate a Communications System or Facilities, as such terms are defined herein, in the Public Rights-of-Way, unless otherwise exempt by operation of applicable state or federal law. This Article shall equally apply to a City owned or controlled Communications System, except to the extent such Facilities are utilized on an internal, non-commercial basis by the City or any of its agencies, departments or bureaus. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-403. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The words "shall," "will" and "must" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed thereto under Chapters 202 or 337, Florida Statutes, as amended, or where none is ascribed shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
(1)  Abandonment means the permanent cessation of all uses of a Communications Facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a Facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "Abandonment" of a Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(2)  Affiliate means each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a Communications Services Provider that is Registered with the City; provided that Affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner, member, or shareholder holding an interest of less than 15 percent in such Communications Services Provider. 
(3)  Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing Wireless Services or other Communications Services. 
(4)  Applicable Codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement this subsection. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require that a new utility pole replacing an existing utility pole be of substantially similar design, material, and color, or that ground-mounted equipment meet reasonable spacing requirements. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require a Small Wireless Facility to meet reasonable location context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements; however, the City may waive the design standards upon a showing that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a Small Wireless Facility or that the design standards impose an excessive expense. The waiver must be granted or denied within 45 days after the date of the waiver request. 
(5)  Applicant means a person who submits an Application and is a Wireless Provider. 
(6)  Application means a request submitted by an Applicant to the City for a permit to collocate Small Wireless Facilities. 
(7)  As-Built Surveys means the final and complete drawings in hard copy signed and sealed by a Professional Surveyor and Mapper (as defined in §472.005, Florida Statutes) and the final and complete electronic overview map (in autocad, microstation, mapinfo or ESRI format) presented in computer input medium such as cd-rom, dvd or zip100/250. As-Built Surveys, in both the drawings and the electronic overview map, must show the present state of a Communications Services Provider's Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, including, but not limited to, the horizontal and vertical location of Facilities located at least every 100 feet and at any alignment change. Horizontal locations on all points of Facilities shall be from street centerline, or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations on all points of Facilities shall consist of elevations in either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum. 
(8)  Cable Service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or any other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
(9)  Cable Service Provider means a person that provides cable service over a cable system. 
(10)  Cable System means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities use any public right-of-way; a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, except such facility shall be considered a cable system other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; or an open video system that complies with 47 U.S. C. Section 573. 
(11)  Chapter or Article means the Key West Communications Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance, codified as Chapter 62, Article VIII of the City Code pursuant to that Ordinance enacted by City Commission effective on May 1, 2018, as may be amended or supplemented from time to time. 
(12)  City means the City of Key West, Florida, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(13)  City Code means the municipal code of ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida. 
(14)  City Commission means the governing body for the City. 
(15)  City Utility Pole means a utility pole owned by the City in the right-of-way. 
(16)  Collocate or Collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way, nor does it include interconnection of Communications Facilities or the sale or purchase of capacity (whether bundled or unbundled). 
(17)  Communications Facility, Facility or Facilities means any portion of a Communications System located in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(18)  Communications Services means the definition ascribed thereto in Section 202.11(1), Florida Statutes, as may be amended, and also includes but is not limited to Wireless Services as defined herein. 
(19)  Communications Services Provider means (i) any Person, municipality or county providing Communications Services through the use and operation of a Communications System or Communications Facilities installed, placed and maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way, regardless of whether such System or Facilities are owned or leased by such Person, municipality or county and regardless of whether such Person, municipality or county has registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of Communications Services in Florida pursuant to Chapter 202, Florida Statutes and (ii) any Person, municipality or county who constructs, installs, places, maintains or operates Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way but who does not provide Communications Services, including for example a company that places "dark fiber" or conduit in the Public Rights-of-Way and leases or otherwise provides those facilities to another company that does provide Communications Services. 
(20)  Communications System or System means any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property placed or maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way that is occupied or used, or is capable of being occupied or used, by a Communications Services Provider for the purpose of producing, conveying, routing, transmitting, receiving, amplifying, distributing, providing or offering Communications Services including, but not limited to cables, wires, lines, conduits, fiber optics, antennae, radios and any associated poles, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, and other plant, equipment and pathway. 
(21)  Dealer means any Person, municipality or county providing Communications Services to an end user in Key West through the use and operation of Communications Facilities installed, placed and maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way, whether owned or leased, and who has registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of Communications Services pursuant to Chapter 202, Florida Statutes. This definition of "Dealer" is intended to include any "Reseller." 
(22)  Department means the Florida Department of State. 
(23)  Communication Facility Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit means the right-of-way utilization permit required under this City Code prior to commencement of any placement or maintenance of Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(24)  Excavation or other similar formulation of that term means the cutting, trenching or other disturbance to the Public Rights-of-Way intended to change the grade or level of land or which causes any cavity, gap, depression, penetration or hole in the surface of the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(25)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
(26)  Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal of an authorization, regardless of whether the authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, to construct and operate a cable system or video service provider network facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(27)  Franchise Authority means any governmental entity empowered by federal, state, or local law to grant a franchise. 
(28)  Government means the United States of America, the State of Florida, counties, municipalities, and any of their respective agencies, departments or bureaus. 
(29)  In the Public Rights-of-Way means in, along, on, over, under, across or through the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(30)  Micro Wireless Facility means a Small Wireless Facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
(31)  Pass-Through Facilities means the Facilities for a Communication System that merely pass through the City from one point to another point and from which no revenues are directly attributable to subscribers or other carriers within the City. 
(32)  Pass-through Provider means any Person, municipality or county that places or maintains a Communications System or Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way but who does not provide Communications Services, including for example a company that places "dark fiber" or conduit in the Public Rights-of-Way and leases or otherwise provides those facilities to another company that does provide Communications Services to an end user. This definition of "Pass-through Provider" is intended to include any Person that places or maintains "Pass-Through Facilities" in the Public Rights-of-Way, but does not provide Communications Services to an end user within the corporate limits of the City. 
(33)  Person means any individual, firm, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including any Affiliate, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the City to the extent that the City acts as a Communications Services Provider. 
(34)  Placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining or other similar formulation of that term means the named actions interpreted broadly to encompass, among other things, erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, inspection, maintenance, placement, replacement, extension, expansion, repair, removal, operation, occupation, location, relocation, grading, undergrounding, trenching or excavation. Any Communications Services Provider that owns, leases or otherwise controls the use of a Communications System or Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way, including the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" a Communications System or Facility. A Person providing service only through buying wholesale and then reselling is not "placing or maintaining" the Communications Facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the Public Rights-of-Way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(35)  Public Rights-of-Way means land in which the City owns the fee title or has an easement devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility, as that term is defined in § 334.03(21), Florida Statutes. "Public Rights-of-Way" shall not include (a) county, state or federal rights-of-way, (b) property owned by any Person other than the City, (c) service entrances or driveways leading from the road or street onto adjoining property or (d) except as described above, any real or personal property of the City, such as, but not limited to, City parks, buildings, fixtures, conduits, water lines, sewer lines, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(36)  Public Service Commission or PSC means the agency for the State of Florida charged with the powers and duties conferred upon it by Chapter 364, Florida Statutes. 
(37)  Record Drawings means a final and complete drawing accurately depicting the improvements as constructed. Record Drawings are not required to be signed and sealed by a Professional Surveyor and Mapper. 
(38)  Registration or Register other similar formulation of that term means the process described in Section 62-404 herein whereby a Communications Services Provider provides certain information to the City. 
(39)  Reseller means any Person providing Communications Services within the City over a Communications System, or portion thereof, for which a separate charge is made, where that Person does not place or maintain, nor own or control, any of the underlying Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way used for transmission. Instead such Person purchases the Service, usually at wholesale, from a Communications Services Provider and then resells it at retail or such Person uses the Public Rights-of-Way by either interconnecting with the Facilities of a Communications Services Provider utilizing the Public Rights-of-Way or by leasing excess capacity from a facility-based Communications Services Provider. 
(40)  Small Wireless Facility means a wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: (a) each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume; and (b) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
(41)  Utility Pole means a pole or similar structure used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights, but does not include any horizontal structures upon which are attached signal lights or other traffic control devices and does not include any pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less unless the City grants a waiver for the pole. 
(42)  Video Programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station as set forth in 47 U.S.C. s. 522(20). 
(43)  Video Service means video programming services, including cable services, provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider as defined in 47 U.S.C. s.332(d), video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables end users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(44)  Video Service Provider means an entity providing video service. 
(45)  Wireless Facilities means equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include (a) the structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated, or (b) wireline backhaul facilities, or (c) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
(46)  Wireless Infrastructure Provider means a person who has been certificated to provide telecommunications service in the state, and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, Wireless Facilities, or Wireless Support Structures, but is not a Wireless Services Provider. 
(47)  Wireless Provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a Wireless Services Provider. 
(48)  Wireless Services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using Wireless Facilities. 
(49)  Wireless Services Provider means a person who provides Wireless Services. 
(50)  Wireless Support Structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a Utility Pole. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-404. - Registration. 
    Every Communications Services Provider that desires to place or maintain a Communications System or any Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, including any Pass-Through Facilities, shall first Register with the City in accordance with this Section 62-404. Subject to the provisions prescribed in this Article, a Communications Services Provider that has properly Registered may apply for Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits to place or maintain a Communications System or Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(a)  Every Communications Services Provider that desires to place or maintain Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, including any Pass-Through Facilities, shall Register with the City Engineer's Office and shall submit the following information and documentation: 
(1)  the name of the applicant under which it will transact business in the City and, if different, in the State of Florida; and 
(2)  the address and telephone number of the applicant's principal place of business in the State of Florida and any branch office located in the City or, if none, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's national headquarters and its Registered Agent in Florida; and 
(3)  the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person and the person to contact in case of an emergency; and 
(4)  the type of Communications Services that the applicant intends to provide within the corporate limits of the City (if more than one, state all that apply), or, if none, state that the applicant is a Pass-through Provider or is intending only to place and maintain Pass-Through Facilities, as the case may be; and 
(5)  for Registrations submitted on or after October 1, 2018, a copy of both the applicant's resale certificate and certificate of registration issued by the Florida Department of Revenue to engage in the business of providing communications services in the State of Florida; and 
(6)  a copy of the applicant's certificate of authorization, public convenience and necessity or other similar certification issued by the Florida Public Service Commission; and 
(7)  the number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide Communications Services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Department, the FCC, or other Federal authority, if any; and 
(8)  for an applicant that is a Pass-through Provider, in lieu of paragraphs (5), (6) and (7) above, the applicant shall provide a certified copy of the certificate or license issued by the Florida Department of State, or other appropriate state agency or department, authorizing the company to do business in the State of Florida; and 
(9)  evidence of the applicant's insurance coverage as required under this Article. 
(b)  The City shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the City Engineer or his or her designee. If it is found that the applicant complied with the requirements in subsection (a) above, the Registration shall be effective and the City shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of Registration in writing. If the City determines that the applicant is not in compliance, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the non-effectiveness and denial of Registration and the reasons therefor. The City shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Registration and required information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness and denial of Registration shall not preclude an applicant from reapplying or filing subsequent applications for Registration under the provisions of this Section. 
(c)  An effective Registration does not, and shall not be construed to, convey equitable or legal title in the Public Rights-of-Way to any Communications Services Provider. Registration under this Ordinance governs only the placement or maintenance of a Communications System or Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the Public Rights-of-Way of facilities that are not part of a Communications System. Registration does not excuse a Communications Services Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its Facilities on those facilities or property belonging to the City or another Person. Registration does not excuse a Communications Services Provider from complying with all other applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations, including the rules, regulations and general conditions set forth in this Article. 
(d)  A Communications Services Provider may cancel a Registration upon written notice to the City stating that it will no longer place or maintain a Communications System or any Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way and will no longer have a need to apply for Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits to perform construction or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way. A Communications Services Provider cannot cancel a Registration if it intends to continue placing or maintaining a Communications System or any Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(e)  Registration, in and of itself, does not establish a right to place or maintain or a priority for the placement or maintenance of a Communications System or any Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way, but shall establish for the Communications Services Provider a right to apply for a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit from the City. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this Article and further subject to any additional City ordinances, as well as any State or Federal laws that may be enacted. Registration does not excuse or exempt a Communications Services Provider from having to obtain an Occupational License from the City in accordance with the City Code. 
(f)  A Communications Services Provider shall renew its Registration with the City by April 1 of even-numbered years in accordance with the Registration requirements in this Article, except that any Communications Services Provider that initially Registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew its Registration until the next even numbered year. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (1), a Communications Services Provider shall provide updated information to the City. If no information in the then-existing Registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a Registration may result in the City restricting the issuance of additional Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits until the Communications Services Provider has complied with the Registration requirements of this Article. 
(g)  In accordance with applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations, a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit is required for a Communications Services Provider to place or maintain a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way. An effective Registration shall be a condition of obtaining such a permit. Notwithstanding an effective Registration, all permitting requirements shall apply, including the requirement to pay for any such permits unless otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance of the City. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of the Communications Services Provider having an effective Registration if all permitting requirements of the City and other provisions of this Article are met. 
(h)  A Reseller, which by definition does not place or maintain Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, is not required to Register with the City. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-405. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets. 
    If a Communications Services Provider transfers, sells or assigns its System or any Facilities located in the Public Rights-of-Way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the Communications Services Provider's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the provisions set forth in this Article. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by the Communications Services Provider to the City within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not currently registered with the City, then the transferee, buyer or assignee must register as provided in Section 62-404 within sixty (60) days of the effective date of such transfer, sale or assignment. If any applications for Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits are pending under the Communications Services Provider's name as of the date the City receives written notice of the transfer, sale or assignment, then the City shall consider the transferee, buyer or assignee as the new applicant unless otherwise notified by the Communications Services Provider. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-406. - Rules, regulations and general conditions to placement of communications systems and facilities in the public right-of-way. 
    As a condition of allowing the placement or maintenance of a Communications System or any Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way, and under additional authority granted pursuant to Chapter 337, Florida Statutes, the City hereby imposes the following rules, regulations and general conditions. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter 62, Article VIII, these rules, regulations and general conditions shall apply to all Communications Services Providers, including those that are Pass-through Providers irrespective of whether they place and maintain only conduit, dark fiber or Pass-Through Facilities. 
(a)  Rules on Utilization of the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  Compliance with Laws. A Communications Services Provider shall at all times be in full compliance with and abide by all applicable Federal, State and local laws, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a Communications System and Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(2)  Due Care. A Communications Services Provider shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the Public Rights-of-Way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(3)  Permits. A Communications Services Provider shall not commence to place or maintain a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way until all applicable permits have been issued by the City and other appropriate authorities, except in the case of an emergency. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or general welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. The Communications Services Provider shall provide prompt notice to the City of the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way in the event of an emergency and shall, after-the-fact, be required to submit plans and Record Drawings and As-Built Surveys, if required by the City Engineer, showing the placement or relocation of a Communications Facility undertaken in connection with the emergency. 
(4)  Application for Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit. Prior to the issuance of a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit to allow the placement or maintenance of a Communications System or Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way, the City has the right to first review and consider and the Communications Services Provider shall provide all of the following: 
a.  The expected dates and times when the Facility will be installed and the estimated time needed for construction and placement of the proposed Facility; 
b.  The location of the proposed Facility, the Public Rights-of-Way affected and a description of the Facility, including the type of Facility (e.g. conduit, fiber, twisted pair, etc.), the number of fibers or other cable being installed, and the approximate size of the Facility (e.g. length, height, width and diameter); and 
c.  Plans, drawings, photographs, and schematics (including cross section layout) prepared by a qualified engineer or technician showing where the Facility is proposed to be located in the Public Rights-of-Way and showing any known Communications Facilities or utility facilities in such Public Rights-of-Way. 
(5)  Revised Plans. If the plans or drawings submitted showing the proposed location for installation of the Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way require revision for any reason prior to commencing construction, the Communications Services Provider shall promptly submit revised plans and drawings to the City Engineer. 
(6)  Power to Restrict Area. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law, the City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional Communications Facilities within a particular area of the Public Rights-of Way and deny the issuance of a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit. 
(7)  Limited Purpose of Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit. A Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit issued by the City constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in Public Rights-of-Way in accordance with this Article, and does not create any property right or other vested interest, or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the Public Rights-of-Way. Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits shall be granted only for specific routes or locations in the Public Rights-of-Way and for such term as described in the permit. The City's issuance of a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit shall not be construed as a warranty that the placement of any Communications Facility is in compliance with applicable codes, regulations or laws. 
(8)  Responsibility for Contractors. Every Communications Services Provider that is Registered with the City shall be liable for the actions of contractor(s) hired by them to perform the placement or maintenance of Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way and shall be responsible for making sure that such contractor meets and complies fully with the rules, regulations and general conditions set forth in this Article. 
(b)  Regulations on the Placement or Maintenance of Communications Facilities. 
(1)  Provision and Form of Record Drawings and As-Built Surveys. Within forty-five (45) days after completion of any placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way, the Communications Services Provider shall provide the City with Record Drawings showing the final location of such Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way. Upon request by the City Engineer, the Communications Services Provider shall also provide the City with As-Built Surveys within forty-five (45) days after completion of any placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way. The Record Drawings and As-Built Surveys shall be provided to the City at no cost. 
(2)  Production and Filing of As-Builts. Every Communications Services Provider that is Registered with the City shall produce and keep on file at its principal place of business an accurate and complete set of As-Builts of all Facilities placed and maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way. The location and identification of Facilities and the production of As-Builts shall be at the sole expense of the Communications Services Provider. Within thirty (30) days of any written request by the City Engineer, the Communications Services Provider must provide to the City, at no cost, copies of complete sets of As-Builts for the indicated Public Rights-of-Way. The failure of the Communications Services Provider to produce, keep on file, or provide to the City As-Builts as required under this Article is sufficient grounds for the City to deny the issuance of Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits in the future. 
(3)  Removal of Facilities Placed Without Permit. Any Communications Facilities placed in the Public Rights-of-Way by the Communications Services Provider without first having obtained the required Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits shall be removed within thirty (30) days of written notice by the City to remove the same and in default of compliance with such notice, such Facilities may be removed by order of the City Engineer and the cost of removal shall be borne and paid by the Communications Services Provider upon demand. 
(4)  Underground. The placement or maintenance of all Communications Facilities shall be underground unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. Communications Facilities shall be placed between the property line and the curb line of all streets and avenues and shall not be within the roadway or the roadway recovery area unless specifically approved in writing by the City Engineer. All Communications Facilities shall have consistent alignment parallel with the edge of pavement, a thirty-six inch (36") depth of cover for and shall have two feet (2') of horizontal clearance from other underground utilities and their appurtenances. Where approved by the City Engineer, Facilities to be placed in the street shall be laid according to the permanent grade of the street and at a depth below the surface of the permanent grade as each is determined by the City Engineer. 
(5)  Above-Ground Approval. The placement or maintenance of Facilities above-ground, including new Utility Poles and aerial wires, is subject to written approval by the City Engineer. Attachment to any Utility Pole or other above-ground structure must be pursuant to a valid and effective pole attachment agreement or similar instrument. Location on any Utility Pole or other above-ground structure shall not be considered a vested interest of the Communications Services Provider or Wireless Infrastructure Provider and such Utility Poles or structures, if owned by the Communications Services Provider or Wireless Infrastructure Provider, shall be removed or modified by the Communications Services Provider or Wireless Infrastructure Provider at its own expense whenever the City or other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The Communications Services Provider or Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall, at such time as the electric utility facilities or other Communications Facilities are placed underground or are required by the City to be placed underground, concurrently place its Communications Facilities underground without cost to the City. 
(6)  New Utility Poles or Above-Ground Structures. The placing of any new Utility Pole or other above-ground structure to support Communications Facilities is subject to the approval of the City Engineer and shall be done under the supervision of the City Engineer or his designee. No such Utility Pole or other above-ground structure shall be placed in any gutter or drainage area and must be behind the curb to avoid damage to any sidewalk. In areas of the City where either electric utility wires or other Communications Facilities are above ground and such facilities are moved, either voluntarily or at the direction of the City, to a new Utility Pole or other above-ground structure, the Communications Services Provider or Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall likewise move all its above-ground Facilities on such Utility Poles or structures to such new Utility Pole or structure within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice from either the City or the owner of the new Utility Pole or structure, without cost to the City. New Utility Poles installed by Wireless Infrastructure Providers shall also be subject to and may avail themselves of the requirements and process set forth in § 62-408(b)(4) hereof. 
(7)  Placement and Maintenance Standards. The placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be performed in accordance with standards and requirements of the following, as is applicable and as each is in force at the time of the respective placement or maintenance of a Communications System or Facility: 
a.  the Florida Department of Transportation Utilities Accommodation Guide; 
b.  the State of Florida Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways; 
c.  the Trench Safety Act (Chapter 553, Florida Statutes); 
d.  the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act (Chapter 556, Florida Statutes); 
e.  the National Electrical Code or the ANSI National Electrical Safety Code; and 
f.  the "Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards of the United States. 
(8)  Sunshine State One-Call. Every Communications Services Provider shall utilize, and if permissible, maintain membership in the utility notification one call system administered by Sunshine State One-Call of Florida, Inc. 
(9)  Safety and Minimal Interference. All placement and maintenance of Communication Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be subject to the City Code and other regulations of the City pertaining thereto, and shall be performed with the least possible interference with the use and appearance of the Public Rights-of-Way and the rights and reasonable convenience of the property owners who abut or adjoin the Public Rights-of-Way and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Florida Department of Transportation. The Communications Services Provider shall at all times employ reasonable care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury or be a nuisance to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. All placement and maintenance shall be done in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent any interference with the usual travel on such Public Rights-of-Way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., micro tunneling and horizontal directional drilling techniques) for the installation of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever and whenever feasible. 
(10)  Correction of Harmful Conditions. If, at any time, the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that any Communications Facility is, or has caused a condition that is, harmful to the health, safety or general welfare of any Person, then the Communications Services Provider shall, at its own expense, promptly correct or eliminate all such Facilities and conditions. In an emergency, as determined by the City Engineer, when the Communications Services Provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate repairs to any Communications Facility that is damaged or malfunctioning, or has caused a sunken area or other condition and, in the City Engineer's sole discretion, is deemed a threat to public safety, then the City, when apprised of such an emergency, shall have the right to remove, make repairs to or eliminate same with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the Communications Services Provider upon demand. 
(11)  Remedy of Hazardous Conditions. If, at any time, a condition exists that the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines is an emergency that is potentially hazardous or life threatening to any person or is a threat to the health or safety of the general public, and to remedy such condition the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that a Communications Services Provider must temporarily relocate or temporarily shut off service or transmissions through a specific Facility, then the City, as an appropriate exercise of its police powers, may order the Communications Services Provider to immediately perform such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied, and to do so at its own expense and without liability to or recourse against the City. In such an emergency, when the Communications Services Provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate relocation or shut off of the specific Communications Facility, then the City shall have the right to perform, or cause to be performed, such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the Communications Services Provider upon demand. 
(12)  Interference with Other Facilities. A Communications Services Provider shall not, in violation of any applicable laws or regulatory standards, design, place or maintain its Communications Facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals or facilities of any municipal or county police, fire or rescue department, the facilities of any public utility, or the Communications Facilities of another Communications Service Provider, including any cable service provider. 
(13)  Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Except in cases of emergency, a Communications Services Provider, at its own expense, shall: 
a.  Upon thirty (30) days written notice, relocate or remove, as specified in said notice, its Communications Facility in the event the City finds that the particular Facility is unreasonably interfering in some way with the convenient, safe or continuous use, or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of any Public Rights-of-Way. The City shall provide the Communications Services Provider with a notice and order as provided for in Section 337.404 of the Florida Statutes, or any subsequently enacted law of the State of Florida, in the event it charges the Communications Services Provider for the cost and expense of relocating or removing such Facility pursuant to this paragraph. 
b.  Within a reasonable period of time from the date of written notice from the City, but not more than one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter, relocate or remove, as specified in said notice, its Communications Facility in the event the City Engineer determines it necessary for the construction, completion, repair, relocation or maintenance of a City project, because the particular Communications Facility is interfering with or adversely affecting the proper operation of street light poles, traffic signals, or any communications system belonging to the City or an agency thereof or because the particular Communications Facility is interfering with the signals or facilities of the Key West Police Department, Key West Fire Rescue, or any municipal public utility. In the event the City issues any such written notice to the Communications Services Provider pursuant to this paragraph, and the Communications Services Provider fails to cause the aforementioned relocation or removal as required herein, the City shall be entitled to relocate or remove such Facilities without further notice to the Communications Services Provider and the total cost and expense shall be charged to the Communications Services Provider. 
(14)  Temporary Raising or Lowering of Facilities. A Communications Services Provider, upon request of any Person holding a validly issued building or moving permit from the City to temporarily encroach on or perform moving operations in or across the Public Rights-of-Way, shall temporarily raise or lower its Communications Facilities to accommodate such temporary encroachment or move. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of Facilities shall be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Communications Services Provider shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Communications Services Provider shall be given not less than twenty (20) days advance written notice from such Person to arrange for the temporary relocation, which notice must detail the time and location of the permitted activity, and not less than twenty-four (24) hours advance notice from the permit holder advising of the actual operation. The City is not subject to, nor shall it be liable for, any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures performed by the City or its contractors. 
(15)  Coordination. In an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the Public Rights-of-Way and other municipal improvements, a Communications Services Provider may be required by the City Engineer to coordinate the placement or maintenance of its Facilities with any work, construction, installation in or repairs of the subject Public Rights-of-Way or other Facilities therein that is occurring or is scheduled to occur within a reasonable time from application for a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit as determined by the City Engineer. Every Communications Services Provider shall make space in its trench and/or conduit within the Public Rights-of-Way available to other providers consistent with the federal requirements of 47 U.S.C. 224. Every Communications Services Provider shall utilize existing conduits, pathways and other Facilities whenever possible, and shall not place or maintain any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, pathways or other Facilities, whether in the Public Rights-of-Way or on privately-owned property, until written approval is obtained from the City or other appropriate governmental authority, and, where applicable, from the private property owner. 
(16)  Collocation and Joint Use. A Communications Services Provider, in an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the useful life of the Public Rights-of-Way, shall, whenever possible, enter into joint use agreements with the City and other parties who have Registered with, or who are expressly authorized by, the City to use its Public Rights-of-Way; provided that the terms of such agreements are satisfactory to the Communications Services Provider. Nothing herein contained shall mandate that the Communications Services Provider enter into joint use agreements with parties other than the City or an agency of the City. However, prior to placement of any new or additional underground conduit in the Public Rights-of-Way, a Communications Services Provider is required to certify in writing to the City Engineer that it has made appropriate inquiry to all existing utilities and other entities possessing a right to occupy the Public Rights-of-Way as to the availability of existing or planned conduit that the particular Communications Services Provider could reasonably utilize to meet its needs, and that no such conduit is available or planned at a reasonable cost by any other entity on the time schedule reasonably needed. The Communications Services Provider shall not be permitted to perform any placement or maintenance of Facilities in those segments of the Public Rights-of-Way where there exists vacant or available conduit, dark fiber or surplus fiber owned by the City, an agency of the City or another governmental body which is or, through a reasonable amount of effort and expense, can be made compatible with the Communications Services Provider's System or network. Under such circumstances the Communications Services Provider shall have the opportunity to enter into a use agreement or lease arrangement with the City or an agency of the City at or below reasonable and prevailing market rates for such conduit or fiber or, where owned by another governmental body, shall, in good faith, first exhaust all means of obtaining use of such conduit or fiber before applying for a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit from the City. 
(17)  Maintenance-of-Traffic. In the event that placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities conducted by the Communications Services Provider requires streets or traffic lanes to be closed or obstructed, the Communications Services Provider must, pursuant to the requirements of existing or subsequently enacted City ordinances, obtain all necessary permits from City, and shall obtain approval of its maintenance-of-traffic plan from the City Engineer. 
(18)  Restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way. After completion of any placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way or each phase thereof, the Communications Services Provider shall, at its own expense and in a manner reasonably acceptable to the City, restore without delay the Public Rights-of-Way so disturbed to its original condition immediately prior to the placement or maintenance work. If the Communications Services Provider fails to make such restoration within thirty (30) days following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the City may perform such restoration and charge the costs of the restoration to the Communications Services Provider in accordance with Section 337.402, Florida Statutes, as it may be amended. The Communications Services Provider shall, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, maintain and correct any restorations made pursuant hereto for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of its completion. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of any future Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits for the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities. 
(19)  Disruption or Destruction of Other Facilities or Property. A Communications Services Provider shall not knowingly place or maintain any Facility in a manner that shall in any way disrupt, displace, damage or destroy any sewer line, gas line, water main, pipe, conduit, wires, fiber-optics or other Facilities, or property belonging to the City or any other Person lawfully occupying the Public Rights-of-Way, without first obtaining the consent of the City. The Communications Services Provider shall bear all responsibility and costs for any such conduct where City consent has not been obtained and shall pay such costs upon demand. 
(20)  Preservation of Public Rights-of-Way for Planned Public Projects. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of Public Rights-of-Way and may consider, among other things and without limitation, the sufficiency of space to accommodate all of the present communications facilities and pending applications to place and maintain facilities in that area of the Public Rights-of-Way, the sufficiency of space to accommodate City announced plans for public improvements or projects that the City determines are in the public interest, the impact on traffic and traffic safety, and the impact upon existing facilities In The Public Rights-of-Way. 
(c)  General Conditions on the Utilization of the Public Rights-of-Way and the Placement or Maintenance of Communications Facilities. 
(1)  City Not Liable. Except for acts of willful misconduct or gross negligence and to the extent permitted by applicable law, neither the City nor its officials, boards, commissions, consultants, agents, employees or independent contractors shall have any liability to the Communications Services Provider for any claims for any damages, costs, expenses or losses resulting from the City's breakage, removal, alteration or relocation of any Facilities of any Communications Services Provider which arose out of or in connection with any emergency or disaster situation or was, in the sole discretion of the City Engineer, deemed necessary to facilitate any public works project, public improvement, alteration of a City structure, change in the grade or line of any Public Rights-of-Way, or the elimination, abandonment or closure of any Public Rights-of-Way or was found by City Commission to be in the best interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the public; nor shall any charge be made by the Communications Services Provider against the City for any damages, costs, expenses or losses related thereto. 
(2)  No Exemption from Permits. Nothing in this Article shall exempt any Communications Services Provider from obtaining Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits for work done within the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(3)  Subject to Police Powers. The rights of the Communications Services Provider shall be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the City, and to such other reasonable regulation of the Public Rights-of-Way as the City shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Any inconsistency or ambiguity between the provisions of this Chapter 62, Article VIII and any lawful exercise of the City's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(4)  City Inspection. The City shall have the right to make such inspections of a Communications System or Facilities placed or maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. This Article shall not be construed to create or hold the City responsible or liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection by the City of the placement or maintenance of a Communications System or Facility as authorized herein or failure by the City to so inspect. 
(5)  Access to Manholes. The City, in the proper exercise of its municipal powers and duties with respect to the Public Rights-of-way, shall have access at any time to all hand holes and manholes in the City belonging to a Communications Services Provider. Before accessing any manhole, the City will make a reasonable good faith effort to provide the Communications Services Provider prior notice to afford an opportunity to have trained personnel present, unless determined by the City to be an emergency situation. 
(6)  Compatibility, Capacity and Interference Issues. To properly manage and control the use of the Public Rights-of-Way, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the City, in its legislative and regulatory role, shall be the final authority on permitting a Communications System or Facility to be placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and shall exercise such authority in a non-discriminatory manner. It shall be in the sole discretion of the City Attorney whether an easement is compatible with or allows for its use by a Communications System or Facility. It shall be in the sole discretion of the City Engineer, based on the nature, design, size, configuration or proposed location of any Communications System or Facility, whether there is sufficient capacity in a particular section of the Public Rights-of-Way or whether such System or Facility will interfere with the Facilities or equipment of any municipality, county, public utility, cable operator, or other Communications Service Provider. 
(7)  No Warranty of Fitness or Suitability. The City makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the Public Rights-of-Way for any Communications System or Facility or its right to authorize the placement or maintenance of any Communications System or Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way. Any performance of work, costs incurred or services rendered by a Communications Services Provider shall be at such Provider's sole risk. Nothing in this Article shall affect the City's authority to acquire or add Public Rights-of-Way, or to vacate or abandon Public Rights-of-Way as provided for in the City Code or applicable law. The City makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the availability of any acquired, added, vacated or abandoned Public Rights-of-Way for a Communications System or Facility. 
(8)  Annexations. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City of Key West, the provisions of this Article and the rules, regulations and general conditions contained herein shall extend to the territories so annexed; and all Facilities placed, maintained, owned or operated by any Communications Services Provider extending into or already located in the Public Rights-of-Way of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-407. - Duty to notify city of resellers; conditional use of public rights-of-way. 
    Within thirty (30) days of any Registered Communications Services Provider using its Facilities to carry the Communication Services of any Reseller, such Communications Services Provider shall notify the City of the name and address of such Reseller. A Reseller's lease, interconnection or other use of Facilities belonging to a Communications Services Provider duly Registered in accordance with Section 62-404 and properly permitted to place or maintain its Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, does not, and shall not, afford such Reseller any right, claim or cause of action to impede the lawful exercise of the City's rights or police powers, including, but not limited to, requiring the Registered Communications Services Provider to remove such Facilities from the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-408. - Wireless facilities. 
(a)  Generally. The placement of telecommunication towers and antennae anywhere in the corporate limits of the City shall in all cases be subject to the City's zoning and land use regulations, including those set forth in Section 122 and Section 102 of the City Code. Where placement of a wireless antenna in the Public Rights-of-Way has been approved by the City and to the extent not inconsistent with any City zoning and land use regulations, a wireless antenna attached to a permitted and legally maintained vertical structure in the Public Rights-of-Way, such as a light pole or utility pole, shall, unless otherwise agreed to by the City in writing: 
(1)  not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the vertical structure; 
(2)  not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, state, or local rule, regulation or law; 
(3)  comply with any applicable Federal Communications Commission Emissions Standards; 
(4)  comply with any applicable local building codes in terms of design, construction and installation; and 
(5)  not contain any commercial advertising thereon. 
(b)  Small Wireless Facilities in Public Rights-of Way. The City hereby adopts the following rules that will apply to the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way for all Applications filed on or after July 1, 2018: 
(1)  General Conditions. Applicants seeking permission to Collocate or install Small Wireless Facilities within Public Rights-of-Way shall comply with the registration, insurance coverage, indemnification, performance bonds, security funds, force majeure, abandonment, City liability, and City warranties provisions contained in this Chapter 62, Article VIII; provided, however, that the review timeframes and denial criteria of this Subsection 62-408(b) shall control. 
(2)  Filing, Review, and Processing of Applications. The City shall accept Applications for permits and shall process and issue permits for the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities in Public Rights-Of-Way subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The Applicant shall as a part of its Application provide information necessary to demonstrate the applicant's compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 62, Article VIII for the placement of Small Wireless Facilities in the locations identified in the Application, and shall bear the burden of demonstrating compliance therewith. 
b.  Within 14 days after the date of filing the Application, the City may request that the proposed location of a Small Wireless Facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative City Utility Pole or support structure or may place a new Utility Pole. The City and the Applicant may negotiate the alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the Applicant, the Applicant must notify the City of such acceptance and the Application shall be deemed granted for any new location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the Application. If an agreement is not reached, the Applicant must notify the City of such nonagreement and the City must grant or deny the original Application within 90 days after the date the Application was filed. A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
c.  The City hereby limits the height of a Small Wireless Facility to 10 feet above the Utility Pole or structure upon which the Small Wireless Facility is to be collocated. Unless waived by the City, the height for a new Utility Pole is limited to the tallest existing Utility Pole as of May 1, 2018, located in the same Public Right-Of-Way, other than a Utility Pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500 feet of the proposed location of the Small Wireless Facility. If there is no Utility Pole within 500 feet, the City shall limit the height of the Utility Pole to 50 feet. 
d.  Within 14 days after receiving an Application, the City must determine and notify the Applicant by electronic mail as to whether the Application is complete. If an Application is deemed incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing information. An Application is deemed complete if the City fails to provide notification to the Applicant within 14 days. 
e.  The City shall process all Applications on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the City fails to approve or deny a complete application within 60 days after receipt of the Application, the Application is deemed approved. If the City does not use the 30-day negotiation period provided herein, the parties may mutually agree to extend the 60-day Application review period. The City shall grant or deny the Application at the end of the extended period. 
f.  A permit issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain effective for 1 year unless extended by the City. 
g.  The City shall notify the Applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. The City shall approve a complete Application unless it does not meet the applicable provisions of this Chapter 62, Article VIII. 
h.  If the Application is denied, the City shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial is based, and shall send the documentation to the Applicant by electronic mail on the day the City denies the Application. 
i.  The Applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the Application within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent to the Applicant. Failure by the Applicant to timely resubmit the Application shall result in a final denial of the Application. The City shall approve or deny a timely filed revised Application within 30 days after receipt or the Application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
j.  An Applicant seeking to Collocate Small Wireless Facilities within the City's boundaries may, at the Applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application with the City and receive a single permit for the Collocation of up to 30 Small Wireless Facilities. If the Application includes multiple Small Wireless Facilities, the City may separately address Small Wireless Facility Collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
k.  The City may deny a proposed Collocation of a Small Wireless Facility in The Public Rights-of-Way if the proposed Collocation: 
1.  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
2.  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
3.  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
4.  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
5.  Fails to comply with applicable codes and the applicable provisions of this Chapter 62, Article VIII. 
l.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the City may reserve space on City Utility Poles for future public safety uses. If replacement of a City utility pole is necessary to accommodate the collocation of the Small Wireless Facility and the future public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to the make-ready provisions of this ordinance and the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety use. 
m.  A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant to this subsection 62-408(b) shall comply with chapter 333, Florida Statutes, and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections. 
n.  The City does not require approval or fees for (i) routine maintenance, (ii) replacement of existing Wireless Facilities with substantially similar Wireless Facilities, or (iii) installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of Micro Wireless Facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing Utility Poles in compliances with applicable codes by or for a Communications Services Provider authorized to occupy the Public Rights of-Way and who is remitting taxes under Chapter 202, Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities on City Utility Poles. Collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles is subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The City shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any Person for the right to attach equipment to City Utility Poles. 
b.  The rates and fees for Collocations on City Utility Poles must be nondiscriminatory, regardless of the services provided by the collocating person. 
c.  The City hereby levies, establishes, and sets an annual rate that shall be paid by all those Applicants who file an Application to Collocate Small Wireless Facilities on City Utility Poles in the amount of $150 per pole per year. The initial payment shall be made as a condition of the granting of the permit, with remaining annual payments to be made in all subsequent years on the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. 
d.  Agreements between the City and Wireless Providers that are in effect on May 1, 2018, and that relate to the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities in the right-of-way, including the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities on City Utility Poles, remain in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions. The Wireless Provider may accept the rates, fees, and terms established under this subsection for Small Wireless Facilities and Utility Poles that are the subject of an application submitted after the rates, fees, and terms become effective. 
e.  For a City Utility Pole that supports an aerial facility used to provide Communications Services or Electric Service by another, the parties shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. s. 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation must include pole replacement if necessary. 
f.  For a City utility pole that does not support an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service by another, the City shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested Collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within 60 days after receipt of a complete Application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, must be completed within 60 days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the Applicant. Alternatively, the City may require the Applicant seeking to collocate a Small Wireless Facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the Applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the Small Wireless Facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a Utility Pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. The City may not condition or restrict the manner in which the Applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-ready work subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered Utility Pole shall remain the property of the City. 
g.  The City may not require more make-ready work than is required to meet applicable codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work may not include costs related to preexisting damage or prior noncompliance. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, may not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to Communications Services Providers other than Wireless Services Providers for similar work and may not include any consultant fee or expense. 
(4)  Placement of Utility Poles by Wireless Infrastructure Providers In the Public Rights-of-Way In Support of Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities. A Wireless Infrastructure Provider may apply to the City to place Utility Poles in The Public Rights-of-Way to support the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities. The Application must include an attestation that Small Wireless Facilities will be collocated on the Utility Pole or structure and will be used by a Wireless Services Provider to provide service within 9 months after the date the Application is approved by the City. The City shall accept and process the Application in accordance with (i) the applicable timeframes contained in Subsection 62-408(b)(2), and (ii) any applicable codes and other local codes governing the placement of Utility Poles in The Public Rights-of-Way, including but not limited to the provisions of §62-406, and applicable historic preservation provisions and requirements set forth in Chapter 102 of the City Code, as amended from time to time. 
(5)  Application and Enforcement of Historic Preservation Zoning Regulations. Consistent with preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. s. 332(c)(7), the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. s. 1455(a), and the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, this Subsection 62-408(b) is subject to the provisions of Chapter 102, City Code, Historic Preservation. 
(6)  Prohibited Collocations, Attachments, Installations, and Services Not Authorized by Subsection 62-408(b). This subsection 62-408(b) does not authorize, and the City hereby prohibits, the following: 
a.  This Subsection 62-408(b) does not authorize a Person to Collocate or attach Wireless Facilities, including any Antenna, Micro Wireless Facility, or Small Wireless Facility, on a privately owned Utility Pole, a Utility Pole owned by an electric cooperative or a municipal electric utility, a privately owned Wireless Support Structure, or other private property without the consent of the property owner. 
b.  The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a Small Wireless Facility pursuant to this Subsection 62-408(b) does not authorize the provision of any voice, data, or Video Services or the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any Communications Facilities other than Small Wireless Facilities in The Public Right-of-Way. 
c.  This Subsection 62-408(b) does not affect provisions relating to Pass-Through Providers contained in this Ordinance and contained in Section 337.401(6), Florida Statutes. 
d.  This Subsection 62-408(b) does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of Micro Wireless Facilities on any existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities, provided that once aerial facilities are converted to underground facilities, any such Collocation or construction shall be only as provided by the City's underground utilities ordinance. 
e.  This Subsection 62-408(b) does not authorize a Person to Collocate Small Wireless Facilities or Micro Wireless Facilities on a City Utility Pole or erect a Wireless Support Structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. This paragraph does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of Micro Wireless Facilities on any existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-409. - Revocation or suspension of permanent right of way (row) permits. 
    Subject to Section 62-411, the City may revoke any Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit currently issued to a Communications Services Provider for work in the Public Rights-of-Way or suspend the issuance of Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits in the future to a Communications Services Provider for, in addition to any other circumstances provided for in this Article, one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  a violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this Chapter 62, Article VIII, and other applicable codes or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; 
(b)  a misrepresentation or fraud made or committed on the part of the Communications Services Provider in the Registration process or in the application for a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit; 
(c)  the failure to properly renew the Registration or the ineffectiveness of Registration; or 
(d)  the failure to relocate or remove Communications Facilities as may be required by the City pursuant to this Chapter 62, Article VIII. 
    The City Engineer shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violation of (a) through (d) above, each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-410. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The City may terminate a Registration if: 
(1)  a Federal or State authority suspends, denies, or revokes a Communications Services Provider's certification or license to provide Communications Services; 
(2)  the Communications Services Provider's placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the Public Rights-of-Way and the Communications Services Provider fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; 
(3)  the Communications Services Provider ceases to use all of its Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way and has not complied with Section 62-421 herein; or 
(4)  the Communications Services Provider fails to comply with any of the rules, regulations or general conditions set forth in Section 62-406 herein. 
(b)  Prior to termination of a Registration, the Communications Services Provider shall be notified by the City Engineer with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination, including which of (1) through (4) above is applicable as the reason therefore. The Communications Services Provider shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice within which to eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the City Engineer, to accomplish the same. If not eliminated or if the plan presented is rejected, the City Engineer shall provide written notice of such rejection to the Communications Services Provider and a final determination to terminate Registration. A final determination to terminate Registration may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 62-411. 
(c)  In the event of termination, following any appeal period, the Communications Services Provider formerly Registered shall: (1) notify the City of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the Communications Services Provider's Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way or (2) provide the City with an acceptable plan for disposition of its Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. If a Communications Services Provider fails to comply with this subsection (c), which determination of non-compliance is subject to appeal as provided in Section 62-411, the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the Facilities where another Person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the Facilities or requiring the Communications Services Provider within 90 days of the termination, or such longer period as may be mutually agreed to between the City and the Communications Services Provider, to remove some or all of the Communications Facilities from the Public Rights-of-Way and restore the Public Rights-of-Way to their original condition prior to such removal. 
(d)  In any event, a Communications Services Provider whose Registration has been terminated shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the Communications Facilities remaining in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(e)  In the event of termination of a Registration, this Section does not authorize the City to cause the removal of Communications Facilities used to provide another service for which the Communications Services Provider or another Person who owns or exercises physical control over the Communications Facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing Federal or State agency, if required for provision of such service, and who is Registered with the City, if required. 
(f)  The City's right to terminate a Registration shall be in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this Article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of the right to terminate Registration will affect or preclude any other right the City may have. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-411. - Appeals. 
    Final determinations by appropriate City staff denying an initial Registration; denying an application for renewal of a Registration; terminating a Registration; or denying, revoking or suspending any Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit are subject to appeal. A notice of appeal of such decision may be filed with the City's Manager within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. The City Manager shall have thirty (30) days from the date the appeal is filed to review the matter and render a written decision to uphold or reverse the final decision made by staff. If the City Manager upholds the final decision of staff, the appellant may file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the Chief Administrative Officer. The City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Commission at any regular meeting of City Commission scheduled within forty-five (45) days of the date that the notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk, unless waived by the Communications Services Provider. A ruling may be made at the hearing or at the next regularly scheduled City Commission meeting and the Communications Services Provider shall be notified of the decision in writing within thirty (30) days thereof. Where a notice of appeal to the City Manager or the City Clerk is not timely filed as provided herein, such right to appeal shall be waived. Upon correction by the Communications Services Provider of the circumstances that gave rise to a suspension or denial of a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit, the suspension or denial shall be lifted (the same does not apply to the revocation of a Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit). 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-412. - Fees applicable to those not subject to communications services tax. 
    While the Florida Legislature has prohibited municipalities from requiring providers of communications services who have registered with the Florida Department of Revenue from having to enter into franchise agreements or license arrangements as a condition to placing or maintaining Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, the City expressly reserves the right to require the payment of consideration or regulatory fees by Persons using or occupying the Public Rights-of-Way in other capacities. The City reserves the right to require such payments based on the type of user and to the extent as follows: 
(a)  Dealer. A Communications Services Provider who meets the definition of Dealer as set forth in this Chapter 62, Article VIII and who has Registered in accordance with Section 62-404 is not required to enter into a franchise agreement or license arrangement with the City as a condition to placing or maintaining Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, nor is a Dealer required to make payment of any franchise fees, license fees or other user fees to the City as consideration for the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way for the provision of Communication Services. 
(b)  Pass-through Provider and Pass-Through Facilities. A Communications Services Provider who meets the definition of Pass-through Provider as set forth in this Chapter 62, Article VIII and who is not subject to the City of Key West's Local Communications Services Tax imposed pursuant to Sections 202.19 and 202.20, Florida Statutes shall pay the city the maximum annual amount allowed under Section 337.401(6)(b), Florida Statutes, as amended. For purposes of calculating payments hereunder, each separate pole or tower installed or maintained by a Pass-through Provider for purposes of supporting Antennas for other over-the-air radio transmission or reception equipment in the Public Rights-of-Way shall comprise a separate Communications Facility subject to assessment of a separate permit fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile, or portion thereof, up to the maximum amount allowed under Section 337.401(6)(b), Florida Statutes, whichever is higher. The annual amount referred to above shall be due and payable on October 1 of every year beginning on October 1, 2018. Fees not paid within ten (10) days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the City shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City may have for additional sums due and payable or authorization to install any facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(c)  Other Persons. All other Persons, except Government, are required to pay the City, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way for the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities, an amount based on and in accordance with Section 62-412(b) of the City Code. 
(d)  Government. A Government is not required to pay the City consideration for the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way for the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities, unless such Facilities are being used by such Government or a Communications Services Provider, including Resellers, to offer or provide Communication Services other than for such Government's internal non-commercial use, in which event the Government, where not subject to the City of Key West's Local Communications Services Tax imposed pursuant to Sections 202.19 and 202.20, Florida Statutes is required to pay the City, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way by or through its Facilities placed therein after October 1, 2017, an amount based on and in accordance with Section 62-412(b) of the City Code or such other amount or rate of compensation as mutually agreed to in writing by the Government and the City. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-413. - Existing communications facility. 
    A Communications Services Provider with a Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way as of the effective date of this Chapter 62, Article VIII has until October 1, 2018 to comply with the provisions of this Article, including, but not limited to, Registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-414. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way, including any time during placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities, the Communications Services Provider shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and maintain satisfactory to the City the types of insurance policies and coverage limits described in this Section 62-414. Nothing contained in this Article shall limit a Communications Services Provider's liability to the City to the limits of insurance certified or carried. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance valid in the State of Florida, including contractual liability and products completed operations liability coverage on an occurrence basis, which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence, combined single limit, for bodily injury, personal injury or death, or property damage and in an amount not less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) policy aggregate for each personal injury liability, broad form property damage (without XCU exclusions), contractual liability and products-completed operations liability. 
(2)  Business automobile liability insurance valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit, including bodily injury and property damage covering owned, leased, hired and non-owner vehicles. 
(3)  Workers' Compensation valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than the Statutory limit for Workers' Compensation. 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) each accident for employer's liability. 
(b)  All insurance providers used shall be admitted and duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall have assigned by A. M. Best Company a minimum Financial Strength Rating of "A-" and a minimum Financial Size Category of "IX" (i.e., a size of $250,000,000 to $500,000,000 based on capital, surplus, and conditional reserve funds). Insurance policies and certificates issued by non-admitted insurance companies are not acceptable. All liability policies shall name the City, its City Commission members, officers, and employees as additional insureds with respect to any covered liability arising out of the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way or other activities under this Article. Each Communications Services Provider shall furnish annually to the City certificates showing proof of all required insurance coverage. All liability coverage must be in occurrence form and in accordance with the limits specified. Claims made policies are not acceptable. No insurance policy shall be canceled, nor shall the occurrence or aggregate limits set forth herein be reduced, until the City has received at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in policy coverage. Each Communications Services Provider shall be responsible for notifying the City of such cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage. All Certificate(s) of Insurance, including all endorsements and riders, evidencing insurance coverage shall be submitted to the City within thirty (30) days after the date of registration with the City in order for a Communications Services Provider to obtain Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permits required for construction in the Public Rights-of-Way. Each Communications Services Provider shall, in the event of any such notice described above, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the City, written evidence of the issuance of replacement policies within thirty (30) days following receipt by the City or the Communications Services Provider of such notice. 
(c)  The Certificate(s) of Insurance forms must be properly executed by the authorized representative of the insurance provider. Each Communications Services Provider shall file and maintain with the City on an annual basis the required Certificate(s) of Insurance. The Certificate(s) of Insurance must indicate the following: 
(1)  the policy number; name of insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative; name and address of insured; that the policy coverage "pertains the requirements of Section 62-414 of the Key West Communications Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance;" policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts; and 
(2)  any applicable deductibles or self-insured retentions; and 
(3)  that the City, its Commission members, officers and employees are additional insureds; and 
(4)  that the City shall receive thirty (30) days' advance written notice of cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage; and 
(5)  that the commercial general liability insurance policy is primary as respects any other valid or collectible insurance that the City may possess, including any self-insured retentions the City may have; and any other insurance the City does possess shall be considered excess insurance only and shall not be required to contribute with this insurance. 
(d)  Under extraordinary circumstances a Communications Services Provider may satisfy the insurance requirements of this Article by providing documentation of self-insurance that, in the sole discretion of the Director of Human Resources and Risk Management, demonstrates incontrovertibly the adequacy to defend and cover claims of any nature that might arise from the placement and maintenance of Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. The Communications Services Provider must be authorized as a self-insurer by the Department of Insurance under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-415. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Except with respect to the willful misconduct, negligence or gross negligence of the City, a Communications Services Provider, by act of Registering with the City as such, shall be obligated, at its sole cost and expense, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officials, commissioners, agents and employees from and against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, liabilities and judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of or in connection with the placement or maintenance of its Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way by the Communications Services Provider or its agent or hired contractor. This indemnification provision shall include, but not be limited to, such damages and penalties arising out of claims (1) by any Person whatsoever on account of (i) bodily injury to a person or persons, (ii) death of a person or persons or (iii) property damage, where any of the foregoing is occasioned by the operations of the Communications Services Provider, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred or (2) involving the Communications Services Provider's violation of any easement or private property rights. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel if in the City's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. 
(c)  Indemnified costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees in defending against any such claim, suit or proceeding, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the City Attorney or his assistants or any consultants, agents and employees of the City. The City will attempt to notify the Communications Services Provider, in writing, within a reasonable time of the City's receiving notice of any issue it determines may require indemnification. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed or interpreted: (1) as denying the City, the Communications Services Provider or any Person any remedy or defense available to them under the laws of the State of Florida; or (2) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in Section 768.28, Florida Statutes, as it may be amended. 
(e)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a Registration. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-416. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any Permanent Right of Way (ROW) Permit where the type of work allowed under the permit will require restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way, the Communications Services Provider or the contractor performing such work on its behalf shall obtain, pay for and file with the City a construction bond. The construction bond shall serve to guarantee the timeliness and quality of the construction and restoration work and to secure, and enable the City to recover, all costs related to the restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way in the event the Communications Services Provider or its contractor fails to make such restoration to the City's satisfaction or causes damage to the Public Rights-of-Way during construction. The construction bond must name the City as Obligee and be in the face amount of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000) conditioned upon the full and faithful completion of construction and restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way to its original condition. Six (6) months following completion and inspection of the restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way satisfactory to the City Engineer, the Communications Services Provider or its contractor, as the case may be, may reduce the face amount of the construction bond to Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) and, thereafter, may allow the bond to lapse in accordance with its terms. However, for any subsequent work in the Public Rights-of-Way, the Communications Services Provider or its contractor will be required to replenish any existing construction bond or provide a new construction bond in the face amount of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000). The construction bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and must be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the City Engineer and authorized by the Florida Department of Insurance to issue surety bonds in this State. 
(b)  The construction bond must be issued as non-cancelable and be for a term of not less than twelve (12) months. In the event the term of any construction bond expires, or is reasonably expected to expire, prior to the completion of construction, restoration and City inspection, the Communications Services Provider, or the contractor acting on its behalf, shall immediately obtain, pay for, and file with the City a replacement bond. 
(c)  The City's requirement of a construction bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required under this Article or through the permitting process. The City's right to recover under the construction bond shall be in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this Article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect or preclude any other right the City may have. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-417. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Before any Communications Services Provider is permitted to begin the placement or maintenance of an initial build, any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its Communications System, or when construction plans show that there would be at least one thousand (1,000) feet of open trenching in the Public Rights-of-Way at any given time, the Communications Services Provider is required to obtain, pay for, and file with the City a performance bond. The performance bond must name the City as Obligee and be in the face amount of Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000) conditioned upon the full and faithful compliance by the Communications Services Provider with all requirements, duties and obligations imposed by the provisions of the Key West Communications Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance during, and through completion of, the placement or maintenance project. The performance bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and must be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the City Engineer and authorized by the Florida Department of Insurance to issue performance bonds in this State. 
(b)  The performance bond must be issued as non-cancelable and be for a term consistent with the reasonably expected duration of the particular placement or maintenance project (including restoration and City inspection), but in no event less than eighteen (18) months. In the event the term of any performance bond expires, or is reasonably expected to expire, prior to the completion of such placement or maintenance project, including restoration and City inspection, the Communications Services Provider shall immediately obtain, pay for, and file with the City a replacement bond. 
(c)  The City's requirement of a performance bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required under this Article or through the permitting process. The City's right to recover under the performance bond shall be in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this Article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance bond will affect or preclude any other right the City may have. Any proceeds recovered under the performance bond may be used to reimburse the City for such additional expenses as may be incurred by the City as a result of the Communications Services Provider's failure to comply with the responsibilities imposed by this Article, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
[Sec. 62-418.] - [Reserved.] 
Sec. 62-419. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  No provision of this Article shall be deemed to bar the right of the City to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provisions of this Article, the Registration provisions, or any rule, regulation or general condition provided for hereunder, whether administratively, judicially or both. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Article nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the City to recover fines, penalties or monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the Communications Services Provider. The remedies available to the City shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity. The laws of the State of Florida shall govern with respect to any proceeding in law or equity pertaining to the enforcement of this Article or any cause of action arising out of or in connection herewith. 
(b)  A Communications Services Provider's failure to comply with provisions of this Article shall constitute a City Code violation and shall subject the Communications Service Provider to the code compliance provisions and procedures as provided in Chapter 2, City Code, and may be punishable as provided in Section 162.22, Florida Statutes, as it may be amended. 
(c)  In any proceeding before the City Commission where there exists an issue with respect to a Communications Services Provider's performance of its obligations pursuant to this Article, the Communications Services Provider shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. The City may find a Communications Services Provider that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this Article in default and apply any appropriate remedy or remedies as authorized by this Ordinance. In determining which remedy is appropriate, the City Commission shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the Person bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the City Commission determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  The City Engineer, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this Article, and is authorized to give any notice required herein or by law. 
(e)  Failure of the City to enforce any requirements of this Article shall not constitute a waiver of the City's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-420. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  Upon Abandonment of any Facility owned by a Communications Services Provider in the Public Rights-of-Way, the Communications Services Provider shall notify the City within sixty (60) days. 
(b)  The City may direct the Communications Services Provider, by written notice, to remove all or any portion of such Abandoned Communications Facility at the Communications Services Provider's sole expense if the City determines that the Abandoned Communications Facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such Communications Facility: (1) compromises safety at any time for any Public Rights-of-Way user; (2) compromises the safety of other Persons performing placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; (3) prevents another Person from locating other facilities in the area of the Public Rights-of-Way where the Abandoned Communications Facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or (4) creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the use of the Public Rights-of-Way. In the event of (2), the City may require the third Person to coordinate with the Communications Services Provider that owns the existing Communications Facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the Communications Services Provider. 
(c)  If the Communications Services Provider fails to remove all or any portion of an Abandoned Communications Facility as directed by the City within the time period specified in the written notice, which time period must be reasonable under the circumstances, the City may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the Communications Services Provider. 
(d)  In the event that the City does not direct the removal of the Abandoned Communications Facility, the Communications Services Provider, by its notice of Abandonment to the City, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of such abandoned Facility by the City or other Person, provided that the cost of the alteration or removal is not borne by the Communications Services Provider. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Sec. 62-421. - Reservation of rights. 
    The City hereby expressly reserves all of the following rights: 
(a)  To exercise its municipal home rule powers, now or hereafter, to the fullest extent allowed by law with regard to the access, use and regulation of the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(b)  To amend this Chapter and Article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its municipal authority. 
(c)  To adopt or enact by resolution or ordinance, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional reasonable regulations as City Commission finds necessary in the exercise of the City's police powers. 
(d)  To exercise the power of eminent domain, consistent with applicable federal and state law, to acquire property that may include that property owned or leased by a Communications Services Provider. 
(e)  As and when deemed necessary by City Commission to be in the interest of the City or its residents, to abandon portions of the Public Rights-of-Way within the proper exercise of its municipal authority and without notice to or the consent of any Communications Services Provider. The City shall not be responsible for any costs, damages, loss or other expense to the Communications Services Provider as a result of the City's abandonment of any Public Rights-of-Way. 
(f)  To place and maintain, and franchise or permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the City in the Public Rights-of-Way occupied by any Communications Services Provider. 
(g)  Without limitation, the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of any Public Rights-of-Way within the City limits and within said limits as the same may from time to time be altered. 
(h)  To require a Reseller to Register in accordance with Section 62-404 to the extent such Reseller wants the right to place or maintain Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. Any Person using or leasing Facilities owned by a Registered Communications Services Provider is not, therefore, entitled to any rights to place or maintain Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, unless such Person themselves Registers with the City. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-2-2018) 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or fees saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); administration, ch. 2; financial matters, § 2-706 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Communications services tax. 
    The City of Key West elected not to require and collect permits fees from any provider of communications services that uses or occupies municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services, as provided in Section 337.401(3)(c) and (j), Florida Statutes. 
    It is the intent of the City of Key West to increase its local communications services tax rate as provided in Section 202.19, Florida Statutes, by an amount equal to .12 percent effective January 1, 2009, to replace revenue the City of Key West would otherwise receive from permit fees as authorized by Section 337.401(3)(c) and (j), Florida Statutes. In the aggregate, the new combined Local Communication Services Tax Rate for the City of Key West will be 5.22 percent effective January 1, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Secs. 66-2-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAXES 

Sec. 66-26. - Property insurance. 
(a)  There is assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaging in or carrying on or which shall engage in or carry on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the state insurance commissioner, an excise or license tax, in addition to any license or excise tax levied by the city, which shall be in the amount of 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the city limits. 
(b)  The license or excise tax levied in this section shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1986, § 4.52) 
State Law reference- Municipal firefighters pension trust fund, F.S. ch. 175; authority to levy, F.S. § 175.101. 
Sec. 66-27. - Casualty insurance. 
(a)  There is assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaging in or carrying on or which shall engage in or carry on the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the state insurance commissioner, an excise tax or license tax in addition to any license or excise tax levied by the city, which shall be in an amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts or premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the city limits. 
(b)  The license or excise tax levied in this section shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1986, § 4.53) 
State Law reference- Municipal police officers retirement trust fund, F.S. ch. 185; authority to levy, F.S. § 185.08. 
Secs. 66-28-66-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Ad valorem taxation, F.S. chs. 192-197. 

Sec. 66-56. - Additional homestead tax exemptions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
    Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in section 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household. 
(b)  The city grants an additional homestead exemption equal to the property's assessed value to any person who has attained the age of 65 by January 1 of the year they are applying for the exemption and they meet the following requirements: 
1.  The applicant holds legal or equitable title to homestead real property with a just (market) value less than $250,000.00; and 
2.  The applicant has maintained thereon permanent residence as owner for no less than 25 years; and 
3.  The applicant's adjusted household income does not exceed $27,030.00, or such other amount as may be annually adjusted by the Florida Department of Revenue; 
(c)  The city grants an additional homestead exemption of $50,000.00 to any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon permanent residence as owner, who has attained the age of 65, and whose household income, as defined by general law, does not exceed $20,000.00. This exemption shall be applicable retroactively to the 2013 tax roll, and continue until amended or repealed by ordinance. 
(d)  The exemption(s) granted in subsection (b) and (c) of this section applies only to taxes levied by the city. 
(e)  Any taxpayer claiming the exemption granted in subsection (b) or (c) of this section must annually submit to the property appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1986, § 4.54; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 12-27-2006; Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 14-09, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt, F.S. § 196.075. 
Secs. 66-57-66-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Res. No. 06-292, adopted Sept. 6, 2006, revised the title of Art. IV, Occupational License Tax, to read as herein set out, to be consistent with F.S. Ch. 205. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; business license, § 78-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local business tax, F.S. ch. 205. 

Sec. 66-86. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as may be necessary or proper for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 91.23) 
Sec. 66-87. - Business tax receipt required for all holding themselves out to be engaged in business. 
    No person shall engage in, manage, carry on or practice, wholly or in part, within the city limits, any business, profession or occupation without first procuring a city business tax receipt. For the purposes of this article, any person holding himself out to the public by sign, printed matter, telephone directory classified section, city directory or otherwise as being engaged in business or as offering services or property to the public for a consideration, regardless of whether such person actually transacts any business or practices a profession, shall be considered as engaging in business and shall be liable for a business tax receipt fee thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 91.01; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-88. - Exemptions. 
    The exemptions from business tax receipt set forth in F.S. ch. 205 shall apply to persons engaged in or operating a business, profession or occupation within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 91.02; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, F.S. §§ 205.063-205.193. 
Sec. 66-89. - Individual professionals required to pay license fee. 
    The tax provided in the schedule in section 66-109 for architects, auditors or accountants, dentists, civil engineers, lawyers, physicians and surgeons, real estate salespersons or other similar professions shall be construed to mean that each individual shall pay the tax, whether practicing by himself or in partnership or association or employed by another, except where such employee is paid a straight salary only. In addition, individuals licensed in the cosmetology industry pursuant to F.S. chs. 476 and 477 who are employees of a licensed salon or barbershop and who may receive commissions in addition to a salary shall not be required to pay a tax as individuals; however, this exception shall not apply to those in this industry who rent a booth or lease a chair in a salon. 
(Code 1986, § 91.03) 
Sec. 66-90. - Levy generally. 
    The business tax receipt tax may be levied on any person who: 
(1)  Maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city's jurisdiction. 
(2)  Maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city's jurisdiction. 
(3)  Does not qualify under subsection (1) or (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if the license tax is not prohibited by section 8, article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 66-91. - License required for each lease department. 
    Every person operating what is commonly known as a lease department in any store shall pay a license for the operation of each department so leased according to the proper classification of the business or occupation as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 91.04) 
Sec. 66-92. - License required for each location. 
    Every person operating a business or occupation in more than one location in the city shall pay a license fee for each location according to the appropriate classification of the business or occupation as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 91.041) 
Sec. 66-93. - Application generally. 
(a)  A completed business tax receipt application form shall consist of an affidavit, duly authenticated, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The location of the business, profession, occupation or other activity to be licensed. 
(2)  A listing of all business, profession, occupation, or other activities conducted at that location, including lease departments conducted by others. 
(3)  A statement as to the gross square footage of business or unit, number of rooms, apartments or other pertinent information as may be required by the city manager in determining the amount of the occupational fee. 
(b)  The application shall bear the signature of the owner, manager or authorized agent of the owner. 
(Code 1986, § 91.05; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-94. - Federal employer identification number or social security number. 
    No license shall be issued unless and until the applicant provides to the city manager a valid and current federal employer identification number or social security number for the business to be licensed. 
(Code 1986, § 91.051) 
Sec. 66-95. - Use of real name on application. 
    All business tax receipts shall be applied for and issued in the real name of the applicant. If the applicant does or will do business under a fictitious, trade or firm name, the application and the license, if issued, shall show the real name as well as the fictitious, trade or firm name of the applicant. 
(Code 1986, § 91.06; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Fictitious name law, F.S. § 865.09. 
Sec. 66-96. - License issued on payment of tax. 
    Upon receipt of the amount of license tax specified in section 66-109 and compliance with all other requirements contained in this Code, the city manager shall issue a business tax receipt to each person, provided a business tax receipt application form has been completed and filed with the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 91.07; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-97. - Application for renewal. 
    The city manager may waive the requirement of a written application for renewals of existing licenses, but shall require, before issuing any renewal license, the furnishing of all necessary information pertinent to the establishment of the proper license tax or fee for such license. 
(Code 1986, § 91.08) 
Sec. 66-98. - Special events. 
(a)  Upon application under section 6-26, a special event business tax receipt shall be issued for a period of no more than seven consecutive days. No applicant or business shall be issued more than one such license during any period of 45 consecutive days, nor more than five such licenses during any annual period. However, in the community redevelopment area the city commission may grant special event permission to a continuing series of events in excess of the limits provided in this subsection. 
(b)  A fee for each special event occupation license shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Not-for-profit business, no fee. 
(2)  For-profit business, full annual fee as for licenses valid for a full year; provided, however, that if the special event business tax receipt is issued for a period of three consecutive calendar days or less, the fee shall be one-half of the full annual fee. 
(c)  Businesses operating pursuant to a special event business tax receipt shall be exempt from historic architectural review commission regulations, off-street parking requirements, impact fees, and outdoor merchandise display regulations during the life of the event. 
(Code 1986, § 91.09; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-99. - Classification of business for license; procedure; appeal. 
    If a disagreement occurs between the applicant for a license and the city manager on the question of proper classification of any business, occupation or profession for license purposes, the city manager shall decide the proper classification; however, the applicant may appeal such decision to the city commission whose decision on the issues involved shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 91.10) 
Sec. 66-100. - Duration. 
    No city business tax receipt shall be issued for a period of more than one year, and all such licenses shall expire on September 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1986, § 91.12; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-101. - Proration of fees. 
    For each business tax receipt obtained subsequent to October 1, a fee shall be charged that is a pro rata portion of the business tax receipt fee. Penalties for delinquency in obtaining pro rata licenses shall be at the same rates as penalties for full-year licenses. 
(Code 1986, § 91.13; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-102. - Dates due and delinquent; penalties. 
(a)  All licenses shall be sold by the city beginning August 1 of each year, are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Licenses that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25 percent of the business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation, or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required, is subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the license due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article who does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Code 1986, § 91.14; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 66-103. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Any business license may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual license tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of evidence of the sale and the original license. 
(b)  Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any license may be transferred from one location to another location in the city upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual license tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(c)  No license, except for coin-operated machines, shall be transferred from person to person or location to location without the written approval of the city manager. 
(d)  If a business owner sells, assigns, or otherwise transfers ownership of a business, the business tax receipt must be transferred within 48 hours of the closing of the transaction. A failure so to transfer the license will subject the potential new licensee to a penalty as though he had never procured such license. 
(Code 1986, § 91.16; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Transfer of license, F.S. § 205.043(2). 
Sec. 66-104. - Display required; penalty for failure to display. 
    Each business tax receipt shall be prominently displayed in the office or place of business or on a truck, conveyance or other appropriate place, where it may be seen by any inspector or city official. For failure to so display a license or to permit its inspection by any inspector or city official, the licensee shall be subject to penalty as though he had never procured such license. 
(Code 1986, § 91.17; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-105. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Suspension. The city manager may suspend a business tax receipt for any one of the following reasons: 
(1)  The health, safety or welfare of the public is threatened by the continuation in business of the license holder. 
(2)  The fire marshal has recommended license suspension for fire prevention purposes. 
(3)  The license holder (or an employee in the exercise of his or her duties) has been indicted for or convicted of a crime directly related to consumer fraud within the city. 
(4)  In the event of two violations within a three-year period (resulting in convictions or pleas of no contest) of the adult entertainment ordinance, sections 122-1531 through 122-1536 hereof, or of chapter 847 (obscenity) of the Florida Statutes. For the purpose of calculating this three-year period of violations, it is the 36 months occurring immediately prior to the second (and each subsequent) violation occurrence date. 
The city manager shall convene a hearing on the proposed suspension and provide the license holder with notice and an opportunity to be heard. If the city manager finds that a suspension is warranted, the order of suspension shall state a specific period of time for the suspension; provided, however, that a suspension pursuant to subsection (4), above, shall not exceed 30 days and no other suspension under subsection (4) shall exceed 90 days. A suspension order may be renewed for an additional period of time only upon a new hearing. A suspension may be lifted by the city manager at any time there is compliance by the license holder of the suspension order. A license holder may appeal a suspension order to the city commission by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the issuance of the order. An appeal shall not stay the city manager's decision unless the suspension order calls for a stay upon appeal. 
(b)  Revocation. A business tax receipt obtained through fraud or through a material misrepresentation on the license holder's application is deemed void ab initio. The city manager shall revoke the business tax receipt. Prior to revocation, the city manager shall provide the license holder an informal opportunity to be heard on the decision to revoke. The order to revoke the license shall be accompanied by the issuance of a code enforcement citation for operating a business without a business tax receipt. If the alleged violator prevails in county court, the business tax receipt shall be restored to him and the order to revoke rescinded. 
(Code 1986, § 91.19; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 8-3-2004; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-106. - License does not provide immunity from prosecution for other offenses. 
    The payment of a license under this article shall not authorize or legalize in any manner whatsoever the commission of any offense or crime against the city, the state or the United States of America nor shall it protect any person from prosecution for transacting any business, trade or profession not covered by such license. 
(Code 1986, § 91.21) 
Sec. 66-107. - Applicability to other sections. 
    Unless otherwise repealed or specifically excepted, changed or differentiated in this article, all qualifying or regulatory sections of this Code or city ordinances applicable to or affecting any of the businesses, operations, occupations or classifications covered in this article shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1986, § 91.22) 
Sec. 66-108. - Payment of certain service charges prerequisite to issuance or renewal of license. 
    No business tax receipt shall be issued or renewed until all outstanding charges for sanitary sewer service, as provided in article II of chapter 74, and solid waste service, as provided in chapter 58, have been paid in full on the property which is the place of business of the subject business tax receipt. 
(Code 1986, § 91.24; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 66-109. - Schedule of taxes. 
    Each individual who acts as an agent and each individual who acts as a business or sales agent for a corporation engaged in any business mentioned in this section, when his principal has not paid a license in accordance with this section, shall be required to take out a license as agent in his own name. This section shall apply to every person who seeks, negotiates or transacts, for himself or for any other person or corporation mentioned in this section, but not to inactive stockholders in corporations or members of agencies who do not attempt to transact any business for such agency. A license tax in the sum set opposite each of the following businesses, occupations or professions is levied and imposed upon the business, occupation or profession opposite which such sum is set: 
(1)  Amusement/entertainment. 
a.  Bars or restaurants with entertainment for patrons ..... $ 203.00 
b.  Entertainment establishment or facility (theater, museum, golf course, special equipment, or similar activity) ..... 281.00 
c.  Sightseeing vehicles (unit may be trolley, train or other vehicle), per vehicle ..... 325.00 
d.  Charter boat for fishing, diving or similar activity conducted under "six-pack license" ..... 83.00 
e.  Charter boat for fishing, diving, sightseeing, parasailing, water taxi, or similar activity other than those licensed under subsection (1)d of this section ..... 170.00 
(2)  Coin-operated machines. 
a.  Nonlaundry, per unit ..... 10.75 
b.  Laundry, per unit ..... 6.89 
(3)  Financial institutions. 
a.  All financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, finance companies, and credit unions ..... 1,157.00 
b.  Automated teller machines, except those located on the site of, and used in conjunction with, a financial institution ..... 192.00 
(4)  Food service activities. 
a.  No seats (take out, deli, catering) ..... 143.00 
b.  Seating 1 to 15 ..... 143.00 
c.  Seating 16 to 40 ..... 203.00 
d.  Seating 41 to 60 ..... 281.00 
e.  Seating 61 to 120 ..... 325.00 
f.  Seating 121 and over ..... 396.00 
(5)  Gas station. All gas stations, including those offering repairs and other accessory uses; does not include convenience stores ..... 281.00 
(6)  Hospital. All hospitals ..... 661.00 
(7)  Insurance. Companies writing any class of insurance upon any person or property residing or located within the city limits or risks occurring within the city limits ..... 308.00 
(8)  Manufacturing/processing. All manufacturing or processing businesses ..... 203.00 
(9)  Newspaper or magazine publishers. 
a.  Daily publication ..... 325.00 
b.  Periodical publication ..... 170.00 
(10)  Rentals. 
a.  Commercial property rental (mall, shopping center, or any other property owner renting or leasing space to five or more commercial tenants, including booth tenants, on a single parcel), per rental unit ..... 28.00 
b.  Nontransient residential rental, per unit ..... 20.00 
c.  Transient residential rental, per unit ..... 28.00 
d.  Motel/hotel/timeshare, per unit ..... 16.00 
e.  Guesthouse/bed and breakfast, per unit ..... 16.00 
f.  Campground or mobile home park or trailer camp, per space ..... 10.75 
Each rental unit within the park shall be charged in accordance with subsection (10)b or (10)c of this section, as applicable. 
g.  Commercial parking lot ..... 83.00 
h.  Marina, wet slips, per slip ..... 16.00 
i.  Marina, dry slips; each dry or stacked storage slip ..... 3.42 
j.  Motor-driven rental items, including mopeds, jet skis, tools ..... 203.00 
k.  Non-motor-driven rental items, including bicycles and videotapes ..... 143.00 
(11)  Retail, mail order, or wholesale sales. Gross square footage of entire structure area and/or outside display area, including storage, associated offices, restrooms, etc.: 
a.  0 to 500 square feet ..... 143.00 
b.  501 to 2,000 square feet ..... 203.00 
c.  2,001 to 5,000 square feet ..... 281.00 
d.  5,001 to 10,000 square feet ..... 463.00 
e.  10,001 to 25,000 square feet ..... 661.00 
f.  Over 25,000 square feet ..... 992.00 
(12)  Services. 
a.  Professional real estate salesperson, massage therapist, or cosmetologist, per person ..... 103.00 
b.  Professional attorney or any other state-licensed professional not listed in subsection (12)a of this section, per person ..... 325.00 
c.  General service provider not listed in subsection (12)a or (12)b of this section, per business ..... 103.00 
(13)  Transportation, excluding taxicabs and pedicabs. 
a.  Airlines ..... 143.00 
b.  Vehicle, including bus service and ambulance service ..... 203.00 
(14)  Utility/communications. 
a.  Telephone, gas, cable television, solid waste pickup, telegraph and similar utilities ..... 1,323.00 
b.  Radio stations maintaining business office within city ..... 203.00 
(15)  Adult entertainment. 
a.  Adult bookstore/video store-See subsection (11). 
b.  Adult performance establishment-See subsection (1)a. 
c.  Adult-themed merchandise store-See subsection (11). 
d.  Adult motion picture theater-See subsection (1)b. 
e.  Adult business-See subsection (12)c. 
f.  Limited adult cabaret-See subsection (1)a. 
(Code 1986, § 91.25; Ord. No. 01-04, § 1, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, loading zones, or other traffic regulations not inconsistent with such Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(8); vehicles on beaches located on city property, § 26-65; traffic impact, § 54-81 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; placing handbills on vehicles, § 106-91; traffic impact, § 108-316 et seq. 
State Law reference- Uniform traffic control, F.S. ch. 316. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, and including any such device having two tandem axles though equipped with two front or rear wheels. The term does not include such a vehicle with a seat height of no more than 25 inches from the ground when the seat is adjusted to its highest position. 
    Bus and trolley mean any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Camping trailer means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at a site or location to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel or temporary dwelling use. 
    Camping vehicle means any vehicle designed for, converted for, or used for camping or for temporary dwelling or living purposes connected with travel or recreation. 
    Cap means any separate structure which can be attached to or detached from a pickup truck placed onto the bed of such truck for use of storing or transporting tools, equipment or similar materials, and which does not have sufficient headroom for an adult of six feet in height to stand upright. 
    Crosswalk means any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Daytime means the period from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset. Nighttime means any other hour. 
    Double parking, double standing and double stopping mean the parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle upon the roadway side of another vehicle, but not within an open parking space. 
    Driver means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle on a street. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    House trailer means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be pulled by another vehicle and to be used as a dwelling for recreation, camping, travel or temporary living purposes. 
    Loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles loading or unloading passengers or materials. 
    Moped means any vehicle with pedals to permit propulsion by human power, having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels; with a motor rated not in excess of two brake horsepower and not capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour on level ground; and with a power-drive system that functions directly or automatically without clutching or shifting gears by the operator after the drive system is engaged. If an internal combustion engine is used, the displacement may not exceed 50 cubic centimeters. 
    Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle and every motor scooter with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, including every vehicle which would meet the definition of the term "bicycle" but for being propelled by a helper motor rated in excess of 11/2 brake horsepower. 
    Motor home means a vehicular unit which does not exceed the maximum length and width limitation of F.S. § 316.515 and which is built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis and which is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or dwelling use. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle with a motor rated in excess of two brake horsepower having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Owner means any person in whose name the title to a motor vehicle is registered; any person driving or controlling any recreational vehicle by right of purchase, gift, lease, or otherwise. 
    Park and parking mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
    Parking meter means a mechanical timing device used for the purpose of regulating parking, which is activated by the insertion of a coin and the operation of a lever or cranking device. It may also be a parking station activated by the insertion of a payment card. 
    Pedestrian means a person afoot. 
    Private road or driveway means any privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Recreational vehicle means any camper, camping trailer, camping vehicle, house trailer, motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or other trailer as defined in this section or any similar vehicle or trailer designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or temporary dwelling use which either has it own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
    Scooter means a motor vehicle that is either a motorcycle or that is a vehicle with a motor rated not in excess of two brake horsepower and not capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour on level ground, and whose displacement does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters. A scooter shall be regulated as a motorcycle or akin to a moped depending on its motor capability. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Storage (or stored) means the status of an operable vehicle or vessel (including a vessel on a trailer) on a street or other public place when its owner or user does not move it from a parking location within a prescribed time, and when its owner has no intent that it become abandoned property. 
    Street means any street, alley, lane, drive or other roadway within the city including the entire width between the boundary lines thereof and specifically including the berm or shoulder. 
    Trailer means any vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Travel trailer, including a fifth-wheel travel trailer, means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels of such size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle, and which is primarily designed and constructed to provide a temporary dwelling for recreation, camping or travel purposes. Such a unit has a body width of no more than 81/2 feet and an overall body length of no more than 40 feet when factory equipped for the road. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle designated, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck camper means a truck equipped with a portable unit designed to be loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of the truck and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or temporary dwelling use. 
    Truck tractor means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1986, § 63.07; Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 70-3. - Motorized vehicles on pedestrian bridges prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate or otherwise place a motorized vehicle, including but not limited to, cars, electric cars, low-speed vehicles, scooters and mopeds, on a pedestrian bridge in the city. 
(b)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-3-2004) 
Secs. 70-4-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 70-31. - City manager's authority. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the power to designate, lay off and indicate, by appropriate signs and markings, parking spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, speed limits, truck routes, through streets, stop streets and intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, streets to be laned for traffic, play streets, bus stops, intersections at which left turns and/or right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited, and intersections at which striping shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections. The city manager may seek the advice and consent of the city commission for such decisions. 
(b)  The city manager shall also designate and indicate, upon the approval of the city commission, by appropriate signs and markings, metered parking spaces and zones; reserved parking zones in which vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb; traffic zones other than the above; truck routes; one-way streets; taxicab stands; intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections. 
(c)  Whenever any designation is made in accordance with this section, the city manager shall erect and install such signs, markings, lines, signals and other traffic control devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate such designation and to put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition resulting from such designation. All designations made in accordance with this section shall be clearly shown and indicated on the official traffic control and regulation of parking signs, markings and other devices map on file in the office of the city manager. 
(d)  The city manager may seek recommendations from the community traffic safety program for all proposed designations. The city manager's advice to the city commission shall include input from the engineering, police and public works departments. 
(Code 1986, § 63.02) 
Sec. 70-32. - Obedience to devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a vehicle upon the city streets contrary to any signs, signals or other traffic control devices that are placed upon the streets for the purpose of directing traffic, except upon direction of a police officer and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 63.03) 
Sec. 70-33. - Necessity of signs. 
    No section of this chapter for which signs shall be required shall be enforced against an alleged violation if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinary observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof. To the extent practicable, signs shall be placed in accordance with the manual of uniform traffic control devices. 
(Code 1986, § 63.04) 
Sec. 70-34. - Moving or damaging devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any sign, signal or other traffic control device placed upon the city streets. 
(Code 1986, § 63.05) 
Secs. 70-35-70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Speed limits, F.S. §§ 316.183-316.1906. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-61. - Maximum speed limits in Key West. 
    The lawful speed limit on a city road, street or other vehicular use area in any residential district shall be a maximum of 20 miles per hour, except as otherwise provided by law. The city commission may by resolution designate specific areas where the above-described maximum speed limit shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, § 1, 6-19-2012) 
Secs. 70-62-70-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCHOOL ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- School speed limits, F.S. § 316.1895. 

Sec. 70-86. - Speed limit. 
    The maximum speed within any school zone is 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1986, § 63.45) 
Sec. 70-87. - Designated. 
    Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 316.1895, those portions of the following streets are designated as school zones: 
(1)  The Basilica School of St. Mary Star of the Sea, 700 Truman Avenue: Truman Avenue from 175 feet east of Simonton Street to 375 feet west of Windsor Lane and Windsor Lane from 215 feet south of Truman Avenue to Amelia Street. 
(2)  Key West Montessori Charter School, 1400 United Street: United Street from 250 feet east of Tropical Street to 150 feet west of Thompson Street. 
(3)  Montessori Children's School of Key West, 1221 Varela Street: United Street from 420 feet east of Grinnell Street to White Street and Varela Street from United Street to 175 feet south of Catherine Street. 
(4)  Horace O'Bryant School, 1105 Leon Street: Jose Marti Drive from 150 feet south from Truman Avenue and Virginia Street 200 feet east of Florida Street and Pearl Street from Virginia Street to Catherine Street and Catherine Street from 300 feet east of Florida Street to 150 feet west of Thompson Street. 
(5)  Grace Lutheran School, 2713 Flagler Avenue: Flagler Avenue from 400 feet east of Venetian Drive to 315 feet west of Eleventh Street. 
(6)  Key West High School, 2100 Truman Avenue: Flagler Avenue from 50 feet east of Duncombe Street to 150 feet west of Fourth Street. 
(7)  Gerald Adams Elementary School, 5855 College Road: College Road from 200 feet east and west of crosswalk in front of Gerald Adams Elementary School. 
(8)  Sigsbee Charter School, 939 Felton Road: Felton Road from 200 feet east and west of Sigsbee Charter School entrance. 
(9)  Poinciana Elementary School 1407 Kennedy Drive: Kennedy Drive from 675 feet south of Northside Drive to 375 feet north of Flagler Avenue and Glynn Archer Drive from 1,300 feet south of Northside Drive to 100 feet north of Eagle Avenue and Duck Avenue 400 feet west of Fifteenth Street to Glynn Archer Drive. 
(Code 1986, § 63.44; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Secs. 70-88-70-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- On- and off-site parking and vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation, § 108-244; off-street parking and loading, § 108-546 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-116. - Prohibited parking. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any city street, alley or other public place for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying a vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(4)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace, or when so authorized or licensed under this Code or other city ordinances. 
(5)  Storage on the public right-of-way or in a public place for more than 72 hours. A stored vehicle shall not mean an abandoned vehicle or vessel, the latter of which may be removed according to law without regard to the length of time it abides on a street or alley. A vessel shall not be stored on the right-of-way or in a public place for any length of time, and its owner is subject immediately to the storage fee of section 70-129. 
(6)  Double parking, double standing or double stopping, except to unload passengers or merchandise in designated loading areas. 
(7)  Parking against traffic. 
(8)  Storing or disposing of refuse, rubbish, garbage, yard waste, or any type of waste or recyclable materials, as defined in chapter 58, within such vehicle or trailer unless the person or business involved is permitted to do so under section 58-34(a) of the City of Key West Code of Ordinances to haul such waste and unless such vehicle is being actively loaded for immediate hauling. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon any city street or alley, except in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  Within an intersection. 
(3)  On a crosswalk. 
(4)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(5)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(6)  Upon any bridge. 
(7)  On a bicycle path. 
(8)  At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit parking. 
(c)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any city street or alley, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(2)  Within five feet of any entranceway, alleyway, public or private driveway, or designated loading area or zone. 
(3)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(4)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to bike racks placed or allowed by the city within the 20-foot area. 
(5)  Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance, when the property is so posted. 
(7)  On an exclusive bicycle lane. 
(8)  At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit standing or adjacent to any curbing painted yellow or red. 
(9)  In any parking space designated for disabled or handicapped use only, without an approved handicap permit. 
(d)  No commercially registered vehicle carrying or designed to carry passengers shall stop in any street, lane, or alley or loading zone when picking up or discharging passengers, unless duly licensed as a vehicle for hire pursuant to chapter 78 by the city, operating as a city franchisee pursuant to ordinance, or authorized by the city port and transit authority. 
(Code 1986, § 63.08; Ord. No. 06-04, § 2, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 6-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. §§ 316.194-316.1965. 
Sec. 70-117. - Authority of police to move vehicles parked in violation. 
    Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or alley in violation of any of the sections of this Code or other applicable traffic laws or ordinances, such officer is authorized to move or cause to be moved such vehicle or to require the driver or person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle to a lawful parking position. 
(Code 1986, § 63.09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.194(3)(a). 
Sec. 70-118. - Special parking areas. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to determine and designate special parking areas for the physically handicapped, tour buses, trolleys, taxicabs and other motor vehicles requiring special areas. The special area shall be identified by the appropriate street parking sign and may include special enforcement limitations regarding size, weight, or time duration. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle in any such special parking area unless the vehicle or driver meets the requirements of such street parking sign. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to determine and designate restricted parking spaces where no person may park a vehicle for longer than 12 hours in any 24-hour period without vacating the space for a minimum of six hours prior to reparking in that space. 
(Code 1986, § 63.10) 
Sec. 70-119. - Parking in undesignated area. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bicycle, tractor-trailer, trailer or other type of motor vehicle to be standing or parked, whether occupied or not, in any area of a public street within the city that is not designated to accommodate parking. Angle parking in any parking area not specifically marked for angle parking shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 63.11) 
Sec. 70-120. - Loading zones. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to designate loading zones on public streets within the city. The loading zones shall be classified and restricted as follows: 
(1)  Commercial loading zones: restricted zone (15-minute parking) from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Taxicab loading zone: 24 hours daily. 
(3)  Tour bus, trolley and tour train: Restricted zone from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. 
(4)  Hospitals and clinics: 24 hours daily. 
(5)  Motels, hotels, guesthouses, theaters and restaurants: restricted to 30-minute parking. 
(b)  All loading zones shall be clearly identified by an appropriate official sign erected facing the direction of oncoming traffic, and the curb shall be painted with the authorized yellow paint. The painted curb designates the boundaries of the loading zone. 
(c)  All loading areas designated by the appropriate sign and curb marking shall not be considered a loading zone if the establishment for which the loading zone has been designated is closed and will not be open for a period in excess of 24 hours or during legal holidays. 
(Code 1986, § 63.12) 
Sec. 70-121. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person cited for violation of the parking, stopping and standing regulations set forth in this chapter who submits payment within ten days of the issuance of the citation shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For violation of section 70-116, but not subsection 70-116(c)(3), 70-116(a)(3) or 70-116(a)(8) and violations of sections 70-119, 70-156, 70-159, 70-247, and 70-265, $35.00. 
(2)  For violation of section 70-118, other than unauthorized parking in handicapped parking spaces, punishable as provided in section 70-122, and division 5 of this article, $45.00. 
(3)  For violation of section 70-158, 70-116(a) (3) or 70-116(a) (8), $115.00. 
(4)  For violation of section 70-116(c) (3) and division 2 of article IX of this chapter, $65.00. 
(5)  (a)  For a first violation of section 70-497 of article X Division 2 of this chapter (Buses), $250.00. 
(b)  For a second or subsequent violation of Section 2-497 of article X Division 2 of this Chapter, occurring within six (6) months of a prior violation of this Chapter, $500.00. 
(b)  Failure to pay the penalty for violation(s) and failure to pay the penalties as provided in subsections (a) (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section within ten days may be referred to the Code Compliance Special Magistrate for a hearing and possible additional penalties in accordance with F.S. ch. 162. 
(c)  In order to fund the school crossing guard program in Key West, the following surcharges are imposed on parking fines: 
(1)  For violations of section 70-116(c)(3) - blocking a fire hydrant - a surcharge of $125.00 
(2)  For violations of section 70-317 - parking in a fire lane - a surcharge of $75.00 
(3)  For violations of section 70-462 - prohibited parking of recreational and oversized vehicles - a surcharge of $25.00 
(4)  For violations of section 70-156 - overtime parking - a surcharge of $5.00 
(5)  For all other violations of parking prohibitions for which a surcharge is authorized by ordinance - a surcharge of $15.00. 
(Code 1986, § 63.17; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-7-2003; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 16-17, § 1 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 1-18-2018; Ord. No. 18-28, § 1, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 70-122. - Violation of handicapped parking spaces. 
    The penalty for violation of F.S. § 316.1955 or 316-1956 shall be a fine of $250.00. A surcharge may be added in accordance with section 70-127. All fines collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special account to be known as the handicapped parking fine account to be used in the following manner: 
(1)  One-third shall be used to defray expenses for the administration of this section. 
(2)  Two-thirds shall be used to provide funds to improve accessibility and equal opportunity to qualified physically disabled persons in the county or city and to provide funds to conduct public awareness programs in the county or city concerning persons who have disabilities. 
(Code 1986, § 63.19; Ord. No. 03-01, § 2, 1-7-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, F.S. § 316.008(4). 
Sec. 70-123. - Failure to appear and pay fine within prescribed time. 
(a)  If the person accused of a violation as enumerated in section 70-121(a) does not appear to answer a citation affixed to his motor vehicle within a period of ten days, the chief of police shall send the owner of the motor vehicle to which the citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation, requesting payment and warning him that if such request is not complied with within a period of 20 days after the date of such notice, a warrant of arrest may be issued. If any person fails to comply with the notice of violation attached to such motor vehicle and fails to make payment within the time prescribed in the letter to the owner, the chief of police is empowered to secure and have served a warrant for his arrest. 
(b)  When a person cited for violation of the parking, stopping, and standing regulations cited in subsection (a) of this section fails to submit payment within ten days of the issuance of a citation, a first reminder notice shall be mailed to the person, and an administrative fee of $5.00, in addition to the penalties set forth in this section, shall be assessed. When such payment is not submitted within 20 days from the mailing of the first reminder notice, a second reminder notice shall be mailed to the person cited, and an additional administrative fee of $5.00, in addition to all other penalties and fees, shall be assessed. 
(Code 1986, § 63.18) 
Sec. 70-124. - Procedure for forwarding information to state. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967, the city traffic violations bureau shall supply the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles with a magnetically encoded computer tape reel or cartridge which is machine readable by the installed computer system at the department, listing persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations. 
(Code 1986, § 63.181) 
Sec. 70-125. - Procedure for immobilization of vehicles. 
(a)  In addition to the enforcement mechanism provided for in section 70-124, where a person has the number of outstanding parking violations specified in F.S. § 316.1967, the city manager shall issue directions to all law enforcement officers and parking enforcement specialists directing immobilization of any motor vehicle registered to the person cited for parking violations. The directions shall specify the registration or tag number of the vehicle, the make or trade name of the vehicle, and, if known, the serial number of the vehicle. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist who comes into contact with an unoccupied motor vehicle parked on any street or highway, as such terms are defined in F.S. § 316.003(27) and (53), for which vehicle he reasonably believes there to be an outstanding immobilization order, may immobilize the vehicle in a manner prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Immobilization of vehicles pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be accomplished by means of a Denver boot or other nondestructive device which prevents the vehicle from moving under its own power. The police officer or parking enforcement specialist who causes the motor vehicle to be immobilized shall attach a notice to the motor vehicle advising the owner of the information necessary to enable the owner to have the immobilization device removed or to request a hearing. The notice shall be signed by the police officer or parking enforcement specialist and indicate his badge number. For a period of 48 hours from the immobilization, the owner of the vehicle shall not be liable for failure to comply with section 70-119. 
(d)  A prompt and adequate postimmobilization hearing will be provided upon request to the owner of an immobilized motor vehicle by the city manager enabling the owner to contest the immobilization. In the course of this hearing, the burden will be on the city to prove the parking violations and the legality of the immobilization. 
(e)  A motor vehicle which has been immobilized shall be released by the police department within 24 hours of the owner's compliance with the terms of the immobilization order and presentation of proof of such compliance to the agency which immobilized the vehicle. 
(f)  If a vehicle is immobilized pursuant to this section and if within 24 hours thereafter the owner neither pays the appropriate fine nor requests a hearing and pays a deposit sufficient to cover such fine plus administrative charges, the vehicle may be removed from its location and impounded by the police department. 
(Code 1986, § 63.182) 
Sec. 70-126. - Owner presumed to be violator. 
    In the prosecution or enforcement of any ordinance or section of this Code governing the stopping, standing, parking or operation of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described was parked or operated in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the person named was at the time of such parking or operation the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who stopped, parked, or operated such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Code 1986, § 63.183) 
State Law reference- Liability for payment of parking ticket violations and other parking violations, F.S. § 316.1967. 
Sec. 70-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-03, § 2, adopted January 18, 2018, repealed § 70-127 in its entirety. Former § 70-127 pertained to "Surcharge; school crossing guard program," and was derived from Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, adopted January 7, 2003. 
Sec. 70-128. - Abandoned vehicles and vessels. 
(a)  Definitions (supplemental to the definitions of section 70-1). 
i.  "Abandoned vehicle or vessel" shall mean any automobile, bus, truck, truck trailer, vessel trailer, moped, scooter, motorcycle, electric vehicle, golf cart, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle, motor home, travel trailer, or any type of watercraft, whether motorized or not and whether habitable or not, that has been determined to be abandoned property, as defined in F.S. § 705.101, pursuant to the procedures of F.S. ch. 705 (or a successor statute). 
ii.  "Inoperable vehicle" shall mean a vehicle incapable of being immediately driven, including, but not limited to, a vehicle that either does not have an engine or does not have wheels or tires. 
iii.  "Junked vehicle or vessel" shall mean a vehicle or vessel that is substantially dismantled, including, but not limited to, a vehicle or vessel that has incurred substantial damage. 
(b)  No owner or other person shall leave an abandoned vehicle or vessel on a right-of-way or in a public place in Key West. 
(c)  The movement of an abandoned vehicle or vessel to another location within 100 feet shall not alter its status as abandoned. 
(d)  When an enforcement officer observes an abandoned vehicle or vessel on the public right-of-way or in a public place, he or she may cause its removal consistent with the provisions of F.S. ch. 705 (or a successor law). An inoperable or junked vehicle or vessel, or a vehicle without a current license tag, constitutes prima facie evidence of abandonment. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. In addition or in the alternative thereto, the city may pursue all other lawful remedies and charges against the owner of an abandoned vehicle or vessel. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 3, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-129. - Storage fee. 
    There is hereby established a storage fee of $25.00 per day. It shall be imposed upon an owner of a vehicle or vessel stored on a city right-of-way, as described in section 70-116. The storage fee shall also be imposed upon an owner of an abandoned vehicle or vessel, as defined in section 70-128, in addition to any fine or penalty or any towing charge(s) imposed upon such owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 4, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-130. - No lodging in vehicles. 
    Except as provided for in sections 70-464 [and] 108-683, it shall be unlawful for any person to lodge in, on or about any automobile, truck, trailer, camping or recreational vehicle or similar vehicle in any public street, public park area, public way, right-of-way, parking lot or other public property within the limits of the City of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Secs. 70-131-70-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERED PARKING 

Sec. 70-156. - Areas or zones. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to establish metered parking areas within the city and to install and maintain the meters upon any of the public streets or parts of public streets as necessary to aid in the regulation and control of the parking of vehicles in the city. 
(b)  Where parking meters have been erected, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any metered parking area for a period of time longer than that designated by the meter upon the deposit of a coin of United States currency as indicated on the meter, except for special occasions as designated by the city manager. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter anything other than a lawful coin of the United States, or any coin that is bent, cut, torn, battered or otherwise misshapen. 
(d)  All references to parking meters in this chapter shall also include and mean parking pay stations. 
(Code 1986, § 63.13) 
Sec. 70-157. - Maintenance and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall provide the necessary personnel within the city operating budget to maintain the parking meter system of the city. Further, the personnel required to enforce the parking meter sections of this division need not be certified law enforcement officers. Personnel performing enforcement duties under this section shall be bonded by the city's surety. 
(b)  The city manager shall provide for the collection of coins from each parking meter at least twice during any 20-day period. Personnel assigned such collection duties shall have a police officer available to provide protection and to assist in the enforcement of collections. All monies collected shall be deposited the same day with the revenue division of the department of finance. 
(Code 1986, § 63.14) 
Sec. 70-158. - Tampering with, defacing or theft of meter or meter boxes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, deface, tamper with, open, willfully break, destroy or damage any parking meter in such a manner that the indicator will fail to show the correct amount of unexpired time before a violation. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall remove, deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or damage any parking meter. 
(c)  No person shall willfully manipulate any parking meter in such a manner that the indicator will fail to show the correct amount of unexpired time before a violation. 
(d)  No person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked in any parking meter space for a period of time greater than the indicator provides for on the meter. 
(Code 1986, § 63.15) 
Sec. 70-159. - Manner of parking. 
(a)  Every vehicle shall be parked wholly within the metered parking space, with the front end of such vehicle immediately opposite the parking meter for such space. 
(b)  All vehicles shall be parked at the prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as indicated by signs or markings. 
(c)  When signs authorized by the city manager are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in the area designated by such a sign for longer than the time provided by such sign. 
(d)  When signs authorized by the city manager are erected prohibiting parking in a place designated by such sign, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Code 1986, § 63.16) 
Secs. 70-160-70-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING RATES 

Sec. 70-186. - Mallory Square. 
    Parking rates at the city parking lot at Mallory Square are established as follows: 
(1)  Hourly parking, per hour ..... $ 4.00 
(2)  Maximum fee, per day ..... 32.00 
The city manager may set special event hourly rates consistent with a market value for parking services during special event periods. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1981(a); Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 03-21, § 1, 9-3-2003; Ord. No. 05-22, § 1, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 18-24, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-187. - Old Town Garage. 
(a)  Parking rates at the Old Town Garage are established as follows: 
(1)  There is a monthly permit charge of $200.00, plus sales tax per month. 
(2)  For users of parking services, there is a charge of $4.00 per hour or a daily maximum charge of $32.00 per day. The city manager may set special event hourly rates consistent with a market value for parking services during special event periods. 
(3)  One [dollar] ($1.00) of this rate shall be set aside and allocated to the following City Funds: 
(I)  67% shall be allocated to The Alternative Transportation Fund, to be used for the study and implementation of alternative transportation methods in the City of Key West designed to alleviate the City's vehicular traffic congestion, 
(II)  33% shall be allocated to the Transit Fund. 
(4)  28% of the maximum daily rate shall be allocated as provided in Section (3) above. 
(b)  For those service charges set forth in this section, the city manager may authorize discount rates. The city manager shall establish a written policy for discount rates for firms, organizations, groups and other persons who would provide multiple use of the park and ride facility. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1981(b); Ord. No. 03-22, § 1, 9-3-2003; Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 1-15-2008; Ord. No. 16-25, § 1, 12-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-16-2018; Ord. No. 18-24, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-188. - Key West Bight Caroline Street parking lot. 
(a)  Parking rates at the Key West Bight Caroline Street parking lot are established as follows: 
(1)  For users of parking services, there is a charge of $4.00 per hour or a daily maximum charge of $32.00 per day. The city manager may set special event hourly rates consistent with a market value for parking services during special event periods. 
(2)  One ($1.00) dollar of the hourly rate shall be set aside and allocated to the following City Funds: 
(I)  50% shall be allocated to the Alternative Transportation Fund, to be used for the study and implementation of alternative transportation methods in the City of Key West designed to alleviate the City's vehicular traffic congestion, 
(II)  50% shall be allocated to the Key West Bight Fund. 
(3)  19% of the daily maximum rate shall be allocated as provided in section 2 above. 
(b)  All other metered parking spaces within Key West Bight are established at $4.00 per hour, one dollar ($1.00) of which shall be allocated as provided in Section (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 16-26, § 1, 12-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-24, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-189. - Other city metered parking spaces. 
    All other city metered parking rates are established at $4.00 per hour. The city manager may set special event hourly rates consistent with a market value for parking services during special event periods. 
(Ord. No. 18-24, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Secs. 70-190-70-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM FOR RESIDENTS 

Sec. 70-216. - Established. 
    A parking permit program is established for those residents of the downtown business district who own vehicles, have no access to off-street parking, and have parking meters placed in front of their residences. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1982(a)) 
Sec. 70-217. - Application. 
(a)  Any person eligible under section 70-216 may apply to the city code enforcement department for an annual parking permit and shall provide the following: 
(1)  Driver's license showing residence address within the downtown business district. 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the vehicle. 
(3)  A utility bill or other documentation showing current residential use of the property. 
(4)  A permit fee of $85.00 per year. 
(b)  After providing the information required in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant shall present the vehicle for application of a permit sticker by a code enforcement inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1982(b)) 
Sec. 70-218. - Limitations; renewal. 
    Only one permit required under this division shall be issued per applicant. Permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Permits shall be issued on a fiscal-year basis, and may be prorated based on the date of issuance. A permit is renewable upon provision by the applicant of the items required in section 70-217. Permit use shall be restricted to the block in which the residence is located; both sides of the street may be used. No specific space within the block may be reserved or appropriated by a permit holder. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1982(c)) 
Sec. 70-219. - Exemption. 
    Holders of permits issued pursuant to this division shall be exempt from section 70-156(b) while exercising their rights thereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1982(d)) 
Secs. 70-220-70-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM 

Sec. 70-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck or motorcycle, so long as such vehicle is allowed to park on the city streets pursuant to this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-247. - Established. 
    A residential parking permit program is established in the area as described in exhibit A to Ordinance No. 99-23. The area is referred to as the "parking permit area." Specifically, exhibit A, which is made a part of this section by reference, delineates each block of the city where the residential parking permit program shall be in effect. The city manager is authorized to erect the appropriate street signs and markings. Unless determined otherwise in writing by the city manager, the residential parking permit program shall be in effect at all hours of the day, seven days a week. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(a); Ord. No. 99-23, § 1, 11-3-99) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that exhibit A referenced in the above section is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 70-248. - Eligibility. 
    All vehicles registered to residents of the City of Key West and Key West real estate property owners shall be eligible to participate in the residential parking program. Annual residential permit decals are issued with driver's license, vehicle registration and residency verification. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(c); Ord. No. 14-13, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-249. - Additional eligibility. 
(a)  In addition to the persons in section 70-248, the following persons shall also be eligible to park vehicles in the residential parking permit area: 
(1)  Military personnel stationed in Key West; and 
(2)  Seasonal residents, persons who reside in the City of Key West on a seasonal basis of four (4) months or longer, and whose vehicles are registered outside of the county; and 
(3)  Vehicles registered to a business that holds a business tax receipt with the City of Key West. 
(b)  All persons whose eligibility is determined under this section shall register their vehicles for this permit with the Monroe County Tax Collector and execute a sworn affidavit of eligibility. There shall be a registration fee sufficient to cover the cost of issuing the residential parking permit decal for each vehicle of an owner eligible under this section. The annual fee, as of the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 14-13], shall be $10.00. The rate may be adjusted as necessary by resolution of the city commission. Each such vehicle shall display a decal in the manner prescribed by the city. 
(c)  All persons displaying a lawfully issued Residential Parking Permit may park free of charge for a period of time not to exceed four (4) hours per day in the following City parking sites: 
(i)  The main parking lot located at the Key West Bight (Caroline Street lot); 
(ii)  The Old Town Garage; 
(iii)  The Fire Station parking lot on Angela Street; 
(iv)  The Truman Waterfront parking lots. 
The City Manager may suspend this parking permit benefit at his or her discretion during special event periods or when otherwise required for City purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(d); Ord. No. 14-13, § 2, 7-1-2014; Ord. No. 16-27, § 1, 12-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-22, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-250. - Effect of other parking regulations. 
    Nothing in this division is intended to permit a vehicle owner to violate the established parking regulations of the city. Furthermore, nothing in this section is intended to guarantee an owner of a vehicle a parking space on any city street. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(e)) 
Sec. 70-251. - Appeal of decisions. 
    An owner of a vehicle may appeal an eligibility decision in writing to the city manager. Upon notice, the city manager shall provide a hearing to the vehicle owner within 30 days from the date of the appeal. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(f); Ord. No. 14-13, § 3, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-252. - Penalty for violation. 
    The penalty for violation of this division shall be as provided in section 70-121. 
(Code 1986, § 63.1983(g)) 
DIVISION 6. - EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM IN HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 70-253. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  The employee assistance program permit applies to onstreet metered p arking in the commercial historic district and is limited to 12 hours per 24-hour day. 
(b)  Commercial purpose. Any use of a vehicle, the primary purpose of which is to further any business purpose by way of markings, advertisements, or actual use in delivery of goods or services. 
(c)  Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled or otherwise defined in Florida Statutes. 
(d)  Commercial Historic District. That area of Key West west of White Street. 
(e)  Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or otherwise defined in Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 9-3-2008; Ord. No. 18-25, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-254. - Proof of eligibility; duration; application; display of decal. 
    In order to be eligible to receive an employee assistance parking decal in the Commercial Historic District, all applicants must provide all of the following to the parking collections division of the City of Key West: 
(1)  (a)  A valid drivers' license. 
(b)  An original notarized letter from the applicant's employer located within the Commercial Historic District verifying the applicant's employment within the Commercial Historic District. In the case of a business owner, a signed affidavit to the same effect. 
(c)  Presentation of the applicant's personal vehicle to the parking collections division for a photograph of the applicant's personal vehicle to be attached to the application. 
(d)  A valid vehicle registration in the name of the applicant or corporation to which the applicant is a principal. 
(e)  Unpaid Key West parking citations shall render an applicant ineligible for this program. 
(2)  Employee assistance parking decals shall be valid for four months. 
(3)  Employee assistance parking decals shall only be applied by the parking collections division. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 9-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-20, § 1, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 18-25, § 2, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-255. - Program; costs; reclamation. 
    Decals shall be valid for four months and shall cost $480.00 tax included. All employee assistance parking decals are considered property of the City of Key West. Fees are nonrefundable and not pro-rated. All expired decals must be returned to the City of Key West Parking Collections Division prior to the issuance of a renewal decal. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 9-3-2008; Ord. No. 18-25, § 3, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 70-256. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently represent that he or she is entitled to an employee assistance parking program decal, or to display such a decal at any time when he or she is not so entitled. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any decal to be used on any vehicle for the use of promoting a commercial purpose including, but not limited to deliveries and advertising. However, an exception will be made for a business owner within the Commercial Historic District who shall be entitled to one decal for his or her personal vehicle that is registered in their name or that of the corporation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display an employee assistance parking program decal in a rental vehicle, as defined in F.S. ch. 320; or contract vehicles for hire or passenger vehicles for hire as defined in chapter 78 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. Liability shall be presumed to be on the part of the business owner, vehicle owner and operator. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 9-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-20, § 2, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 70-257. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions under this division shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00 if paid via citation to the parking collections division of the City of Key West within 30 days. 
(b)  Citations that have not been paid within 30 days as well as violations filed by way of a notice of code violation as a repeat offender shall be punishable under chapter [section] 1-15 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Secs. 70-258, 70-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EMPLOYEE PARKING LOT PERMIT IN HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 70-260. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Commercial purpose means any use of a vehicle, the primary purpose of which is to further any business purpose by way of markings, advertisements, or actual use in delivery of goods or services. 
(b)  Historic district means the historic preservation districts of the City of Key West as identified in sections 122-566 through 122-1005 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, Florida. 
(c)  Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or otherwise defined in Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-261. - Description; proof of eligibility and application; display of permit. 
    The employee parking lot permit allows employees of businesses in the historic district to park during their scheduled work hours in designated municipal lot(s) determined to have excess parking capacity. The city manager is authorized to designate lot(s) for this permit program. Currently the Old Town Garage (Park and Ride) lot is designated. 
    In order to be eligible to receive an employee parking lot permit, all applicants must be employed in the historic district and present the following to the revenue office of the City of Key West when making application: 
(a)  A valid drivers' license. 
(b)  An original pay stub from a licensed business in the historic district not more than 30 days old. 
(c)  A valid vehicle registration in the name of the applicant, family member, or corporation to which the applicant is a principal. 
    The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle when parked in the lot in the manner directed by the city. 
    Possession of an employee parking lot permit is not intended to guarantee a parking space. Parking spaces in the designated lots are available on a first come basis until the lot is full. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-262. - Program costs; reclamation; suspension. 
    The amount of the monthly permit fee, as of the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 14-12], shall be $25.00. Rates may be adjusted as necessary by resolution of the city commission. Up to six (6) months may be purchased at one time, however fees are nonrefundable. All employee parking lot permits are considered property of the City of Key West. Permits are not transferable except to another vehicle owned by the applicant, in which case the original permit is surrendered to the revenue department and a new permit issued. 
    The city manager may suspend permits or restrict parking in areas of the lot(s) during emergencies or events, including, but not limited to, tropical storms, hurricanes, or festival events, when these lots may be needed for preparation or recovery. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-263. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently represent that he or she is entitled to an employee parking lot is not so entitled. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permit to be used on any vehicle for the use of promoting a commercial purpose including, but not limited to, deliveries and advertising. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked with the employee lot permit except during the employee's scheduled work hours. The city reserves the right to require proof of employee's work schedule upon request. This permit is not intended to allow vehicles to be stored at the lot. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-264. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions under this division shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00 if paid via citation to the parking collections division of the City of Key West within 30 days. 
(b)  Citations that have not been paid within 30 days as well as violations filed by way of a notice of code violation as a repeat offender shall be punishable under section 1-15 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 70-265. - Eligibility and application. 
(1)  (a)  Monroe county residents whose driver's license reflects a home address located south of U.S. 1 Mile Marker 11 and north of the city limits of the City of Key West shall be eligible for an annual Non-Resident Truman Waterfront Parking Permit. The annual fee for this permit shall be $25.00. A county resident with outstanding unpaid City of Key West parking citations shall not be eligible for this program. 
(b)  All persons displaying a lawfully issued Non-Resident Truman Waterfront Parking Permit may park for a period of time not to exceed four (4) hours one time per day in the Truman Waterfront parking lot. 
(c)  The Permit issued hereunder shall not authorize any commercial use or parking in the Truman Waterfront Parking Lot including but not limited to deliveries and advertising. 
(d)  The City Manager may suspend this parking permit benefit at his or her discretion during special event periods or when otherwise required for City purposes. 
(2)  The penalty for violation of this division shall be as provided in section 70-121. 
(Ord. No. 18-28, § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Secs. 70-266-70-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, § 18-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Open containers of alcoholic beverages, F.S. § 316.1936. 

Sec. 70-281. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one percent alcohol by weight, as determined in accordance with F.S. § 561.01(4)(b). 
    Commercial establishment parking lot means any private or public area appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for, and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives, parking areas, and sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto. 
    Open container means any receptacle or container immediately capable of being consumed from by a person or which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
    Public or semipublic area open for vehicular or pedestrian travel means any private or public road, street, highway, right-of-way, lane, alley, parking lot or parking area on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or pedestrian means or which is otherwise open for such travel. It does not include the following: 
(1)  Areas such as golf courses; 
(2)  Private driveways; or 
(3)  Property serving a single dwelling unit. 
    Vehicle means any device by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway, or roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 63.47) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-282. - Intent. 
    It is the policy of the city that the consumption of alcoholic beverages or the possession of any open container of alcoholic beverage while driving or riding in or on a vehicle is prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 63.46) 
Sec. 70-283. - Prohibition; construction. 
(a)  No person shall drink from or possess any open container containing any alcoholic beverage while in or on any vehicle upon a commercial establishment parking lot or public or semipublic area open for vehicular or pedestrian travel in the city. 
(b)  The exceptions contained in section 18-88(a) shall apply to this section. 
(c)  An open container shall not be considered to be in the possession of a person in or on any vehicle if it is located in a locked trunk, locked glove compartment, or other area not accessible to the driver or passengers. 
(Code 1986, § 63.48) 
Sec. 70-284. - Penalty for violation. 
    Violations of section 70-283(a) shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 63.49) 
Secs. 70-285-70-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY VEHICLE ZONES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 70-311. - Determination of zones. 
    On application of the owner or lessor of real property and payment of the fee established in accordance with section 70-316, the city manager shall inspect the grounds of any shopping center, shopping mall, parking lot or parking garage and determine whether there are areas which should be kept free of parked motor vehicles in order to facilitate access to buildings by authorized emergency vehicles as defined in F.S. § 316.003. When making this determination, the city manager shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The number of people who frequent the property; 
(2)  The accessibility of the property by authorized emergency vehicles; 
(3)  The frequency of calls for emergency services at the property; and 
(4)  The need for accessibility to buildings by tenants, vendors, and delivery persons. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(a)) 
Sec. 70-312. - Permission to erect signs. 
    The city manager, upon determining that there are areas within a shopping center, shopping mall, parking lot or parking garage which should be kept free of parked vehicles in order to facilitate building access by authorized emergency vehicles, shall discuss the matter with the owner or lessee of the property and, if there is no objection, shall permit the owner or lessee of the property to erect emergency vehicles zone signs in accordance with section 70-314. Access roadways shall comply with the provisions of the 1997 Standard Fire Prevention Code, sections 602.6.1 through 602.6.7, and all other codes adopted in section 30-57, and applicable state statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(b)) 
Sec. 70-313. - Withdrawal of application. 
    The owner or lessee of a shopping center, shopping mall, parking lot or parking garage who has made application to the city manager pursuant to section 70-311 may withdraw the application at any time by written notice. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(c)) 
Sec. 70-314. - Posting of no parking signs. 
    Areas in which parking is to be prohibited pursuant to this article shall be conspicuously posted with signs advising motorists that parking is prohibited. The city manager may designate the form of the sign to be used; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the city manager from authorizing the additional use of nonconforming signs. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(d)) 
Sec. 70-315. - Installation and maintenance of signs. 
    All signs erected or allowed by section 70-314 shall be installed and maintained by the property owner or lessee of the property. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(e)) 
Sec. 70-316. - Fees. 
    The city manager shall, by administrative order, establish a fee to pay costs of inspection of property and establishment of emergency vehicle zones pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1986, § 63.53(f)) 
Sec. 70-317. - Penalty for parking in zone. 
    Any person who causes a motor vehicle to be parked in an area in which parking is prohibited pursuant to this article shall be subject to a civil fine of $100.00 per occurrence. A surcharge may be added in accordance with section 70-127. 
(Code 1986, § 63.54; Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, 1-7-2003) 
Secs. 70-318-70-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRUCKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-346-70-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL DELIVERIES 

Sec. 70-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial truck delivery means any delivery of goods or merchandise by a commercial motor vehicle which is designed or operated for purpose of transporting goods or merchandise. 
    Historic district means all of that portion of the city located west of and including White Street between the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-372. - Time limits for deliveries within the Duval Street Corridor. 
    Except as provided in this division, all commercial truck deliveries made between Whitehead Street and Simonton Street bordered by the Atlantic Ocean and the Key West Harbor, and the entire lengths of Front, Greene and Caroline Streets, including all intersecting streets therein shall occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for an owner or driver of a truck to deliver goods or merchandise within the Duval Street Corridor except within the designated hours. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(b); Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 70-373. - Time limits for deliveries within historic district. 
    Along the perimeter of and within the following area of the historic district, except on Duval Street as provided in section 30-372, all commercial truck deliveries shall occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for an owner or driver to deliver goods or merchandise in this area except within the designated hours. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(c); Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 70-374. - Moving van permit required in historic district. 
    Any person who desires to bring a moving van greater in length than 35 feet into the historic district between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, shall apply for a permit from the city manager. The city manager shall have the discretion to deny a permit on the basis of traffic congestion or parking limitations. If a moving van is unable to park entirely on private property, the city manager may condition permit approval upon the operator of the moving van providing police traffic control. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(d)) 
Sec. 70-375. - Exceptions. 
    The restrictions of sections 70-372 and 70-373 shall not apply to a mail truck or to any private mail or package courier truck or to any truck whose length is not greater than 35 feet, nor shall this article apply to other uses of trucks in the historic district, including but not limited to governmental trucks, public service trucks, emergency vehicles or construction trucks. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(e)) 
Sec. 70-376. - Waiver of restrictions on delivery times. 
    The city manager may waive the restriction on delivery hours in this article for: 
(1)  An emergency, which may include a traffic delay caused by the closing of the Overseas Highway or severe weather; 
(2)  A special event; or 
(3)  A demonstration of the existence of a special circumstance to the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(f)) 
Sec. 70-377. - Review of loading zones in historic district. 
    The city manager, pursuant to section 70-120, shall review all loading zones in the historic district and, if necessary, redesignate loading zone areas in order to facilitate the effectiveness of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 63.55(g)) 
Sec. 70-378. - Penalty. 
    This division shall be enforced under section 1-15 and applicable state traffic laws. 
(Code 1986, § 63.56) 
Secs. 70-379-70-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SKATEBOARDING/ROLLER SKATING 

Sec. 70-406. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inline skate and roller blade mean a manufactured or assembled device consisting of an upper portion that is intended to be secured to a human foot, with a frame or chassis attached along the length of the bottom of such upper portion, with such frame or chassis holding two or more wheels that are longitudinally aligned and used to skate or glide by means of human leg power. 
    Roller skate means any shoe, boot or similar device placed or worn on the foot, mounted with wheels, regardless of configuration, which can be used to produce movement from place to place. 
    Roller skating means any method of movement or propelling oneself in or upon roller skates, inline skates or any device worn or placed on the foot with wheels designed to produce movement. 
    Skateboard means a board made of wood, fiberglass, or other material or combination of materials mounted on two axles, front and rear, with two wheels made of clay, polyurethane, or other material or combination of materials attached to each axle. The term "skateboard" includes motorized skateboards propelled by a motor mounted on the skateboard. 
    Skateboarding means lying, sitting, squatting, kneeling, or standing upon a skateboard and propelling oneself by any means which causes the skateboard to move, including but not limited to jumping on a skateboard, being pulled or pushed while situated on a skateboard, pushing the ground or other surface with one foot while keeping one'sother foot on the skateboard, riding a skateboard from one elevation to a lower elevation, or operation of a motor mounted on a skateboard. 
(Code 1986, § 63.50) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-407. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Roller skating, skateboarding and inline skating are prohibited on all streets, sidewalks, and alleys within that area of the Duval Street right-of-way bounded on the north by the Bay of Florida shoreline, and on the south by the Atlantic Ocean shoreline, including all sidewalks and portions of driveways or alleyways crossing these sidewalks. Roller skating, inline skating and skateboarding are otherwise prohibited along city rights-of-way in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Skateboarding is prohibited on all other public property owned or controlled by the city, except streets, sidewalks, and alleys and except as specifically authorized by the city, and on all public property owned or controlled by other governmental entities, except as may be specifically authorized by the appropriate governmental entity. 
(Code 1986, § 63.51) 
Sec. 70-408. - Penalty for violation of section 70-407. 
    Violation of section 70-407 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 per violation. In lieu of the fine, a violator may elect to provide five hours of volunteer labor services to the city streets and sidewalks department or recreation department. Such provision of services shall be carried out under adequate supervision, with regard for the health and safety of participants, and in accordance with applicable state and federal law. 
(Code 1986, § 63.52) 
Secs. 70-409-70-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-436-70-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING 

Sec. 70-461. - Authority of city manager. 
    The city manager is directed and empowered to take all steps necessary and appropriate to carry out and effectuate the purposes of this division. This authority specifically includes but is not limited to arranging for, acquiring and erecting at conspicuous locations throughout the city and at adequate distances outside the city along the southbound lane of U.S. Highway No. 1 signs advising the drivers of recreational vehicles of the parking prohibition and directing them to public and private lawful parking facilities within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 63.198) 
Sec. 70-462. - Prohibition. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to park, cause to be parked, allow to be parked, or to cause or to allow to remain standing or stationary, except in the normal course of traffic flow, any recreational vehicle or any combination of a recreational vehicle and a motor vehicle in excess of 20 feet in length or seven feet in width, exclusive of mirrors and other safety devices determined by the department of highway safety and motor vehicles to be necessary for the safe and efficient operation of such vehicles, whether occupied or not and whether attended or unattended, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or property and unless actual loading or unloading of passengers or property is taking place, on any street over which the city exercises parking jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 63.191) 
Sec. 70-463. - Use of designated area required. 
    Off-street parking of recreational vehicles shall be confined to those areas which are allowed by this Code to accommodate such parking and to specific parking areas designated and established by the city manager to accommodate the parking needs of recreational vehicles within the city. No overnight parking shall be permitted in any public parking area designated by the city manager pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1986, § 63.192) 
Sec. 70-464. - Exceptions to prohibition contained in section 70-462-Generally. 
(a)  The prohibition contained in section 70-462 does not extend to or include the following: 
(1)  Vehicles, trailers, or motor homes which may park on city streets occasionally and for limited periods of time while engaged in public or community service activities, such as library bookmobiles, mobile blood donor stations, mobile health care centers, military recruiting units, and similar vehicles; 
(2)  Commercial vehicles; 
(3)  Motor homes, trailers or house trailers used as on-site bona fide field offices or construction offices or construction offices in connection with ongoing permitted construction projects within the city; or 
(4)  Pickup trucks upon which there are attached caps providing for the storage and transportation of tools, equipment, and other similar material. 
(b)  Permits to allow parking for a specific number of days may be issued by the city manager in his discretion. 
(Code 1986, § 63.193) 
Sec. 70-465. - Same-For handicapped. 
    The prohibition contained in section 70-462 shall not extend to or include recreational vehicles owned and used for transportation by or leased to and used for transportation by handicapped or disabled persons or persons having permanent mobility problems which substantially impair their ability to ambulate or persons who are certified as being legally blind, nor shall it apply to recreational vehicles providing transportation services to such persons. However, only such vehicles as have firmly affixed upon them exemption entitlement parking permits, disabled veterans' motor vehicle license plates, wheelchair user license plates, similar license plates or parking permits issued to handicapped persons by any state or district other than this state, international wheelchair user symbols, or other commonly recognized and accepted markings identifying the vehicles as serving the transportation needs of the handicapped shall be entitled to exemption under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 63.194) 
Sec. 70-466. - Temporary emergency exception. 
    This article shall not prohibit the temporary emergency parking of disabled recreational vehicles on the city streets. However, such vehicles must be removed from the city streets within not more than two hours by wrecker towing or other means regardless of the nature of the emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 63.195) 
Sec. 70-467. - Resident owner permits. 
    Owners of recreational vehicles who are city residents may apply to the city manager, on forms approved and distributed by the city manager, for annual parking permits allowing them to park their recreational vehicles at their residences on the city streets. There shall be no fee for such permits; however, the permits shall be renewed each year and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 63.196) 
Sec. 70-468. - Citation of violator; removal of vehicle. 
    Whenever any police officer or other authorized law enforcement officer finds a recreational vehicle standing, stationary, or parked upon a street within the city in violation of this article, such officer shall issue a parking citation to the driver or owner as the alleged violator. If such vehicle is unattended, the parking citation may be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The officer is further authorized to immediately move the vehicle or cause the vehicle to be moved or to require the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 63.197) 
Secs. 70-469-70-495. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-496. - Definitions. 
    Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 10 passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and any motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation and which utilize the streets, rights-of-way or other public property of the City of Key West for the loading or unloading of its passengers. 
    Bus tour means a tour or an excursion, conducted by the use of a bus of any size, to or through places of tourist interest in Key West, whether or not a narrative description of history or scenery is offered. 
    Historic district means all areas of the city with an historic zoning designation. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 70-497. - Bus parking restricted. 
(a)  On any street or other public right-of-way of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, allow to be parked, or cause or allow to remain standing or stationary (other than in the normal course of traffic flow) any bus, whether occupied or not, attended or unattended, except for the purpose of active loading and active unloading of passengers or property at loading zones designated by the city manager. All buses must park on private property (with the permission of the property owner) or at locations designated for such purpose by the city manager. 
(b)  Parking, active loading and active unloading of buses shall be confined to the city bus parking lot located at 908 Caroline Street or such specific parking areas designated and established by the city manager or his/her designee to accommodate the parking needs of buses within the city. No overnight parking shall be permitted in any parking area so designated. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in section 70-497 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Vehicles licensed as "sightseeing motor vehicles" pursuant to chapter 78, articles IV and V of the Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  Vehicles licensed as "passenger vehicles for hire" pursuant to chapter 78, article II of the Code of Ordinances; 
(3)  Vehicles operated pursuant to franchises granted by the City of Key West; 
(4)  Disabled vehicles, temporarily parked on city streets or other areas over which the City of Key West exercises parking jurisdiction, but such vehicles must be removed from such streets or areas within not more than two (2) hours by wrecker towing; 
(5)  School buses. 
(d)  No bus, while parked in a designated parking area, shall leave its engine running, except for a five-minute active unloading period immediately upon arrival at a parking area or 20 minutes prior to leaving said parking area. 
(e)  Whenever any police officer, parking enforcement specialist, or other authorized law enforcement officer finds a bus standing, stationary, or parked, within the city in violation of these provisions, such officer shall issue a parking citation, or a notice to appear, to the driver or owner as the alleged violator. If such vehicle is unattended, the parking citation may be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such officer is further authorized to immediately move such vehicle or cause the same to be moved, or to require the owner, driver, or person in charge of the vehicle to move the same. 
(f)  The city manager or his/her designee is directed and empowered to take all steps necessary and appropriate to carry out and effectuate the purposes of these provisions. This authority specifically includes, but is not limited to, arranging for, acquiring and erecting at conspicuous locations throughout the city and at adequate distances outside Key West along the southbound lane of U.S. Highway No. 1, signs advising the drivers of buses of the parking prohibition and directing them to lawful public parking facilities within the city limits. 
(g)  Buses shall only park in the designated parking zones during the hours posted at said parking zone as determined by the city manager. 
(h)  Parking fees for bus parking in designated bus parking zones shall be $100.00 per day or $1,500.00 per month per vehicle and may be amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 2, 8-16-2016) 
Secs. 70-498-70-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOURS 

Sec. 70-521. - Bus tours restricted in historic district. 
(a)  No person or firm shall operate a bus tour on the streets of the historic district. 
(b)  A bus in excess of 31 feet taking passengers directly to a specific destination may use the streets of the city and its historic district, but only those streets designated by the city manager. (A map of those streets is attached to and made part of this ordinance.) If the origination of a 31-foot bus to be used for a bus tour is Key West or Monroe County, notwithstanding the origination of its passengers, then the operator must obtain a franchise from the city in order to operate a bus tour on the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 01-17, § 1(a), 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 16-14, § 3, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 70-522. - Identification and marking generally. 
    Generally. Every bus shall have a sign in plain view on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, containing the full name of the company operating the bus. All markings must be permanently fixed to the vehicle. No electronic or neon signage is permitted. There shall be no third-party advertising of any kind on buses. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-14, § 4, adopted August 16, 2016, repealed § 70-522 in its entirety; and § 5 enacted a new § 70-522 to read as set out herein. Former § 70-522 pertained to "Parking restricted," and was derived from Ord. No. 01-17, § 1(b), adopted October 16, 2001. 
Sec. 70-523. - Enforcement of sections 70-496 through 70-522. 
    Violations of section 70-496 through 70-522 may be enforced by the issuance of a parking ticket or by a citation pursuant to section 1-15 of this Code, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 01-17, § 1(c), 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 16-14, § 6, 8-16-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-14, § 6, adopted August 16, 2016, amended § 70-523 to read as set out herein. Previously § 70-523 was titled "Enforcement of sections 70-521 and 70-522." 
Secs. 70-524-70-620. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-621-70-645. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROTATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 70-646. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Administrative fee means the charge for notifying a motor vehicle owner and any lien holders that a wrecker operator has towed and stored the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Commercially manufactured wrecker means a tow truck that is: 
a.  Designed and constructed by a wrecker manufacturer which offers its wreckers for sale; or 
b.  Assembled by a business licensed and approved to assemble and certify wreckers according to manufacturer's specifications. Florida Statutes Sections 713.78 and 715.07 will be the prevailing statutes. 
(3)  Motor vehicle or vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle as described in Section 320.01(1), Florida Statutes. 
(4)  Wrecker also means tow truck. 
(5)  Wrecker operator or operator means the individual, partnership, corporation, or business entity engaged for hire in the recovery, towing removal, or storage of wrecked, disabled, stolen or abandoned motor vehicles. For the purpose of this section, a hired driver or employee shall be governed by this section and shall be considered an agent of the wrecker operator. 
(Code 1986, § 109.01(a); Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-647. - Regulations; jurisdiction. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to make such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this division and shall furnish to each licensed towing service a copy of such regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to all wrecker operators providing towing and the removal of motor vehicle service and motor vehicle storage in the City of Key West at the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1986, § 109.12; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-648. - Emergency conditions. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to limit the authority of the police department to otherwise request towing services in an emergency where necessary to preserve or promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1986, § 109.14) 
Sec. 70-649. - Rotating call list. 
(1)  There is established a city rotating call list. A person in the business of operating a wrecker and who is eligible under this division may apply for a permit to be placed on the rotating call list and thereby take possession, handle, and store vehicles and vessels on land, as directed by the police department. The city may place itself on the rotating call list. 
(2)  A tow company on the rotating call list shall tow every vehicle or vessel on land as directed by the police department. The tow shall occur immediately when the police department indicates a safety hazard. The tow company neither shall undertake selective towing nor impose its own limits on the number of vehicles or vessels on land it will tow in a given time period. If a tow company determines not to tow a vehicle or vessel on land per the direction of the police department, the tow company must justify its determination to the satisfaction of the police chief or his designee, or otherwise be subject to removal from the rotating call list. If all members of the rotating call list are unable to respond to a call, the police department may call for a wrecker not on the rotating call list. 
(3)  Except in extraordinary circumstances as authorized by the city manager or his designee all vehicles and vessels on land towed by a tow company must be stored by that tow company within a distance no greater than mile marker 15 on U.S. 1. 
(4)  The intent of this division is not to preclude a towing company and an owner of a vehicle or vessel to enter into a private agreement for the removal of the vehicle or vessel; provided, however, that a towing company shall not remove a vehicle or vessel if advised by the police department that it is needed as evidence in a criminal action. 
(5)  In the event that the rotating call list fails to assure an orderly removal of abandoned vehicles from the city's rights-of-way or public places, then the city may establish any lawful program or set of administrative rules necessary to ensure the removal of abandoned vehicles. 
(6)  Once notified by communications, the duty tow/wrecker service will respond to the requested scene within 30 minutes. If the tow/wrecker service is unable to meet the deadline then the next duty tow/wrecker will be called. For abandoned vehicles the duty abandoned tow/wrecker service will respond within 24 hours of being notified. Unless exigent circumstances exist, the abandoned duty rotation will be Monday through Friday during normal business hours. 
(Code 1986, § 109.01; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 06-04, § 5, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-650. - Application for placement; license requirements; revocation. 
(1)  Selection. 
(a)  Towing or wrecker companies providing city-initiated towing services shall be selected after review of the applications by the city manager. 
(b)  Every application for a towing license shall be in writing with a notarized signature of the applicant. 
(c)  Every application shall be filed with the licensing division together with an investigative, processing fee established in section 70-652. 
(d)  The statements contained in the application shall become part of the towing license and may be modified only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Every application for a towing license shall be on a form prescribed by the licensing division and shall contain all the information required by that form, including, but not limited to: 
I.  Sufficient information to identify the applicant; including, but not limited to, full legal name, date of birth or date of formation or incorporation of legal entity, business telephone numbers, and all business and residence addresses. If the applicant is a corporation, the foregoing information shall also be provided for each corporate officer, director, resident agent and shareholder. If the applicant is a partnership, the foregoing information shall also be provided for each general and each limited partner. Post office box addresses will not be accepted. 
II.  Documentation demonstrating that all corporate or partnership applicants are qualified to do business under state law. 
III.  Photocopy of all city and county business tax receipts of the applicant. 
IV.  A list of all persons with any ownership interest in the applicant who have previously been denied a license. 
V.  Any trade name under which the applicant operates, intends to operate, or has previously operated, and a description of proposed, existing and previous towing vehicles' colors and markings. 
VI.  A description of the applicant's management plan, which shall include, but is not limited to: Location and description of all places of business; a description of all towing vehicles and equipment; a description of the plan and facilities for maintaining towing vehicles and equipment; a system for handling complaints and accidents, insurance coverage and a description of any communication system. 
VII.  A description of services proposed to be provided, including, but not limited to, days and hours of operation and types of towing and storage services to be provided. 
VIII.  Sufficient information to identify the applicant and each employee, including, but not limited to, full legal name, date of birth and social security number. For each employee, the wrecker company shall obtain documentation from the relevant local, state and federal agencies regarding the employee's criminal and arrest history and submit such information to the city. Wrecker companies shall submit current employee information every year. 
IX.  Individual applicants shall obtain and submit their fingerprints and photographs from an appropriate law enforcement agency and provide them with the application and, where civil rights have been revoked, provide such information with the application. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, all such information shall be provided by all corporate officers and directors, or partners, as the case may be, and by all stockholders who own, hold or control five percent or more of issued and outstanding stock in the corporation or beneficial interest therein, and by all officers and directors of any corporate general partners of a partnership and by stockholders who own, hold or control five percent or more of issued and outstanding stock in a corporate general partner, or beneficial interest therein. 
X.  Proof of insurance as required in this article. 
XI.  The signature of each individual applicant, the signature of the president or vice-president of a corporate applicant, and the signature of all the general partners of a partnership applicant. 
XII.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the applicant shall abide by this article, city, county and state law. 
XIII.  It shall be a violation of this section to fail to report to the licensing division any material change pertaining to the information supplied by the applicant or licensee for his license, including, but not limited to, changing the location of the applicant's place of business prior to issuing the license and during the time period for which the license has been issued. 
XIV.  Each applicant for a license shall provide a schedule of all proposed rates and charges on a form prepared by the licensing division. 
XV.  Any additional information about the application as the licensing division may deem appropriate. 
(f)  In order to be considered for duty tow rotation, the tow company/wrecker service must also tow abandoned vehicles when directed to do so. The abandoned vehicle rotation list will be determined by the chief of police or his/her designee. For abandoned vehicles, the duty abandoned tow/wrecker service will respond within 24 hours of being notified. Unless exigent circumstances exist, the abandoned duty rotation will be Monday through Friday during normal business hours. 
(g)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to issue licenses to applicants who have met the standards and requirements for a towing license, and to promulgate rules, regulations and procedures for the application, issuance and revocation of such licenses. 
(h)  The city manager or his designee shall review and investigate each application for a towing license and shall reject any application that is not properly filed or is incomplete or untrue in whole or in part, or which fails in any way to meet the requirements of subsection (e) of this section. 
(i)  No towing license shall be issued to an applicant or renewed unless the applicant has completed the following: 
I.  Filed with the licensing administrator a true, correct and complete application on the form prescribed by the licensing section, including all proofs of required insurance. 
II.  Paid the initial, renewal or late application fee, as applicable. 
III.  Submitted to a background investigation resulting in a determination by the licensing administrator that: 
A.  Neither the applicant, nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant, has a currently suspended license, has had its license revoked by action of the licensing director within two years of the date of application, or has outstanding and unsatisfied civil penalties imposed on account of violations of this article. 
B.  Neither the applicant, nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant, has been convicted of one or more felonies within the preceding five years; or that three misdemeanors have been committed within the 36-month period preceding the date of the application, unless the civil rights of such individual or applicant have been restored or that such person has successfully completed all sentences of incarceration, probationary periods, required rehabilitation activities and payment of all fines and penalties imposed. For applicants requesting renewal, the licensing administrator may only consider crimes committed after the date the applicant obtained his license, unless such crimes were not previously disclosed in the original application. 
C.  Each corporate or partnership application is qualified under the state law to do business under the trade name or names under which it has applied for a license. 
D.  No fraud or willful or knowing misrepresentation or false statement was made in the application. 
E.  No judgment against the applicant arising out of the activity of recovery, towing or removing a vehicle or providing storage in connection therewith remains unsatisfied, unless a stay or reversal of the judgment is procured through the courts. 
F.  No outstanding warrants of arrest against the applicant nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant. 
(j)  Each towing license shall be on a form prescribed by the licensing section and shall be signed by the licensing administrator. Each towing license shall contain, at a minimum, the name and address of the applicant, the dates the license remains in effect unless suspended or revoked, and a statement of such additional terms and conditions, restrictions and limitations as were authorized in the application and approval process. 
(k)  Prior to the expiration of the initial towing license or expiration of the annual license, where applicable, an applicant may apply for an annual towing license. As a part of the renewal process, the original application shall be updated and verified by the applicant on forms prescribed by the licensing division. Renewal applications shall also include such financial information, as licensing department shall deem necessary to consider the continued appropriateness of maximum fees established by resolution. Each updated renewal application shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to expiration of the current initial or annual license and shall be accompanied by a renewal fee in an amount established by resolution. The amount of the renewal fee shall be reasonably related to the cost of the administrative services and regulation provided, and shall be in addition to any other fees or charges required by this article. All annual towing licenses that are not renewed shall automatically expire on June 30 following the issuance date and all recovery; towing, removing and storage services permitted thereunder shall cease immediately. The licensing administrator shall deny each renewal application that is not timely, not properly filed, incomplete, untrue in whole or in part, unaccompanied by the required fee, or results in a determination by the licensing administrator that the applicant has failed to satisfy the requirements of subsection (i)(III) of this section. 
(l)  A license issued or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be transferable, nor shall the ownership structure of the license be so modified as to continue a change in control or ownership of the license, without city commission approval. 
(m)  Each year the City of Key West will utilize the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as set forth by the United States Department of Labor as a guideline for possible rate increase/decrease of the respective duty rotation wrecker/tow companies. 
(Code 1986, § 109.02; Ord. No. 06-04, § 6, 3-7-2006; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-651. - One business under different names. 
    It is the intention of this division that persons engaged in towing service shall not be allowed to seek separate licenses under different names where the ownership of the towing businesses is actually the same and/or the towing services are provided from the same premises. The chief of police and the police department shall have the power to make the necessary investigation to determine if the applicant's equipment is actually owned by and operated from the premises of an applicant who had been issued a permit by the city to be placed on a call list for the purpose of offering towing service on a rotation basis with the police department. If such investigation proves that the applicant is the same owner and/or the equipment is operated from the same premises, the police department shall deny such additional rotation turn. 
(Code 1986, § 109.13) 
Sec. 70-652. - Filing of application, fees. 
    Application to be placed on the rotation call list shall be made to the chief of police in duplicate. An initial application fee of $200.00 shall contemporaneously be submitted to the licensing division. Annual renewal fee shall be $150.00. One of the applications shall be marked by the chief of police and delivered to the city manager disclosing that the applicant owns and possesses a business tax receipt to operate a tow truck and that the fee has been paid. 
(Code 1986, § 109.04; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-653. - Investigation, approval, indemnification. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant(s) for the rotation call list and including any employees and shall approve the application if the applicant meets the requirements set out in this division. The chief of police, upon receipt of the approved application, shall issue for the applicant to be placed on the call list as provided in this division. Companies that are on the city tow rotation list shall enter into an indemnification and hold-harmless agreement benefitting the City of Key West for any subsequent negligence occurring after the city inspection has taken place. 
(Code 1986, § 109.05; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-654. - Wrecker classification; required and optional equipment. 
A.  Wrecker classification and equipment required for placement and retention on the city's rotating call list. 
(1)  Each tow truck owned or maintained by a wrecker operator shall be commercially manufactured and shall conform to all other requirements of this section, as indicated. 
(2)  All tow trucks shall be equipped with a business-type communication radio or mobile telephone or cellular telephone. There shall be one radio or phone for each truck. The equipment shall be licensed and approved by the Federal Communications Commission. The mobile radio or telephone shall enable the wrecker operator to communicate with his trucks within his usual area of operation. A citizens band radio does not meet the requirements of this subsection. 
(3)  In order to be eligible for the city's rotating call list, an operator must possess the following specified wrecker classifications and required equipment: 
(a)  All wreckers (all classifications) shall include the following: 
I.  A cradle, tow plate or tow sling to pick up motor vehicles. The cradle, tow plate or tow sling shall be equipped with safety chains and constructed in such a manner that it will not damage the motor vehicle to be towed. 
II.  Dual rear wheels. 
III.  Clearance and marker lights and all other equipment as required by F.S. ch. 3l6. 
IV.  A rotor beam or strobe-type light, amber in color, mounted on the wrecker in such a manner that it can be seen from the front, rear, and both sides. 
V.  The name, address and telephone number of the wrecker operator shall be painted or permanently affixed in a conspicuous place on both sides of the trucks as required by F.S. § 713.78(2). 
VI.  At least one heavy duty push broom with a minimum width of 24 inches. 
VII.  One square shovel. 
VIII.  One ax. 
IX.  One crowbar or pry-bar with a minimum length of 30 inches. 
X.  Minimum of one five-pound CO 2 or dry chemical fire extinguisher or equivalent. Must be approved type and have a current inspection tag attached. 
XI.  One pair of bolt cutters with a minimum opening of one-half inch. 
XII.  One set of jumper cables. 
XIII.  One four-way lug wrench. 
XIV.  One flashlight. 
XV.  Five 30-minute fuses. 
XVI.  One snatch block for each winch with manufacturer's rating to match winch. 
XVII.  Extra towing chain six to eight feet in length with hooks. 
XVIII.  At least three safety cones or triangle reflectors. 
XIX.  Fifty pounds of sand or petroleum absorbent. 
(b)  Class "A" wreckers (for the removal of cars and light duty trucks and vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less): Specifications and equipment in addition to requirements outlined in subsection (3)(a) of this section, shall be as follows: 
I.  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. A complete, commercially manufactured boom and at least one winch having a manufacturer's combined rating of at least four tons must be mounted on the chassis. Hand crank winches do not satisfy these requirements and will not be approved. 
II.  A minimum of 100 feet of three-eighths-inch cable. 
III.  Dollies. 
IV.  Flood lights on the hoist. 
V.  Vehicles which are equipped with wheel lifts or the equivalent may also qualify as class "A" tow trucks so long as they are equipped with a boom and all other applicable requirements are met. Wheel lifts shall be rated at a minimum of 3,000 pounds lift capacity and must utilize wheel safety straps when lifting vehicles by the wheels only. 
VI.  Operators who wish to remove cars and light trucks may have, in addition to the criteria described in this subsection A(3)(b), or as an alternative to, a roll-back or slide-back carrier truck/trailer with specifications and the equipment as provided in subsection A(3)(c) of this section. 
(c)  As an alternative to the Class "A" wrecker described in subsection A(3)(b) above, an operator may have Class "A" roll-back or slide-back wreckers (for the removal of cars and light duty trucks and vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less): Specifications and equipment for roll-back or slide-back carriers in addition to the requirements outlined in subsection A(3)(a) of this section shall include the following: 
I.  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight with a minimum of a 16-foot bed, dual rear wheels and a winch with at least 8,000 pounds capacity. 
II.  A minimum of 50 feet of three-eighths-inch cable. 
III.  A minimum of two safety tie-down chains of at least ten feet each in length. 
IV.  Two spot (flood) lights mounted on the rear of the carrier. 
V.  A roll-back or slide-back carrier trailer shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  A commercially manufactured carrier trailer with a rated capacity of at least 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight with a minimum 16-foot bed equipped with a winch with at least 8,000 pounds lifting/pulling capacity. 
B.  A minimum of 50 feet of three-eighths-inch cable. 
C.  Brakes and trailer lights which meet the minimum statutory requirements of Florida law. 
D.  Safety chains. 
E.  Must be towed by and used in conjunction with an approved wrecker that meets or exceeds the class of the vehicle to be towed. 
(d)  Class "B" wreckers (for removal of medium duty trucks or vehicles weighing 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less): Specifications and equipment in addition to the requirements outlined in [subsection A](3)(a) of this section, shall be as follows: 
I.  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. A complete, twin-winch, commercially manufactured boom and winches having a manufacturer's combined rating of at least ten-ton capacity mounted on the chassis. 
II.  A minimum of 100 feet of at least one-half-inch cable on each drum. 
III.  One set of scotch blocks for wheels or hydraulic rear-extendable scotch blocks. 
IV.  Flood lights on the hoist. 
(e)  Class "C" wreckers (for removal of heavy duty trucks, house trailers, buses, etc., weighing over 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight): Specifications and equipment in addition to the requirements outlined in [subsection A](3)(a) of this section, shall be as follows: 
I.  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 30,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and 30,000 pounds gross vehicle weight for tandem axle trucks. A complete, twin-winch, commercially manufactured boom and winches having a manufacturer's combined rating of at least 25-ton capacity mounted on the chassis. 
II.  A minimum of 200 feet of at least five-eighths-inch cable on each drum. 
III.  Air brakes so constructed as to lock the rear wheels automatically upon failure. 
IV.  External air hookup and hoses, to supply air to disabled vehicles. 
V.  One set of scotch blocks for wheels or hydraulic rear-extendable scotch blocks. 
VI.  Flood lights on the hoist. 
B.  Optional wrecker classification and required equipment. In addition to wreckers and equipment described in subsection A above, an operator may elect to enhance its operation and towing capabilities by having the optional equipment described below. However, the only wreckers and equipment required for participation in the city's rotating call list is as described in [sub]section A above. 
(f)  Class D wrecker. The requirements for a Class "D" wrecker are as follows: 
I.  Commercially manufactured unit, with a rated capacity of not less than 52,000 pounds, GVW, according to the manufacturer's identification plate. Any modification to increase GVW must be documented by the dealer or manufacturer. 
II.  Cab to bogey dimension of not less than 180 inches. 
III.  Commercially manufactured boom or booms with a minimum total capacity of 70,000 pounds. 
IV.  Hydraulically operated winch or winches with a minimum total winching capacity of 70,000 pounds. 
V.  Two hundred feet of three-fourths-inch steel core cable per winch. 
VI.  Hydraulically operated under reach with a retracted rating of not less than 45,000 pounds and an extended rating of not less than 12,000 pounds. 
VII.  Rear support jacks or outriggers. 
VIII.  Two one-half-inch alloy safety chains. 
IX.  Tow bar or tow-sling equipped. 
X.  External air hookup and minimum hoses to supply air to disabled vehicles. 
XI.  Two snatch blocks, minimum 24,000-pound capacity for each. 
XII.  Spring brake-air lock. 
XIII.  Two scotch blocks. 
XIV.  Six to eight feet of extra towing chain with hoods, minimum 4,000- pound capacity. 
C.  This section only applies to wrecker operators providing towing services to law enforcement agencies pursuant to the city's rotating call list. 
D.  Operators actively providing services pursuant to the city's rotating call list shall ensure all required wreckers and equipment are available to timely respond to calls for service in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1986, § 109.03; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 12-09, § 1, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 70-655. - Disapproval, appeal. 
    If a person's application to be placed on the rotating call list is disapproved, the police department shall immediately notify the applicant accordingly. If the application for placement on the rotating list is disapproved by the police department, such applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the police department by filing a notice of such appeal to the city commission with the city clerk within 20 days after notification to the applicant by the police department of its disapproval. The application fee shall not be refunded if the application is denied. 
(Code 1986, § 109.06) 
Sec. 70-656. - Insurance required. 
    No person for compensation shall recover, tow, or remove a motor vehicle or provide motor vehicle storage or otherwise function as a wrecker operator until that person maintains in effect an insurance policy which shall insure it for its liability at a minimum, as follows: 
(1)  For each tow truck, combined single limit of $500,000.00; and 
(2)  For garagekeeper's liability, not less than $50,000.00 for each loss covering perils of fire and explosion, theft of a motor vehicle and parts or contents, riot and civil commotion, vandalism, malicious mischief, and for on-hook protection; provided, however, that the requirement of this subsection may be adjusted, at the discretion of the chief of police, for an applicant who would propose to remove abandoned vehicles from the rights-of-way or public places of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 109.07; Ord. No. 06-04, § 7, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-657. - Removal from rotating call list; revocation or suspension of license. 
    On written complaint of any person or by its own initiation, the city manager or his/her designee may investigate the activities or action of a business licensed under this article to determine if there are grounds for revocation or suspension of a license. The city manager or designee, upon notice to the licensee and upon noticed hearing, shall determine if the license should be revoked or suspended based on evidence and testimony presented at the hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 109.08; Ord. No. 06-04, § 8, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-658. - Rates. 
(1)  For the removal and storage of wrecked or disabled motor vehicles or for the removal and storage of abandoned motor vehicles at the request of a law enforcement officer, the maximum rate that may be charged by a wrecker operator is: 
(a)  Class "A" wrecker service - $135.00. 
I.  For motorcycles, cars and vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or less. 
II.  Inside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $2.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
III.  Outside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $1.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
IV.  Hourly charge in prorated quarter hour increments beginning 60 minutes after arrival - $135.00. 
V.  Administrative fee per notification - $25.00. 
(b)  Class "B" wrecker service - $200.00. 
I.  For vehicles weighing 20,000 pounds or less. 
II.  Inside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $2.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
III.  Outside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $1.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
IV.  Hourly charge in prorated quarter hour increments beginning 60 minutes after arrival - $180.00. 
V.  Administrative fee per notification - $25.00. 
(c)  Class "C" and "D" wrecker service - $485.00. 
I.  For vehicles weighing between 20,000 pounds to 52,000 pounds. 
II.  Inside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $2.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
III.  Outside storage per day (after the first six hours) - $40.00 plus $1.00 per foot for vehicles over 20 feet in length. 
IV.  Hourly charge in prorated quarter hour increments beginning 60 minutes after arrival - $300.00. 
V.  Administrative fee per notification - $25.00. 
(2)  The daily storage rate must be prorated in six-hour increments when the vehicle is retrieved by the owner or his agent. The administrative fee may only be charged when notice is sent by the operator to the motor vehicle owner and any lien holder(s). 
(3)  Ordinary towing and road service shall include the use of a sling or wheel lift when required to be used to render the service, and no additional charges are to be made for use of the sling or wheel lift. 
(4)  Additional rates. Charges for towing and road service in addition to those set forth in subsection (a) of this section are permitted, when necessary and applicable, as follows: 
(a)  For extraordinary tows, an hourly rate may be charged by the tow company. Whether the tow is extraordinary and eligible for the additional hourly charge shall be authorized or ratified by the police chief or his designee. The hourly rate shall be cumulative for all employees of the tow company involved in the extraordinary tow. The hourly rate shall be $100.00 per hour. 
(b)  For use of a GoJac or other type of dolly, a device to lift individual wheels manually, the rate shall be $30.00. 
(c)  If the tow company is required to remove either a front or rear axle in order to perform the tow, the rate shall be $40.00. 
(d)  If the tow company is required to remove a drive shaft in order to perform the tow, the rate shall be $50.00. 
(e)  Use of a Lo-Boy trailer for carrying vehicles the rate shall be $300.00. However, a Lo-Boy shall not be used and therefore not charged simultaneously with a class C wrecker. 
(f)  The tow company shall not charge for mileage for tows of vehicles or vessels on land picked up in the city and brought to the tow company's storage area. For any other tow, at the direction of the police department, the tow company may charge a mileage fee of $3.00 per mile. 
(g)  Sales tax shall be added to all charges under this section. 
(5)  In the event a law enforcement officer needs a tow truck for a towable violation, and once the towing service has been requested by the officer at the violation site and the operator has advised the officer that he is en route to the request, should the owner or driver of the motor vehicle in violation return to the vehicle site before the operator has arrived at the motor vehicle there shall be no charge to the operator for the tow. If the operator returns to a vehicle before the operator has departed with the vehicle, and upon the officer's authorization to release the vehicle to the owner or driver, then the owner or driver of the vehicle shall pay a charge of not more than one-half of the base rate for the class of towing service called for, only if the vehicle has been completely secured to the tow truck prior to the operator's actual arrival at the tow site consistent with F.S. § 715.07 and city ordinances regarding private property tows. 
(6)  Towing companies may charge an additional $20.00 per vehicle as compensation for all certified letters and all other time and expenses incurred through compliance with F.S. § 713.78, provided that the charge shall not be due and owing until the towing service has complied with the notice requirements of the statute. 
(7)  This section applies only to rates charged by towing services called at the request of a law enforcement officer, rather than by direction of the owner of the vehicle or vessel on land. In all other situations this section does not apply, and the parties may negotiate prices and rates as in other ordinary service contracts. 
(8)  In addition to accepting cash, all tow companies shall accept traveler's checks and credit cards from vehicle and vessel owners. Tow companies operating on the city tow rotation list shall afford owners a reasonable time to secure an acceptable method of payment and must have a written policy in place regarding accepting credit or debit cards on site at all times. 
(9)  A wrecker operator may dispatch a heavier class of wrecker to the site but may charge no more than the rates applicable to the type of service required. Should a recreational vehicle, boat, or other type of trailer be attached to a motor vehicle which requires towing, and only one tow truck is required to remove the vehicle and its trailer, only one tow charge may be levied for the combined length of the vehicle and its trailer. 
(Code 1986, § 109.09; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-659. - Display of rates. 
    Every towing service operating under this division shall conspicuously display at its place of business the maximum charges that may be imposed for ordinary towing and road service under this section, and failure to do so shall be an offense punishable as provided by Sec. 1-15. All operators shall provide a copy of the posted tow charges to any vehicle owner or operator upon request. 
(Code 1986, § 109.10; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-660. - Billing for charges. 
(1)  The owner or operator of a towing service shall have prepared billheads setting forth the name and address of the place of business of the towing service. Before removing a disabled vehicle a bill on such billhead form, in duplicate, shall be prepared, the original of which shall be given to the owner or operator of the disabled vehicle or his authorized representative if available and a duplicate copy shall be retained by the towing service. Bills shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the person engaging in the towing service. 
(b)  The state license number of the disabled vehicle. 
(c)  The total amount to be charged for the towing service, if known. 
(2)  The towing service shall retain a duplicate copy of the bill for a period of six months and shall produce the copy upon demand of the police department or any other person who removes the disabled vehicle from the compound of the wrecker service to any other place. 
(Code 1986, § 109.11; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-661. - Storage facilities. 
(1)  Wrecker operators shall provide storage facilities which shall be maintained at the operator's place of business. These facilities must be fenced and locked for the protection of vehicles and property. 
(2)  The wrecker operator shall provide storage for all impounded/towed vehicles in an outside storage area unless specific written instructions are given for inside storage by the impounding law enforcement officer. If required for investigative purposes, the wrecker operator shall move the vehicle(s) to a designated area for processing prior to storage. In such instance, the law enforcement agency will not authorize release of the vehicle until all outstanding charges by the operator, as authorized by this section have been satisfied. 
(3)  The wrecker operator shall not change the type of storage facility (inside or outside) afforded a vehicle without written permission from the officer in charge. The wrecker operator shall not change the storage facility location without first obtaining written permission from the officer in charge. 
(4)  The storage facility must be owned or leased solely by the wrecker operator and vehicles stored by the operator must be separately fenced and locked. 
(5)  The registered owner of a vehicle or the owner's representatives or owner's insurance adjusters, upon proper identification, shall be permitted to inspect or photograph stored vehicles during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., on days they are engaged in towing. The wrecker operator shall not require the owner, adjuster or representative to pay any fee in order to inspect or photograph the stored vehicle. 
(6)  All fencing shall be chain-link or solid-wall type and at least six feet in height where permissible under land use regulations of the county to discourage theft of any vehicle or any property being stored inside. All storage facilities shall be illuminated with lighting of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 150 feet during nighttime. 
(7)  Permanent inside storage facilities must be available for 24-hour storage when weather or other conditions require inside storage for the protection of the vehicle or personal property. A lean-to, tent or shed does not meet the requirements of this section. Inside storage must be within a weather-tight building. A container shall not be a considered a weather-tight building. 
(8)  A minimum of 25 storage spaces with three inside storage spaces must be available. Service bays or repair bays do not qualify as inside storage, nor does any area that is utilized for any activity other than serving as a permanent inside storage area, when vehicles are actually stored inside at the request of a law enforcement agency or the owner of a vehicle. 
(9)  Wrecker operators shall comply with hold orders placed by the law enforcement agency, including any instructions for inside or outside storage. Vehicles involved in a fatality and sealed by the traffic homicide investigator shall remain intact until the seals are removed by the investigator. No property of any kind shall be released to anyone without authority of the homicide investigator. If no fatality occurred, then the vehicle and the property may be released by the wrecker operator upon valid proof of ownership once the hold is released. 
(10)  A copy of an inventory prepared by the law enforcement agency, of all personal property found in a wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle shall be provided to the wrecker operator. The wrecker operator shall permit the removal of such property by the vehicle owner or his agent from a stored vehicle during normal business hours without charge. The agent's authority shall be evidenced by a writing acknowledged by the owner before a notary public or other person empowered by law to administer oaths. A signed receipt for each article removed by the owner or his agent shall be obtained. Personal property shall be defined as any item not affixed to the vehicle which was in the vehicle at the time of the tow. In the case of vehicles stored where no "hold order" has been placed, the wrecker operator will directly release any vehicle upon presentation of proper proof of identification and ownership. If these conditions cannot be met due to unusual or extraordinary circumstances, the vehicle will be released only upon authorization obtained from the law enforcement agency. 
(11)  Wrecker operators handling the initial tow shall exercise reasonable care and control of parts and contents located in vehicles while under their protection or while in storage. 
(12)  During the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; or on any day they are actively engaged in towing, wrecker operators will provide adequate staffing at the storage facility so that personal property may be removed from the vehicle or the vehicle itself may be released without undue delay. If the property or vehicle is to be released after hours the wrecker operator will respond within 60 minutes to release the property or vehicle. 
(13)  Should it become necessary that personal property be removed from a vehicle or a vehicle be released when the storage facility is not staffed, the wrecker operator will be required to do so and allowed to charge a reasonable fee to cover actual expenses limited to $30.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 70-662. - Penalties. 
    Violations shall be prosecuted under section 1-15 and/or suspension from both the duty and abandoned tow rotation list consistent with the provisions above. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-663. - Sunset; competitive solicitation. 
    The division shall sunset and be of no further effect upon the city commission's issuance of a competitive solicitation for police initiated tows, subsequent acceptance of a vendor or vendors and final implementation of a contract to provide such services. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2-15-2011) 
Secs. 70-664-70-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NON-CONSENSUAL PRIVATE TOWING SERVICES 

Sec. 70-701. - Authority. 
    This division is enacted pursuant to the statutory power of the City of Key West to establish and enforce business regulations necessary for the protection of the public, and pursuant to F.S. §§ 166.043(1)(b) and 715.07. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-702. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as "The Non-Consensual Private Towing Services Ordinance of the City of Key West." 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 2, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-703. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to regulate non-consensual tows consistent with federal and state laws and to create a mechanism for the establishment of maximum permissible rates which may be charged for the towing and storage of motor vehicles/vessels by private persons not acting at the behest of local, county, state, or federal government and without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 3, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-704. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Commission shall mean the city commission of the City of Key West, Florida. 
    Custodian shall mean one lawfully authorized and entrusted to possess, guard, maintain, and/or operate the property of another. 
    Division (except as the context otherwise indicates) shall mean the City of Key West Parking Division. The duties of the Division hereunder may also be supplemented and/or exercised by the Key West Police Department and licensing department upon the direction of the city manager. 
    Immobilizing shall mean rendering a vehicle incapable of being driven by means of a wheel-locking boot or other device. 
    Non-consent or non-consensual private towing services shall mean the immobilizing, towing and/or storage of a vehicle or vessel, without the prior express consent of the owner or custodian, by any person who is not acting pursuant to a contract with a unit of local, county, state, or federal government. 
    Owner shall mean that person who exercises dominion and control over a vehicle, other personal property, or real property, including, but not limited to, the legal titleholder, lessee, designated representative of a condominium association, or any other person authorized to share dominion and control over the property. 
    Person shall mean any natural person, or any association, corporation, firm, joint venture, partnership, or other entity. 
    Storage shall mean the safekeeping of a vehicle which has been towed under the authority of this division. 
    Towing or tow shall mean taking possession of a vehicle and its contents, exercising control, supervision and responsibility over it, and changing its location by immobilizing, hauling, drawing, or pulling it by means of another vehicle, with or without booms, car carriers, winches, or similar equipment. 
    Vehicle shall mean an automobile, bus, motorcycle, recreational unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, semi-trailer, semi-trailer combination, trailer, truck, truck-tractor, van, or any other mechanized conveyance used to transport persons or property and designed to operate on public roads without a fixed track. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 4, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-705. - Operating permit required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct non-consensual private towing services, or to cause or permit any other person for compensation to conduct non-consensual private towing services in the city without first obtaining a non-consensual tow permit under this division. It shall also be unlawful to advertise said services without first obtaining and maintaining a current non-consensual tow permit pursuant to the provisions of this division. A person conducting non-consent tows in the city but having his/her primary place of business outside of the city shall be required to obtain a non-consensual tow permit and shall be subject to all the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit the discharge or storage of a vehicle lawfully recovered, towed or removed in another city or county and lawfully transported into the city; nor shall anything in this division be construed to prohibit a vehicle owner from requesting the services of a towing business not regularly doing business in the city (i.e., routinely, contracted, etc.) To tow or transport such vehicle out of the city. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to governmental agencies and persons operating pursuant to a government-initiated tow request. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 5, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-706. - New applications/renewals and issuance of non-consensual tow permit; fees. 
(a)  Permit. 
(1)  The Division shall issue a non-consensual tow permit to persons that have met the requirements as provided for in this division. 
(2)  If the non-consensual tow applicant holds a valid towing license issued pursuant to section 70-650, the non-consensual tow permit shall be issued upon request and payment as described in subsection 70-706(l). 
(b)  Every application/renewal for an operating permit shall be in writing, signed and verified by the applicant, and filed with the Division. The application/renewal shall be on a form prescribed by the Division and shall contain the same information required by Key West City Code of Ordinances subsection 70-650(1)(e). 
(c)  The Division shall review and investigate each application/renewal of a non-consensual tow permit and shall deny any application/renewal that is incomplete or untrue in whole or in part, or which fails in any way to meet the requirements of this division. 
(d)  The applicant must submit to a background check, and to be eligible for a non-consensual tow permit the Division must find that: 
(1)  Neither the applicant, nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant, has a currently suspended permit, has had its permit revoked by action of the licensing official within two years of the date of application, or has outstanding and unsatisfied civil penalties imposed on account of violations of this article. 
(2)  Neither the applicant, nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant, has been convicted of one or more felonies within the preceding five years; or that three misdemeanors have been committed within the 36-month period preceding the date of the application, unless the civil rights of such individual or applicant have been restored or that such person has successfully completed all sentences of incarceration, probationary periods, required rehabilitation activities and payment of all fines and penalties imposed. For applicants requesting renewal, the licensing official may only consider crimes committed after the date the applicant obtained his license, unless such crimes were not previously disclosed in the original application. 
(3)  Each corporate or partnership application is qualified under the state law to do business under the trade name or names under which it has applied for a license. 
(4)  No fraud or willful or knowing misrepresentation or false statement was made in the application. 
(5)  No judgment against the applicant arising out of the activity of recovery, towing or removing a vehicle or providing storage in connection therewith remains unsatisfied, unless a stay or reversal of the judgment is procured through the courts. 
(6)  No outstanding warrants of arrest against the applicant nor any officer, director or partner of the applicant, nor any stockholder owning, holding, controlling or having a beneficial interest in five percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate general partner of a partnership applicant. 
(e)  If there are six months or less remaining before the annual renewal period, the nonrefundable fee for the non-consensual tow permit shall be 50 percent of the approved fee, otherwise all other fees are applicable. 
(f)  Except for the initial permit, each non-consensual tow permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid and effective for a maximum of one year. Each non-consensual tow permit shall terminate on June 30 of each year. 
(g)  Persons failing to submit a complete and true application within 30 calendar days after the Division's receipt and any notification of the incompleteness of the application shall be denied a non-consensual tow permit. 
(h)  All non-consensual tow permits shall be renewed annually. As a part of the renewal process, the original application shall be updated and verified by the applicant. Each updated renewal application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. All non-consensual tow permits which are not renewed shall automatically expire upon the expiration date of the permit, and all non-consensual tows shall cease immediately. The Division shall deny each renewal application that is not timely, is incomplete, is untrue in whole or in part, is unaccompanied by the required fees, or results in a determination by the Division that the applicant has failed to satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(i)  After initial application and upon renewal, the applicant shall submit to a background investigation every other year. 
(j)  Each non-consensual tow permit shall be printed on a certificate containing, at a minimum, the name and address of the company, the name of the principal, the dates the operating permit is in effect, and any identifying number assigned by the Division to the company. The non-consensual tow permit certificate issued by the Division shall remain the property of the City of Key West and shall be used only under the authority of the division. 
(k)  A non-consensual tow permit issued or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be transferable, nor shall the ownership structure of the operating permit be so modified as to constitute a change in the control or ownership of the operating permit. If the business changes its name or ownership structure, a new business permit application and the business application permit fee shall be submitted to the division within 45 days of said change. In cases where the name of the business changes, the new business will be required to have each vehicle inspected and must also pay decal/vehicle fees. 
(l)  An initial application fee of $200.00 shall contemporaneously be submitted to the licensing division. Annual renewal fee shall be $150.00. 
(m)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall result in denial of a non-consensual tow permit, revocation or suspension of the permit, a denial of renewal of such permit, issuance of a civil citation, a criminal conviction and/or other such remedies available to the Division as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 6, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-707. - Maximum rates for non-consensual towing services. 
(a)  The maximum rate for nonconsensual private towing services shall be as follows: 
(1)  $135.00 for mopeds, motorcycles, cars and vehicles/vessels weighing 10,000 pounds or less. 
(2)  $200.00 for vehicles/vessels weighing between 10,001 and 20,000 pounds. 
(3)  $485.00 for vehicles/vessels weighing in excess of 20,000 pounds. 
(4)  A labor rate of up to a maximum of $135.00 per hour may be applied in circumstances where extraordinary effort, such as the use of multiple tow trucks, is required. 
(b)  Storage fees may be charged only after the vehicle has been in the storage facility for at least six hours. If the vehicle is not recovered by the vehicle/vessel owner after the six-hour time period has elapsed, then storage charges shall accrue in 24-hour increments from the time the vehicle/vessel arrived in the storage facility at the rate of $30.00 per day for outside storage plus $2.00 per foot for motor vehicles over 20 feet long and $40.00 per day for inside storage plus $2.00 per foot for motor vehicles over 20 feet long. 
(c)  An administrative/lien fee in the maximum amount of $25.00 shall be charged for all vehicles. A notification/lien fee of $50.00 for the first notification and $20.00 for each additional letter shall only be charged after the vehicle/vessel has been in the storage facility for at least 24 hours. The non-consent tow truck company must show proof that lien letter(s) have been prepared with the appropriate names/addresses (i.e., U.S. Mail Certification Number, correspondence copies, etc.) and that actual fees for obtaining required ownership information have been expended. Failure to document and provide all of the above-required information will result in administrative/lien fee charges being removed from the total cost of the service/invoice and is a violation of this division. Prior to instituting such charge, the tow company must provide such documentation to the vehicle/vessel owner upon demand. 
(d)  After-hour gate fees may not be applied between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (excluding federal holidays). The maximum amount of such after-hours gate fee shall be $75.00. 
(e)  Persons who provide services pursuant to this division shall not charge in excess of the maximum allowable rates established by the commission. No person providing services pursuant to this section shall charge any type of fee other than the rates the commission has specifically established. Persons who provide non-consensual tow services from the city to a location outside the city shall abide by the terms of this division including all rates and charges adopted by the commission. 
(f)  Persons who provide non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall provide a City of Key West, Florida Maximum Non-Consent Towing Rates sheet to the vehicle or vessel owner upon request at the time of payment. 
(g)  Upon payment of the fees specified herein, persons who provide non-consensual tow services in areas where the speed limit exceeds 35 mph shall make reasonable arrangements to return any noncommercially owned moped, electric car and similar reduced-speed vehicle to the Key West city limit without charge to the vehicle owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 7, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 15-18, § 1, 12-16-2015) 
Sec. 70-708. - Non-consent tow truck company requirements. 
(a)  Non-consent tow truck companies which provide services pursuant to this division shall advise any vehicle/vessel owner who calls by telephone prior to arriving at the storage facility of the following: 
(1)  Each and every document or other item which must be produced to retrieve the vehicle/vessel; 
(2)  The exact charges as of the time of the telephone call, and the rate at which charges accumulate after the call; 
(3)  The acceptable methods of payment; and 
(4)  The hours and days the storage facility is open for regular business. 
(b)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall allow every vehicle/vessel owner to inspect the interior and exterior of the towed vehicle upon his or her arrival at the storage facility before payment of any charges (except for "after-hour gate fee"). With the exception of a vehicle being held pursuant to the specific request or "hold order" of a law enforcement agency, the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent shall be permitted to remove the vehicle license tag and any and all personal property inside but not affixed to the vehicle/vessel. A vehicle/vessel owner who shows a government-issued photo identification shall be given access to view ownership documents stored in the vehicle/vessel. The vehicle/vessel and/or personal property shall be released to the vehicle/vessel owner if the ownership documents are consistent (name and address) with the photo identification. When a vehicle/vessel owner's government-issued identification and ownership documents are stored inside the impounded vehicle due to unforeseen circumstances, the tow truck company shall be required to recover the ownership documents stored in the impounded vehicle (i.e., glove compartment, sun visors, etc.) upon receipt of a vehicle/vessel key, vehicle access code, or electronic device from the vehicle/vessel owner that would allow entry. The vehicle/vessel and/or personal property shall be released to the vehicle/vessel owner if the ownership documents are consistent with the photo identification. 
(c)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall accept payment for charges from the vehicle/vessel owner in all the following forms: 
(1)  Cash, money order or valid traveler's check; and 
(2)  Valid bank debit/credit card, which shall include, but not be limited to, MasterCard or VISA. 
(d)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall not store or impound a towed vehicle/vessel at a distance which exceeds a ten-mile radius of the location from which the vehicle/vessel was recovered, towed or removed unless no towing company providing services under this division is located within a ten-mile radius, in which case a towed or removed vehicle/vessel must be stored at a site within 20 miles of the point of removal. 
(e)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall maintain one or more storage facilities, each of which shall maintain a current business tax receipt and when applicable a municipal business tax receipt. The storage facility must be secured and fenced with a minimum of six feet fencing, lighted and equipped with a lock or enclosed building and otherwise comply with the City of Key West Code of Ordinances. The business shall be open for the purpose of redemption of vehicles/vessels by owners on any day that the tow truck company is open for towing purposes. A business shall be considered open for towing purposes if it has vehicles engaged in towing services at the time. At a minimum, each business operating pursuant to a non-consensual tow permit shall be open from at least 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. When closed, each business shall have posted prominently on the exterior of the storage facility and place of business, if different, a notice indicating a telephone number where the tow truck company can be reached at all times. Upon request of the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent, the tow truck company shall release the vehicle/vessel to the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent within one hour. 
(f)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall not, as a condition of release of the vehicle/vessel, require a vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent to sign any release or waiver of any kind which would release the tow truck company from liability for damages noted by the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent at the time of the vehicle's/vessel's release. A detailed, signed receipt showing the legal name of the tow truck company removing the vehicle/vessel shall be given to the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent at the time of payment, whether requested or not. 
(g)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall release vehicles/vessels towed or removed to the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver/agent [who] provides proof of ownership documents. Proof of ownership documents shall include: 
(1)  Current vehicle registration; 
(2)  Vehicle title; 
(3)  An authorized driver/agent with a notarized release from the vehicle/vessel owner or lien holder. Vehicle/vessel owners have the right to identify/approve designated agents to claim vehicles on their behalf. A facsimile or electronic transfer of a notarized release statement from the vehicle/vessel owner shall be accepted; 
(4)  Insurance card with the vehicle/vessel owner's information and vehicle description; 
(5)  Licensed dealer in possession of an auction buyer's sales invoice; and/or 
(6)  A notarized bill of sale for nontitled vehicles or vessels. 
(h)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division shall make a "good faith effort" to locate the vehicle/vessel owner or lien holder. For the purposes of this paragraph and subsection, a "good faith effort" means that the required steps have been performed by the tow truck company according to F.S. § 713.78(4)(d). Failure to make a "good faith effort" to comply with the notification requirements of this section shall preclude the imposition of any storage charges against such vehicle or vessel. 
(i)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services pursuant to this division and found to be in violation of this division relating to a specific non-consent tow shall be required to immediately reimburse the vehicle/vessel owner all illegal or over charges related to that towing incident. Failure to reimburse the owner of the vehicle/vessel in such cases is a violation of this division. 
(j)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person providing non-consensual tow services to fail to respond in writing within ten business days to any written inquiry or request for information from the division or any law enforcement agency. 
(k)  No person shall engage in non-consent or non-consensual private towing services unless that person maintains in effect an insurance policy which shall insure it for its liability at a minimum, as follows: 
(1)  For each tow truck, combined single limit of $500,000.00; and 
(2)  For garage keeper's liability, not less than $50,000.00 for each loss covering perils of fire and explosion, theft of a motor vehicle and parts or contents, riot and civil commotion, vandalism, malicious mischief, and for on-hook protection; and 
(3)  Workers compensation and employer's liability insurance as required by statute. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 8, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 15-18, § 2, 12-16-2015) 
Sec. 70-709. - Non-consent towing with prior express instruction of real property owner or duly authorized agent and/or law enforcement agency. 
    In addition to the other requirements of this division, no person shall engage in non-consensual towing services or provide storage in connection therewith without the prior express instruction of the vehicle/vessel owner or authorized driver, except in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Persons providing non-consensual tow services in accordance with applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West, may for compensation recover, tow or remove a vehicle/vessel based upon a police-directed tow without the prior express instruction of the vehicle/vessel owner. 
(b)  Persons may provide non-consensual tow services without the authorization of the vehicle/vessel owner upon the prior express instruction of the real property owner or his duly authorized agent on whose property the vehicle/vessel is disabled, abandoned or parked without authorization or whose vehicle/vessel owner or authorized agent is unwilling or unable to remove the vehicle/vessel, provided that the requirements of this division are satisfied. The non-consent tow truck company recovering, towing or removing a vehicle/vessel shall, within 30 minutes of completion of such towing or removal, notify the appropriate law enforcement agency in which jurisdiction the vehicle/vessel was parked of the nature of the service rendered, the name and address of the storage facility where the vehicle/vessel will be stored, the time the vehicle was secured to the towing vehicle, and the make, model, color and vehicle/vessel license plate number (if any). The person providing non-consensual tow services shall obtain the name of the person at the law enforcement agency to whom such information was reported and note that name on the trip record. 
(c)  No person providing non-consensual tow services shall pay or rebate money, or solicit or offer the rebate of money, or other valuable consideration in order to obtain the privilege of rendering towing services. 
(d)  Each person providing non-consensual tow services shall enter into a written contract with every owner or duly authorized agent of private property that authorizes non-consensual tow services on or from its property. This written contract shall include the beginning date of said contract, the names of all persons who can authorize prior express instruction to the tow truck company to remove, recover or tow any vehicle/vessel on or from its property. The written contract shall include the name and current telephone number of the tow truck company performing the towing service, and the name, address and telephone number for any duly authorized agents acting on behalf of the real property owner. The written contract for non-consent towing shall also include a clear understanding of liability for the real property owner as stated in F.S. § 715.07, which statute shall be included as an exhibit to the contract. No such contract shall state that the person providing non-consensual tow services assumes the liability for improperly towed vehicles/vessels, contrary to F.S. § 715.07(4). The person providing non-consensual tow services must keep on file each contract and addendum (if applicable) with the property owner. Such contract shall be maintained for at least 12 months after termination. The Division and law enforcement officers may inspect and request a copy of any and all such contracts from the person providing non-consensual tow services during normal business hours. The person providing non-consensual tow services may not withhold production of the contract upon demand by the Division or law enforcement. Failure to enter into or keep on file a contract with the property owner shall be a violation of this division. All contracts which were entered into prior to the effective date of this division, shall accomplish the requirements of this subsection by entering into an addendum to the current contract within three months following the enactment of this division. 
(e)  Real property owners or authorized representatives shall not request the recovery, tow or the removal of vehicles/vessels that are reasonably identifiable from markings or equipment as law enforcement, firefighting, rescue squad, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles/vessels which are marked as such. 
(f)  Any person who improperly causes a vehicle/vessel to be recovered, towed, removed or stored shall be liable to the vehicle owner or authorized representative for the costs of the services provided, any damages resulting from the recovery, towing, removal or storage and attorney's fees and court costs in accordance with Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 9, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 70-710. - Enforcement and penalties for violations. 
(a)  All law enforcement officials are hereby authorized to assist in the enforcement of this division to the extent that it is within their respective jurisdictions to do so. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this division. Any such violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West, including a fine of not more than $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment. Each day that any of the towing or storage rates provisions of this division are violated shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(c)  The penalties described in subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any other equitable relief, or revocation of any permit or license by any governmental entity. Should any person violate or fail to comply with any provision of this division, the office of the city attorney may make application to the circuit court for the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida for an order to enjoin such violation or failure of compliance. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties described above, any owner who is found to have violated this division on two or more occasions shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of its non-consensual tow permit. Within ten days of a finding that an owner has violated two or more provisions of this division the city manager shall schedule a hearing with the violator. The city manager shall hear testimony and/or evidence of the nature of the violations and any circumstances associated therewith. After such hearing the city manager may suspend or revoke the violator's non-consensual tow permit for a period of up to one year based upon the gravity and frequency of the violations. The violator may appeal the city manager's decision to the city commission by filing written notice with the city clerk within three days of the city manager's written determination. The city commission shall set the matter for hearing with appropriate public notice for the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. By majority vote, the commission may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager based upon the factors considered by the city manager and those brought before the commission at hearing. 
(Ord. No. 11-22, § 10, 12-6-2011) 
Secs. 70-711-70-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - OTHER TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 70-801. - Personal assistive mobility devices prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on any street, road or bicycle path in the City of Key West. It shall be unlawful to operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on any sidewalk in the historic district of the city. It shall be unlawful to conduct or participate in a sightseeing tour in Key West with personal assistive mobility devices. 
(b)  Electric personal assistive mobility device means any self-balancing, two-nontandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, with an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (1 horsepower), the maximum speed of which, on a paved level surface when powered solely by such a propulsion system while being ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 miles per hour. Electric personal assistive mobility devices are not vehicles. 
(c)  Federal, state and local governmental agencies and utilities are hereby exempted from the prohibition of this section. 
(d)  The prohibition set forth in this section does not apply to wheelchairs or to any mobility device designed or used to assist a disabled person. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 7-1-2003) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-17, adopted Oct. 21, 2008, added provisions designated as §§ 70-661 and 70-662. To avoid duplication of section numbers, already existing § 70-661 has been redesignated as § 70-671, at the discretion of the editor. 
Additionally, this section was renumbered from § 70-671 to § 70-801, to accommodate the addition of §§ 70-701-70-710 by Ord. No. 11-22. 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical wiring and service for floating homes, § 14-186; electricity, § 14-221 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; level of service for drainage facilities, § 94-69; historic preservation, ch. 102; planning and development, ch. 108; concurrency facilities and other utilities or services, § 108-233; site plans for utility lines, § 108-282; utilities, § 108-956; resources protection, ch. 110; posting notices, signs or advertising matter on trees, poles or public property, § 114-2. 
State Law reference- Water and wastewater systems, F.S. ch. 367. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Impact fees for sanitary sewers, § 54-151 et seq.; level of service for sanitary sewer, § 94-67. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base charge unit means a unit of measure for billing purposes designated as a waste connection to the city's sewer system, each unit being defined as a residential user (residential living space), an unmetered well or cistern owned and used by a residential user, or, as determined by the city, wastes equivalent to the average residential dwelling unit wastewater contribution to the city's sewer system per month by a nonresidential user. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Director means the director of the city sewer facility or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Equivalent residential unit means a unit of measure for billing purposes equivalent to a water consumption of 3,000 gallons per month of normal domestic strength sewage. 
    Extranormal strength sewage means sewage with a BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) exceeding 350 milligrams per liter and/or TSS (total suspended solids) exceeding 350 milligrams per liter, and not containing industrial wastes, prohibited discharges, or harmful wastes as set forth in this article. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trades, or businesses as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Infiltration and inflow means groundwater and surface water that enters into the sewer system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
    Living unit means a single-family dwelling, apartment, mobile home, condominium unit, motel or hotel unit to which service is made available by the utility and which is offered for human occupancy, whether or not such unit is occupied. For purposes of commercial billing, any warehouse, office, room or other unit separately occupied or offered for commercial occupancy shall be considered a living unit. 
    Major contributing industry means as defined by 40 CFR 128.124. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic strength sewage means sewage with a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) not exceeding 350 milligrams per liter and total suspended solids (TSS) not exceeding 350 milligrams per liter and not containing industrial wastes, prohibited discharges, or harmful wastes as set forth in this article. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Private sewage treatment plant means an arrangement of services and structures used for treating sewage which is not owned or controlled by public authority. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Sludge means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain and storm sewer mean a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Utility means the city sewer utility. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1986, § 74.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-27. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all persons and property within the city limits and to any other persons or property who may from time to time utilize the services or facilities of the sewer utility. 
(Code 1986, § 74.01) 
Sec. 74-28. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article, except section 74-34, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently erase all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15 or by the code enforcement special master. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city because of such violation. 
(Code 1986, § 74.11) 
Sec. 74-29. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city, agents or independent contractors, as designated by the city manager, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with this article. The director shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  The director and other duly authorized city employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1986, § 74.03) 
Sec. 74-30. - Observance of company's safety rules by city; indemnification of company by city. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 74-29, the director or duly authorized city employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death of the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as are required in section 74-173. 
(Code 1986, § 74.04) 
Sec. 74-31. - Unlawful deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public property within the city or any area under the city's jurisdiction any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1986, § 74.05) 
Sec. 74-32. - Discharges to natural outlets. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the city's jurisdiction any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 74.06) 
Sec. 74-33. - Use of septic tanks, cesspools or other sewage disposal facilities. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1986, § 74.07) 
State Law reference- On-site individual sewerage system, F.S. § 381.0065. 
Sec. 74-34. - Damaging equipment of sewer system. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1986, § 74.10) 
Sec. 74-35. - Shallow injection wells. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct and operate in the city any shallow injection well used for sewage disposal. 
(b)  Upon application and showing of a great public need or necessity and lack of a reasonable alternative, the city commission may grant an exemption to subsection (a) of this section. The grant of an exemption shall not operate to exempt any applicant from section 74-131 requiring connection to the sanitary sewer when available within 100 feet of the applicant's property line. 
(c)  Any shallow injection well permitted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section is subject to the provision of a well depth of not less than 150 feet with a casing depth of not less than 100 feet. There shall be no less than tertiary level of treatment, defined as nutrient stripping meeting a standard of no more than 1.5 parts per million of phosphorus as the average over two consecutive quarters and nitrogen content of no more than ten parts per million. At the expense of the permit holder, the permit holder is to submit reports to the city commission documenting that the standards relating to nutrient stripping are being met pursuant to testing of the effluent. If the standards are not met for two consecutive quarters, the permit shall come before the city commission for review and possible revocation. 
(d)  Monitoring and testing standards required by subsection (c) of this section shall be conducted as required by F.A.C. chs. 17.601.100 through 17.601.900. 
(Code 1986, § 74.20) 
Secs. 74-36-74-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON-SITE AND OTHER PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 74-61. - Connection when public sewer unavailable. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under section 74-131, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage treatment plant complying with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 74.12) 
Sec. 74-62. - Permit for construction. 
(a)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage treatment plant to process fewer than 5,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sewage, the owner shall first obtain a written city permit signed by the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Three complete sets of blueprints for the proposed plant and site plan. 
(2)  A fee in the amount of $2,500.00, to be expended for inspection and engineering review, the unexpended portion of which shall be promptly refunded to the applicant. 
(3)  An executed contract between the applicant and a treatment plant operator certified by the state for the operation and maintenance of the proposed plant, which shall include or incorporate a letter of coordination for an approved dump site to dispose of sludge and other materials collected from the proposed plant. 
(4)  An executed contract providing for performance of quarterly laboratory analyses using procedures which comport with all state and federal requirements, and providing that the analyses are to be submitted directly to the city sewer department from the testing laboratory. 
(b)  The contracts referred to in subsections (a)(3) and (4) of this section shall extend for a term not to expire before March 31, 1989. 
(Code 1986, § 74.13) 
Sec. 74-63. - Inspection. 
    A permit for a private sewage treatment plant shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Code 1986, § 74.14) 
Sec. 74-64. - Compliance with state recommendation required; area of lot; discharge to natural outlet. 
(a)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage treatment plant shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of health. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any private sewage treatment plant employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 48,400 square feet. 
(c)  No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1986, § 74.15) 
Sec. 74-65. - Connection with public sewer upon availability. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage treatment plant, as provided in section 74-131, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tank, cesspool, and similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned as provided in section 14-362. 
(Code 1986, § 74.16) 
Sec. 74-66. - Operation and maintenance; stockpiling of sludge deposits. 
(a)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage treatment plant in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(b)  All sludge deposits must be transported to an approved sludge depository and shall not be stockpiled at the site in excess of seven days. 
(Code 1986, § 74.17) 
Sec. 74-67. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements on private sewage treatment plants that may be imposed by city, state or federal health officials. 
(Code 1986, § 74.18) 
Sec. 74-68. - Discontinuance upon availability of public sewer. 
    When a public sewer becomes available, any building sewer shall be connected to the sewer as provided in section 74-100(b), and the private sewage disposal system shall be discontinued as provided in section 14-362. 
(Code 1986, § 74.19) 
Secs. 74-69-74-95. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Abandonment of On-Site Individual Sewer Systems 

Sec. 74-96. - Intent. 
(a)  This subdivision establishes a procedure for abandonment of existing on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems (OSTDS) and connection to the city central sewage collection and treatment system. This subdivision also establishes a procedure for inspecting and ensuring that on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems located in areas where sewer connections to the municipal treatment plant are unavailable within 200 feet of city sewer connections are inspected and brought up to secondary levels of treatment through installation of aerobic treatment plants. 
(b)  The intent of this subdivision is to produce a discontinuance of existing on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems and for the properties previously served by them to be connected by sewer lines to the city's central sewage treatment and collection system. For properties not within 200 feet of city sewer lines, the intent is that all units be inspected and that those that are certified as functioning properly are issued annual operating permits. If an on-site sewage treatment and disposal system is not properly functioning, the intent is that it be upgraded to an aerobic treatment unit providing secondary treatment, i.e., an effluent that shall not exceed 20 milligrams per liter of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) in five days or 20 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids (TSS) on a permitted annual average basis. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(a)) 
Sec. 74-97. - Requirements and prohibitions for septic tank contractors, engineers and plumbers. 
(a)  All licensed septic tank contractors and plumbers doing business in the city and registered with the state and registered professional engineers doing business in the state must receive certification by the county health department to be eligible to submit system evaluations pursuant to this subdivision. 
(b)  No licensed septic tank contractor, engineer or plumber shall falsify information on the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system inspection report forms or operating permit applications. In such event, the contractor, engineer or plumber shall be subject to license revocation by the city and its contractors examining board. In addition, the city shall reserve the right to pursue all other civil and criminal remedies. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(h)) 
Sec. 74-98. - Violations by property owners. 
(a)  A property owner in the city is in violation of this subdivision if structures on his property are served by an on-site sewage treatment and disposal system and the property owner: 
(1)  Fails to provide sewer lines from his improved property to within 200 feet of a municipal sewer connection as determined by the city utility director such that all structures can be provided with sewer service by connection to the city's sewage treatment collection system within the appropriate time as specified in this article; 
(2)  Fails to submit an application for an operating permit by the date specified subsequent to an inspection and finding that the existing septic system qualifies for an annual operating permit by meeting acceptable standards as provided in this article; 
(3)  Fails to submit a permit request to install an aerobic treatment plant when the existing on-site sewage treatment and disposal system does not meet the standards provided in this article; or 
(4)  Fails to take steps in a timely manner to rectify a system that has been inspected and found to require a permit or connection to the municipal system. 
(b)  Failure to connect to the municipal sewage system, obtain an operating permit, or renew an existing permit by the date specified creates a rebuttable presumption that the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system is operating in an unsafe or insanitary manner, and creates reasonable cause to find that a sanitary nuisance exists under F.S. ch. 386. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(i)) 
Sec. 74-99. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this subdivision shall subject the property owner either to the penalty set forth in section 1-15 or to code enforcement action pursuant to article VI of chapter 2. In addition, a property owner shall be subject to all applicable state and federal sanctions pursuant to environmental statutes and administrative rules. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(j)) 
Sec. 74-100. - Properties within 200 feet of sewer connection. 
(a)  An owner of an improved property without current service to the city's sewage treatment plant and whose property, at any point of the property line, is located within 200 feet of an existing city sewer line shall provide for the property to be connected to the city central sewage treatment and collection system. The existing on-site sewage treatment and disposal system shall then be discontinued. 
(b)  If the city brings an existing sewer line to within 200 feet of any point of the property line of an improved property without such current service, within 90 days of notice from the city of such availability, the property owner shall connect to the sewer line; provided, however, that the director of utilities may grant an extension of time to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  If a sewer connection becomes available as provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the existing on-site system shall be abandoned, and the property owner shall take all required steps to pump out and seal the facility in accordance with state regulations governing abandoned on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems. 
(d)  The city by and through the county health department shall provide written notice to all property owners that are subject to this section. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(b)) 
Sec. 74-101. - Properties not within 200 feet of sewer connection. 
(a)  For improved properties for which city sewer lines are not available within 200 feet of any point of the property line, the property owner shall cause the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system to be inspected and pumped out. If it does not pass inspection according to the standards set forth in this subdivision, the unit shall be upgraded at the owner's expense to an aerobic treatment unit providing secondary treatment, i.e., an effluent that shall not exceed 20 milligrams per liter of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) in five days or 20 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids (TSS) on a permitted annual average basis. If, after inspection, the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system is certified to be functioning properly, the property owner shall apply for and be issued a one-year operating permit to be issued by the county health department. 
(b)  Owners of improved properties with on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems that are subject to the requirements of (a) shall cause their on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems to be pumped out prior to inspection by a licensed septic tank contractor who is registered by the state to haul septage. The system shall be inspected by either a licensed septic tank contractor or plumber registered with the state or by a registered professional engineer in the state, in the presence of authorized personnel from the county health department. Upon successful inspection, the property owner shall apply for an annual operating permit. The county health department shall issue the permit within 60 days of this inspection and finding of adequacy. 
(c)  At the time of the inspection, the structural components of the system shall be checked for cracks, leaks, missing or broken deflection or discharge devices; the structural integrity of the tank bottom, sides and lid; and any other evidence that the system is failing to provide satisfactory service, including a comparison of tank volume to current usage and design considerations for the standards at the time of installation. 
(d)  Following the inspection, the inspector shall submit a signed, written OSTDS Inspection Report Form 1 to the county health department and to the property owner. The report must fully describe the existing system, residential or commercial structure, and shall: 
(1)  Specify the date that the system was pumped out; 
(2)  Specify the total number of gallons of septage removed; 
(3)  Describe the elevation, location, and functional status of the tank and drainfield; and 
(4)  Contain the inspector's certification that the inspector personally inspected the system and that the description of the system is accurate. 
(e)  If the inspector's certification attests that the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system does not meet acceptable standards according to the criteria provided in this section, the property owner shall be required, within 30 days of receipt of the inspector's certification, to apply for a permit and pay the fees pursuant to F.A.C. 64E-6.030 to upgrade the sewer system to an aerobic treatment plant providing secondary treatment, i.e., an effluent that shall not exceed 20 milligrams per liter of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) in five days or 20 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids (TSS) on a permitted annual average basis. The property owner shall, within one year of such determination, complete the installation of a secondary treatment system. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(c)) 
Sec. 74-102. - Status of existing operating permits. 
    On December 1, 1998, all finally approved on-site sewage treatment and disposal system permits previously issued by the state department of health and rehabilitative services, its predecessors and successors, and/or the city building department for all residential and commercial structures including houses, mobile homes, single-family and multifamily rental units and businesses which are served by an on-site sewage treatment and disposal system, are bound by the terms of this subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(d)) 
Sec. 74-103. - Certification review and permit. 
    The county health department shall review the certifications (OSTDS Inspection Report Form 1) issued as a result of the inspection of the on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems and, within 90 days of their receipt, shall: 
(1)  Issue a finding that the property owner must discontinue the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system and connect to the city central sewage treatment and collection system if city sewer lines are available on the adjacent public right-of-way or 200 feet from the property; 
(2)  Issue a finding that the property owner must upgrade the existing on-site sewage treatment and disposal system as provided in this subdivision; 
(3)  Issue a finding that the existing permit satisfies the requirements of this subdivision; or 
(4)  Issue a finding of incomplete information, providing the property owner 30 days to respond with either an amended inspection form 1 or an amended application for a permit. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(e)) 
Sec. 74-104. - Approved systems. 
    The owner of an approved on-site sewage treatment and disposal system for which an operating permit has been obtained may continue to use the approved system so long as: 
(1)  The system is properly and lawfully maintained and remains in satisfactory operating condition; 
(2)  The operating permit is renewed in accordance with this subdivision; and 
(3)  The city has not yet extended sewer line connections to within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(f)) 
Sec. 74-105. - Permit renewal. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be renewed by the property owner prior to the expiration date by submittal of OSTDS Inspection Report Form 2 to the county health department, accompanied by the appropriate fees, pursuant to F.A.C. 64E-6.030. 
(Code 1986, § 74.165(g)) 
Secs. 74-106-74-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-131. - Required where public sewer available. 
    The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located or may be located a city public sanitary or combined sewer is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with this article, as provided in section 74-100(b). 
(Code 1986, § 74.08) 
Sec. 74-132. - Permit required to open or make connection to public sewer. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, including the opening of, removing of or tampering with any manhole cover, without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Code 1986, § 74.21) 
Sec. 74-133. - Owner to bear expenses for installation; indemnification. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and construction of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 74.23) 
Sec. 74-134. - Use of old sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 74.25) 
Sec. 74-135. - Construction specifications. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable city rules and regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 74.26) 
Sec. 74-136. - Elevation of building sewer. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 74.27) 
Sec. 74-137. - Prohibited connections to sanitary sewers. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 74.28) 
Sec. 74-138. - Specifications for connection to public sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable city rules and regulations. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(Code 1986, § 74.29) 
Sec. 74-139. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director. 
(Code 1986, § 74.30) 
Sec. 74-140. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property. 
(a)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 74.31) 
Sec. 74-141. - Separate building sewers required; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 02-27, § 1, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-142. - Replacement of sewer laterals. 
(a)  All leaking sewer laterals shall be replaced in accordance with the following guidelines and specifications. The city shall: 
(1)  Require gasketed or glued connection to existing PVC pipe (PVC to PVC) see note on similar connection. 
(2)  Require use of SDR 26 or schedule 40 PVC or better. 
(3)  Require gasketed connection to existing manhole (see sand collar specification). 
(4)  Require concrete encasement when lines have less than 24 inches over top of pipe and are exposed to vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Require the use of P-rock or 57 stone in pipe zone. Backfill to exclude all debris in excess of three inches. 
(6)  Require lined manhole welded seam and seal riser. 
(7)  Require elimination of certain mechanical joints as defined herein, except such mechanical joins may be used for dissimilar connections and must be concrete encased. For the purpose of this subsection a "mechanical joint" is a manufactured rubberized prefabricated assembly or an on-the-job assembly of component parts that is adjunct into piping systems for the purpose of connecting dissimilar piping materials not glued, screwed, welded, caulked, threaded, soldered or brazed; an assembly in which compression is applied to axis ends of piping in order to develop connection and continuity in piping systems. 
(b)  The city hereby adopts standard details for private property sewer construction and repairs pursuant to the "Private Property Sewer Specification August - 2000," attached to Ordinance No. 00-29 and made a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-29, § 1, 10-4-2000) 
Secs. 74-143-74-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-166. - Additional requirements for major contributing industries. 
(a)  Section 307(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, requires all municipal sanitary sewers with major contributing industries to comply with the pretreatment standards of 40 CFR 128. Therefore, the sewer use ordinances of all municipalities which have received a grant under PL 92-500 must require this compliance. 
(b)  Any major contributing industry within the city as defined by 40 CFR 128.124 shall comply with 40 CFR 128 and any other regulation as shall from time to time be established by the Environmental Protection Agency or other appropriate regulating governmental agency. 
(Code 1986, § 74.09) 
Sec. 74-167. - Infiltration and inflow and other discharges to sewer prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to allow or to cause infiltration and inflow to enter the city's sewer system from private property. If the director determines that infiltration and inflow is entering the sewer system from private property, he shall provide written notice to the property owner or his agent of such defect. The director may require that the owner make repairs to laterals or make other repairs as the director determines necessary within 30 days of the sending of such notice. If, in the judgment of the director, the defect presents an emergency, the director may require immediate repairs. Upon receipt of the notice, the property owner may request a hearing with the director at which the owner or his agent may present evidence to rebut the determination of the director or to negotiate terms of the repair. The director may deny such hearing in an emergency situation. If the property owner fails to correct the infiltration and inflow problem immediately in an emergency or otherwise on a timely basis, the director on behalf of the city may undertake either or both of the following actions: 
(1)  Institute penalty proceedings against the property owner as provided in section 1-15 or by referral to the code enforcement special master. To the extent that this subsection conflicts with section 74-28, this subsection shall prevail. 
(2)  Make a written finding of the emergency nature of the infiltration and inflow, after consultation with the city manager and city attorney. If the director determines an emergency, he may authorize city workers or agents of the city to enter onto the private property for the limited purpose of effecting repairs. In such event, the city shall bill the property owner the cost of repairs, payable within 15 days of mailing. Failure of the property owner to pay the bill timely shall entitle the city to place a lien on the property by an appropriate filing in the circuit court. The city shall foreclose the lien in the manner provided by the laws of the state, and when applicable the lien shall have priority pursuant to F.S. § 159.17. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, pool water, roof runoff, surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. However, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters may be discharged into a storm sewer or natural outlet upon the prior written approval of the director in accordance with written standards for such discharge that are issued from time to time by the director. 
(Code 1986, § 74.32) 
Sec. 74-168. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (mg/l) as cyanides (CN) in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes; cinders; sand; mud; straw; shavings; metal; glass; rags; feathers; tar; plastics; wood; unground garbage; whole blood; paunch manure; hair and fleshings; entrails; and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1986, § 74.33) 
Sec. 74-169. - Discharge of potentially harmful wastes. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are as follows: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined in this article. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1986, § 74.35) 
Sec. 74-170. - Actions of director for potentially harmful wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 74-169 and which, in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under subdivision II of division 5 of this article. 
(b)  If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(c)  The director shall notify the city manager in writing of conditions present to which actions in this section are applicable. 
(Code 1986, § 74.36) 
Sec. 74-171. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1986, § 74.37) 
Sec. 74-172. - Preliminary treatment for flow-equalizing facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment for flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes pursuant to this article, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1986, § 74.38) 
Sec. 74-173. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1986, § 74.39) 
Sec. 74-174. - Measurements, testing and analyses of wastes. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1986, § 74.40) 
Sec. 74-175. - Special agreements between city and industrial users. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1986, § 74.41) 
Secs. 74-176-74-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SERVICE RATES, CHARGES, BILLING PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 74-201. - Deposits. 
(a)  The minimum guaranteed payment deposits for new, delinquent or re-connected sewer system use are as follows: For residential customers, the deposit minimum shall be $90.00 per unit and for commercial customers, the deposit minimum shall be $90.00 or three times the monthly rate, whichever amount is greater, as determined by utility department billing personnel based on the most recent rate study. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to set deposits for any customer to an amount greater than three months' sewer bills as estimated by the utility department director if, in the director's opinion, the minimum deposit is judged to be insufficient. These deposits apply to new customers and current customers that require a turn-on for delinquent accounts. 
(c)  Interest on the guaranteed payment deposit shall be credited to all customer accounts for which the city has held guaranteed payment deposit for a full twelve month period ending September 30 of each year. The rate of interest shall be established based on interest earned on guarantee payment deposit funds invested by the city during the same 12-month period, less administrative costs. 
(d)  Guaranteed payment deposits are waived for accounts established for: 
(1)  All municipal, county, state and federal agencies; and 
(2)  Accounts which provide residential service and meet all criteria established under subsection (e), below. 
(e)  Upon customer's written request, the city may refund the guaranteed payment deposit to accounts which provide residential service under conditions that the residential customer: 
(1)  Has been on the city system three years or greater; 
(2)  Has not been assessed with a delinquent account charge (penalty) on two or more occasions within the past three years; 
(3)  Has not been turned off for non-pay (delinquent) status on two or more occasions within the past three years; and 
(4)  Has not had any record of having presented dishonored checks to the city on two or more occasions within the past three years. 
(f)  Bank drafts. 
(1)  Bank drafts shall be for the purpose of providing automatic direct payment to the city or its designee through a financial institution. The applicant will be subject to the following criteria: 
A.  Has no record of having presented dishonored checks to the city or its designee within the past 12 months; 
B.  The applicant's financial institution must participate in the Automated Clearing House system (ACH); 
C.  Completion of a bank draft authorization agreement listing each account to be drafted; 
(2)  Authorized account(s) will be drafted monthly for the net amount due shown on the bill(s); 
(3)  The account(s) will be cancelled from the bank draft service if a draft is returned as uncollectible. A return bank draft charge will be billed to the account and the account may be subject to disconnection of sewer service. 
(4)  Bank draft authorization agreement will remain in effect until written notification of cancellation is provided by either the customer, the participating financial institution or by the city or its designee. 
(Code 1986, § 74.45(a); Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 74-202. - Other charges. 
    Other sewer charges are as follows: 
(1)  Service calls. Charges for service calls are as follows: 
a.  Minimum of $36.00 plus $15.00 per hour, unless the basis for the call is found to be defective sewer utility facilities. 
b.  Labor, $18.00 per hour, per person, after the first hour. 
c.  Equipment, such as Aqua Tech, sewer cleaning truck, $56.00 per hour. 
d.  Backhoe/front loader, $30.00 per hour. 
e.  General equipment, such as electric snake, sewer rodder, street saw, mud pump, compactor, etc., $15.00 per hour, plus material. 
(2)  Delinquent account turn-on. To turn on a delinquent account after all delinquent amounts have been paid, the charge shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1986, § 74.45(b)) 
Sec. 74-203. - Connection charges. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "unit" is defined as any property, building or structure or any addition or increase thereto requiring or involving legal connection to the sanitary sewer, whether or not there is an existing main connection point to the sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Before any person shall newly connect any unit to the sewer system, he shall pay directly to the City of Key West for such connection and availability of sewer a connection charge to be assessed by the director in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Residential customer connection: $1,000.00 for each living unit. 
(2)  Commercial customer connection: $1,500.00 per connection point to the sewer system plus the greater of: 
a.  For each additional living unit served by the connection point, $400.00. 
b.  For each 6,000 gallons per month increment of flow estimated through the connection point by the director, $1,000.00. Such estimates of flow shall be made by the director in accordance with normal flows expected from the plumbing fixtures being serviced by the connection. Where the use or occupancy of a commercial unit changes, the director shall assess an additional connection fee where the estimate of flow increases as a result of the change. 
(3)  Low income residential and commercial connections. Qualified low income customers or commercial units shall be assessed a connection fee of $100.00 for each residential unit or commercial connection point. A qualified low income customer or unit is defined as low income eligible by residency in a HUD, HUDAG, or KWHA project or compound consisting of not less than 50 HODAG developed residential units located on government-owned or government-leased property or by location as an auxiliary facility (laundry room, management office, etc.) within the qualified property. 
(c)  Installment payments may be made in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Commercial customers located in the Bahama Village portion of the city's community redevelopment area, established in division 6 of article V of chapter 2, may opt to pay sewer connection fees directly to the City of Key West on an installment payment plan basis. This option shall apply only to new businesses established after December 4, 1997. The owner of any business who opts to pay sewer connection fees shall execute a promissory note in favor of the city. The note shall state a term of years not to exceed ten years and an interest rate of four percent; provided, however, that the precise term of years shall be determined by the city manager. The note shall be secured by a lien against the property recorded in the public records. 
(2)  Any person or business located within the city boundaries who agrees to convert from septic tank use to the city sewer system may opt to pay sewer connection fees directly to the City of Key West on an installment payment plan basis. This option shall apply only to persons or businesses who convert from septic tank use to the city's sewer system after December 4, 1997. Any person or owner of any business who opts to pay sewer connection fees shall execute a promissory note in favor of the city. The note shall state a term of years not to exceed ten years and an interest rate of four percent; provided, however, that the precise term of years shall be determined by the city manager. The note shall be secured by a lien against the property recorded in the public records. 
(3)  Installment payments under this subsection shall be made on a monthly basis apart from the customer's monthly sewer bill, and directly to the City of Key West. They are deemed payment of sewer services pursuant to F.S. ch. 159. 
(Code 1986, § 74.43; Ord. No. 12-08, § 2, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 74-204. - Meters required for commercial property with well or cistern discharging to sewer system. 
(a)  Every owner of commercial licensed property upon which any well or cistern is located and which well or cistern discharges to the sewer system shall install, at an accessible location upon the property, a meter measuring water flow. Installation and purchase of equipment shall be at the owner's expense to conform to the city's specifications. If any owner fails to perform such installation, the city may do so and shall, in that event, bill the owner's sewer account for such installation charges. Meters shall be considered city property. City employees or agents may enter upon the premises during business hours for such purposes and shall notify the owner prior to entry. 
(b)  City employees or agents shall maintain, repair, and read the meters referred to in subsection (a) of this section, and the city shall bill the owner's sewer account for such charges. City employees or agents may enter upon the premises during business hours for such purposes. City employees or agents may remove meters from the property for purposes of maintenance and repair. The city manager shall determine approved meter types, frequency of maintenance and testing, criteria for meter location, and requirements for meter replacement. 
(Code 1986, § 74.451) 
Sec. 74-205. - Billing for well- and cistern-generated flows. 
    Monthly charges for the use of the city sewer system for flows from wells and cisterns referred to in section 74-204 shall be based upon (i) the monthly water consumption for each customer, derived from meter readings, or, where such information is unavailable, (ii) estimated sewage flow. The city manager shall establish a schedule of estimated flows for use in estimating flows where no meter readings or other accurate data are available. The schedule shall be presented to the city commission, which may adopt and amend it by resolution. If no schedule is adopted by the city commission, the city manager shall set an interim schedule of estimated flow. The schedule or interim schedule shall be used to determine monthly charges where meter reading or other accurate data are not available. 
(Code 1986, § 74.452) 
Sec. 74-206. - Owner's responsibility for payment. 
    The owner of the property being served the city sewer system shall be responsible for payment of all amounts due from rates and charges established by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 74.46) 
Sec. 74-207. - Payment due date. 
    All bills evidencing charges for use of the sanitary sewer system shall be payable to the city by the users of the sanitary sewer system on the day indicated on the bill forwarded to the user, as established by the city finance department in accordance with administratively determined billing cycles. 
(Code 1986, § 74.47) 
Sec. 74-208. - Payment to city; disposition. 
    The rates and charges established by this article shall be paid to and collected by the city manager by and under the direction of the city or its designee. However, all funds collected shall be segregated, maintained and disposed of utilizing accounting specifically identifiable to the sewer utility. 
(Code 1986, § 74.48; Ord. No. 12-08, § 3, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 74-209. - Delinquent payments; disconnection and reconnection of service. 
(1)  An account shall be considered delinquent if payment for service is not received within 30 days of the date of meter reading. 
(a)  If the due date falls on a weekend or legal holiday, it shall be extended to the next business day. In the event partial payment of a bill is made, that portion of the bill not paid within 30 days of billing shall be considered delinquent. However, government accounts shall be considered delinquent if payment is not received within 45 days of the date of meter reading. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to approve waiver of the delinquent account charge for a two-month billing period following mandatory or voluntary evacuation orders due to hurricane. 
(2)  Delinquent accounts shall be charged a delinquent account charge in the amount greater of $4.00 or ten percent of the total amount that is the delinquent outstanding balance unless the outstanding balance is less than $5.00, in which instance no delinquent account charge will be imposed. In the event a partial payment is made between the 30th and 45th day from the date of meter reading, the total bill shall be subject to the delinquent account charge. However, all qualified senior citizens/disabled and government accounts are exempt from a delinquent account charge. 
(3)  Service may be discontinued if the total delinquent amount that is past due is not received within 15 days of the current meter reading date shown on the bill. Failure to pay amounts due within the time designated for payment may result in a decision of the city manager or his agent causing disconnection of sewer service until all amounts due, including delinquent fees and accrued interest, have been paid in full. The city shall give 48 hours notice by hand delivery, use of a door hanger, notice by mail or telephone of proposed disconnection to the customer. 
(4)  For service to be restored, the customer must request restoration of service and pay all amounts due, including the applicable service charge, and a guaranteed payment deposit. 
(5)  In the event service is suspended twice as a result of account delinquency, service shall not be restored until the customer has paid a guaranteed payment deposit in an amount three times the average of the prior 12 months billing or $200.00, whichever is greater. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article when sewer service is subject to disconnection or has been discontinued due to account delinquency, the city may restore such service prior to payment of all amounts due, provided the customer has entered into a negotiated payment agreement. 
(7)  Failure to pay amounts due within the time designated for payment shall result in the city exercising all reasonable business efforts to collect such unpaid amount, including, but not limited to, placing a lien on the property for all amounts due, including delinquent fees, interest, attorney fees and filing charges. 
(Code 1986, § 74.49; Ord. No. 12-08, § 4, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 74-210. - Charges constitute lien. 
    The city shall have a lien on all lands or premises served by the city sewer system for all sewer service charges until paid, which lien shall be prior to all other liens on such lands or premises except the lien of state, county and municipal taxes and shall be on a parity with the lien of such state, county and municipal taxes. Such liens, when delinquent for more than 30 days, may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by the state laws for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. 
(Code 1986, § 74.51) 
State Law reference- Limitation on lien, F.S. § 180.135. 
Secs. 74-211-74-235. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Monthly Rates and Charges 

Sec. 74-236. - Scope. 
    Monthly rates and charges to be charged by the city for the availability or provision of sewer service and the use of the city's sewer collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal system shall be as provided in this subdivision, except as provided in section 74-246. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42) 
Sec. 74-237. - Components. 
(a)  Generally. Sewer service charges shall be based on three components: (i) a base charge component; (ii) a proportional use component; and (iii) an extranormal strength component. The sum total of these components shall be the monthly sewer service charge for each customer. 
(b)  Base charge component. The base charge component rates and charges for sewer services, assessable to a base charge unit, shall be composed of three subcomponents: (i) a debt service subcomponent; (ii) a base administration, operations, maintenance, and replacement subcomponent; and (iii) a collection system restoration subcomponent. The base charge shall be determined as a pro rata allocation to each base charge unit of the sum of the costs of the city sewer system incurred for and allocable to the debt service of the system; to administration, operations, maintenance, and replacement costs attributable to the system's existence; to base operations; and to costs of collection system restoration. This component of rates and charges shall be determined annually and shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(1)  Debt service subcomponent. The debt service subcomponent shall be a charge determined as a base charge unit pro rata share of the required payments for the currently outstanding debt service of the sewer system, except for adjustments in this subcomponent made for the United States navy, which satisfied part of its capital contribution requirements by a lump sum payment of a connection charge. 
(2)  Base administration, operations, maintenance, and replacement subcomponent. The base administration, operations, maintenance, and replacement subcomponent shall be a charge determined as a base charge unit pro rata share of the referenced costs, determined by the city manager as being attributable to the system's existence and to the system's basic operations and related activities and requirements that are not attributable to system requirements imposed by the waste contributions of system users. 
(3)  Collection system restoration subcomponent. The collection system restoration subcomponent shall be a charge determined as a base charge unit pro rata share of the annually budgeted investment designated for use in the planned 20-year collection system restoration program. 
(c)  Proportional use component. The proportional use component of rates and charges for sewer services, assessable to a user of the city sewer systems (a customer account) shall be determined as the sum of the pro rata allocations to the user's monthly units of waste contributions to the system (each 1,000 gallons of actual/estimated wastes per month) of costs of the system incurred for and allocable to administration, operations, maintenance, and replacement attributable to the system receiving, treating, and disposing of users' contributions of wastes of normal or domestic strength. This component of rates and charges shall be determined annually and shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(d)  Extranormal strength component. The extranormal strength component of rates and charges for sewer services shall be assessable to commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential users of the city sewer system, determined by the city manager as contributing wastes having an average strength per month in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids (TSS). The extranormal strength component shall be determined by generally accepted cost accounting principles and shall be expressed as the costs of treating and disposing of a pound of BOD and a pound of TSS. The component shall be applied as a surcharge for wastes contributed to the system having in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of BOD and in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of TSS. The extranormal strength component shall be calculated by the city manager at such time as it is determined that any user of the city sewer system is contributing extranormal strength wastes. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(a)) 
Sec. 74-238. - Estimates of flow, extranormal strength and base charge units. 
(a)  Sewage flow. Sewage flow shall be estimated by obtaining monthly water consumption data for each sewer system user and multiplying by a factor representing the assumed percentage of water being contributed to the sewer system. Monthly wastewater contribution shall be estimated for each account by the city from FKAA water meter reading data or from water meters installed on privately owned wells and cisterns. 
    If water furnished by the FKAA or any other water supply source or system shall be used exclusively for irrigation purposes or for any other application from which the water does not enter the city's sanitary sewer facilities, the user may, at the user's own expense, contract with FKAA to separately meter such water. The city manager shall determine approved meter types, frequency of maintenance and testing, criteria for meter location, and requirements for meter replacement. After the city is notified by the user of the installation of such a meter, the city shall maintain, repair, and read the meter and may bill the owner's sewer account for such charge. The water measured by such meter will be excluded from the calculation of chargeable sewer flow. Meters shall be considered city property. City employees or agents may enter upon the premises during business hours for purposes of maintenance, repair, and reading and may remove meters from the property for purposes of maintenance and repair. 
    For any residential living space using unmetered wells or cisterns as the sole source of water supply, a base charge shall be assessed for each such living space. The monthly wastewater flow (proportional use) component of the user charge for such residential wells and/or cisterns shall be based on an amount of water equal to the average monthly flow for residential system users. In addition to the proportional use component, a flat monthly well surcharge shall be assessed for each residential living space served by the unmetered wells and/or cisterns. The well surcharge shall be assessed to account for the exposure of the wastewater system to unmetered flows and the likelihood that wells are contributing more than the average monthly flow for residential system users. 
    For any residential system user having a metered water connection to the FKAA water system and owning wells and/or cisterns currently in use and connected to the wastewater system, a base charge shall be assessed for the FKAA water system connection, but no base charge shall be assessed for the wells and/or cisterns. However, a minimum flow charge based on the estimated average monthly residential wastewater flow shall be assessed, if the FKAA meter reading is less than the average. In addition, regardless of the amount of metered FKAA water consumption, the flat monthly well surcharge to be established by the city manager shall be assessed for each residential living space served by an unmetered well or cistern connected to the city's wastewater system. Owners of single-family residences and duplexes, including mobile homes, may but shall not be required to install water meters on their private water supplies. 
    Wells and cisterns used by all nonresidential users and that are connected to the city's wastewater system shall be metered at the user's expense in accordance with section 74-204. The city shall bill monthly sewer service charges to such users in accordance with section 74-205. 
    All wells and cisterns of all residential and nonresidential users within the city limits shall be assumed to be active wells and cisterns connected to the city's sanitary sewer system. The holder of record title to the property may demonstrate otherwise by filing with the city a notarized affidavit, supported by available documentation, declaring that the well or cistern is not active or connected and does not discharge water before or after use into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Extranormal strength. The extranormal strengths of wastes shall be estimated by the city by periodically monitoring wastes contributed to the system by users deemed as frequently or consistently having waste discharges of strengths in excess of those defined as being of domestic or normal strength. The monitoring of wastes shall be performed in accordance with current industry standards and procedures for waste flow sampling and laboratory testing. The amounts of extranormal strength waste components, expressed in pounds of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS), to which the extranormal strength surcharge shall be applied shall be calculated from monitoring data. The estimated amount of such waste component shall be applicable for 12 billing periods or until an adjustment is made resulting from a user's request for adjustment in accordance with the appeals and adjustment sections of this subdivision. 
(c)  Base charge units. For purposes of determining the number of base charge units chargeable to each sewer system user, the average monthly water consumption shall be calculated annually for residential users on the basis of a three-year rolling average. 
    The average monthly water consumption per residential dwelling unit shall be calculated from FKAA water billing records, from city sewer department data files, and from the city's water well and cistern meter readings data for all residential users of the sewer system owning such wells and cisterns, currently in use, who have elected to install, at their own expense, water meters. The water consumption records and meter reading data shall be adjusted prior to calculation of the monthly average residential consumptions, to account for nonuse, meter errors, customers' misclassifications and other data errors. 
    Each residential dwelling unit shall be defined as one base charge unit regardless of the source of water for that dwelling unit. 
    The total annual water consumption from FKAA and city meter reading data, adjusted, for each nonresidential user of the sewer system shall be divided by the number of water bills rendered to such FKAA water customer, and the quotient of that division shall be divided by the monthly average water consumption for residential users of the sewer system, calculated as prescribed in this section. The quotient of the second division will show the number of base charge units and fractions thereof that such sewer system user shall be assessed; provided, however, that the number of the base charge units shall not be less than one. The resulting number of base charge units, including fractions thereof, shall be billed to such nonresidential users for the 12 billing periods following such determination. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(b); Ord. No. 12-08, § 6, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 74-239. - Senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled person residential base charge adjustment. 
(a)  Since the city commission desires to provide a sewer service discount to senior citizens and other citizens that are totally and permanently disabled, adjustments to the base charge components shall be made as specified in this section. 
(b)  The senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled residential base charge adjustment shall mean a reduction of 15 percent of the base charge component of residential rates and charges assessed to qualified senior citizens and other citizens who are totally and permanently disabled and who reside at the property where the reduction is sought. Any subscriber who is 60 years of age or older by October 1 of the year in which senior citizens base charge adjustment is established or who is totally and permanently disabled and whose total annual income does not exceed the maximum social security benefit amount established each year shall be entitled to the reduction upon submission of such proof of age, disability, residency, and income as the city manager may reasonably require. Proof of age may be submitted anytime after the October 1 date at which time the fee adjustment will be made effective from that day forward. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(c); Ord. No. 09-12, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 74-240. - Adjustment to waste components. 
    Since the characteristics of sewage of an individual system user may vary from the normal domestic strength sewage and will cause additional expense to the city's sewer department, the city manager shall, upon determining that a user may be discharging extranormal domestic strength sewage into the city's sewer system, initiate and perform sampling and laboratory testing of the user's waste, in accordance with current industry standards, as provided in this article, and shall adjust the value of extranormal strength factor to which the extranormal strength component of rates and charges shall be applied. The city manager may thereby recompute the extranormal strength surcharge component of the user's monthly sewer service charge. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(d)) 
Sec. 74-241. - Adjustment in base charge units. 
    Upon written appeal in a form prescribed by the city manager and satisfactory presentation and verification of data on and affidavits related to water consumption from all sources, including wells and cisterns, for six months preceding the date of the appeal, the city manager may adjust the number of base charge units by use of the average monthly water consumption for the preceding six months divided by the number of gallons most recently estimated to be the average monthly residential contribution to the wastewater system, provided that the number of whole base charge units thus determined shall not be less than the number of living units for multiple-family occupancies, whether transient or permanent in nature, nor shall the number of base charge units be less than one. The city manager may from time to time require a sewer system user who has made such an appeal to present further evidence as to water consumption, but only at intervals of six months or more, as the city manager shall choose. Charges shall be adjusted retroactively to the date that the appeal and adequate supporting data, as described in this section, are filed. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(e)) 
Sec. 74-242. - Adjustment in estimated flow. 
    Upon written appeal in a form prescribed by the city manager and presentation of satisfactory, verifiable water consumption data for the six months preceding the date of the appeal, along with appropriate affidavits related thereto, the city manager may adjust the estimated sewage flow to the average of the water consumption for the preceding six months. The city manager may from time to time require a customer who has made such an appeal to present further evidence as to water consumption, but only at intervals of six months or more, as the city manager shall choose. Charges for proportionate use of the system shall be adjusted retroactively to the date the appeal and adequate supporting data, as described in this section, are filed. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(f)) 
Sec. 74-243. - Adjustment for extranormal strength wastes. 
    Upon written appeal in a form prescribed by the city manager and presentation and verification of certified laboratory results of tests performed on the customer's discharge for a period of at least eight weeks or otherwise in conformance with current wastewater industry practices, the city manager may recompute the measure for other than normal domestic strength sewage and recalculate the extranormal strength surcharge component of the user's monthly sewer service charge. Charges so adjusted shall be retroactive to the date that the appeal and results of such tests are filed. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(g)) 
Sec. 74-244. - Establishment of uniform estimates of flow. 
    The city manager shall establish a schedule of estimated sewage flows based on the various occupancies, for use in estimating the sewage flows and base charge units where no accurate base data, as described in section 74-238, are available. Such schedule of estimated sewage flows shall be presented to the city commission, which may adopt and amend the schedule by resolution. If no schedule is adopted by the city commission or any occupancy is not addressed in the adopted schedule, the city manager shall set an interim schedule of estimated flows and base charge units to be effective until an applicable schedule is adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(h)) 
Sec. 74-245. - Annual review of rates and user charges. 
    The city manager shall cause to be performed annually a user charge rate study which, together with recommendations on rates and user charges contained in this subdivision, shall be presented to the city commission at least 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year, for its use in determining the base charge component and proportional use components as set forth in section 74-237(b)(1) and (2). 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(i)) 
Sec. 74-246. - Annual sewer rates, charges and components. 
(a)  The base charge component (BCU) of the sewer service user charge is determined to be $23.23. The BCU may be adjusted each October 1, by resolution of the city commission by up to 100 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI-(U), U.S. City Averages (as of June). The city commission shall enact an ordinance amendment to this section in order to increase the BCU in excess of the CPI. 
(b)  The proportional use charge component of the sewer service user charge is determined to be $4.60 per 1,000 gallons per month of actual or estimated sewage flow per user. The proportional use charge may be adjusted each October 1, by resolution of the city commission by up to 100 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI-(U), U.S. City Averages (as of June). The city commission shall enact an ordinance amendment to this section in order to increase the proportional use charge in excess of the CPI. 
(c)  The extra-normal strength charge component of the sewer service user charge is determined to be $0.57 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and $0.26 per pound of total suspended solids (TSS) contributed per month per user in excess of the amount accounted for in waste at a rate of 350 mg/l for BOD and for TSS. 
(d)  The flat monthly alternative water surcharge is determined to be $8.51. 
(e)  The assumed percentage of water being contributed to the sewer system, as referred to in Ordinance No. 89-33, subsection (b)(1), continues to be 80 percent. This figure times the average monthly residential water consumption, the product then divided by the average number of residential dwelling units, yields an average residential monthly wastewater production (rounded to the nearest hundred gallons) or monthly base charge unit (BCU) of 3,600. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(j); Ord. No. 00-30, § 1, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 01-14, § 1, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 03-25, § 1, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 06-18, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 09-19, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 10-23, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 74-247. - Exemption for contractual service arrangement. 
    The methods set forth in this subdivision for determination of monthly rates and charges for the availability or provision of sewer service and the use of the city's sewer collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal system shall be inapplicable to sewer system users with which the city has entered into a separate contractual service arrangement. 
(Code 1986, § 74.42(k)) 
Secs. 74-248-74-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND WATER MANAGEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Stormwater and surface water management, § 108-711 et seq. 
State Law reference- Water resources management, F.S. ch. 373; duty of municipality to assist water management district, F.S. § 373.609. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 74-276-74-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSERVATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 74-286-74-294. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permanent Water Conservation Measures 

Sec. 74-295. - Title; purpose. 
(a)  This subdivision shall be known as the "City of Key West's Water and Irrigation Conservation Ordinance." 
(b)  This subdivision sets restrictions, constraints and prohibitions on persons in Key West in order to enhance the city's water resources and provides a permanent water conservation measure. Unless otherwise provided, nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to relieve any person from compliance with any applicable regulations enacted by the city or any other political subdivision of the state. 
(c)  The purpose of this subdivision is to establish a regulatory framework to ensure that water and landscape irrigation conservation will be consistent throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 1, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-296. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply: 
    Agriculture means the growing of farm products including, but not limited to, vegetables, citrus and other fruits, sod or nursery stock including, but not limited to, ornamental foliage and greenhouse plants. 
    Impervious means land surfaces that do not allow the penetration of water, including paved roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and highly compacted areas such as shell or clay. 
    Irrigation means the direct application of water by means other than precipitation. 
    Irrigation systems means equipment and devices that deliver water to plants being irrigated including, but not limited to pipelines, control structures, pipes and ditches, pumping stations, emitters, valves and fittings. This does not include the transfer of water through water management systems from one location to another. 
    Person includes any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 2, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-297. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Irrigation of any residential, commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial landscape areas shall be restricted to the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing potable water to be wasted. Such unlawful operations shall include, but not be limited to, unnecessary watering of impervious areas, other than that which may occur incidental to the proper operation of the primary irrigation system. 
(c)  Upon the effective date of Ordinance [No. 02-28, January 1, 2003,] new installations of automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a water sensing device that shall automatically discontinue irrigation during periods of rainfall. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 3, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-298. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of section 74-297(a): 
(1)  Landscape irrigation by hand watering using a self-canceling nozzle. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation by systems from which the sole source is treated wastewater effluent. 
(3)  The operation of irrigation systems for system repair and maintenance. 
(4)  Flushing of water mains required for normal water main clearance and maintenance and for maintenance of water quality; provided, however, where practical, contractors shall direct flushed water into pervious areas, flush at the minimum rate necessary for cleaning, and disperse the water in such a manner to benefit local vegetation. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation for purposes of watering in fungicides, insecticides and herbicides as required by the manufacturer or by federal or state laws; provided, however, this exemption applies only to licensed pest control operators and shall be limited to manufacturer's recommendations. 
(6)  Landscape irrigation for the purpose of watering newly planted grass and foliage for the first 45 days after initial installation. 
(7)  Irrigation activity for dust emissions required by court or administrative action. 
(8)  Irrigation of agriculture where the use of water is permitted by a consumptive or water use permit issued by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 4, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-299. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A failure to comply with the requirements of this subdivision shall constitute a violation, punishable as provided in section 2-680. Each day a person is in violation of a provision of this subdivision shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties contained herein, the city may take appropriate action, including but not limited to, administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions, to enforce the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 5, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-300. - Variance relief. 
(a)  Any person affected by the provisions of this subdivision may make written application to the city manager for a variance, if compliance would impose a unique, unnecessary and inequitable hardship on such person. Relief may be granted only upon a demonstration that such hardship is peculiar to the person or the affected property and is not self-imposed, and that the grant of the variance will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of this subdivision. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for variance, the city manager shall render a decision on the variance within ten working days. The decision of the city manager shall constitute final administrative action. 
(c)  An application for a variance, and/or the granting of a variance, shall operate prospectively, and shall not affect any pending enforcement action against the property owner pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 02-28, § 6, 11-19-2002) 
Subdivision III. - Restrictions During Water Shortage Conditions 

Sec. 74-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    District means the South Florida Water Management District. 
    Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under F.A.C. ch. 40E-21, part II, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety, or welfare or the health of animals, fish or aquatic life or a public water supply or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Code 1986, § 77.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-302. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this subdivision to protect the city water resources from the harmful effects of overutilization during periods of water shortage and allocate available water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in the implementation of its water shortage plan. 
(Code 1986, § 77.01) 
Sec. 74-303. - Applicability. 
    This subdivision shall apply to all persons using the water resource within the geographical areas subject to the water shortage or water shortage emergency, as determined by the district, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This subdivision shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Code 1986, § 77.03) 
Sec. 74-304. - Plan adopted by reference. 
    F.A.C. ch. 40E-21, Water Shortage Plan, as may be amended from time to time, is incorporated by reference as a part of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 77.04) 
Sec. 74-305. - Implementation of plan; violation. 
    The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district and its subsequent approval by the city commission shall invoke this subdivision. Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district applicable to the city or any portion thereof shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to section 74-306. Any violation of the provisions of F.A.C. ch. 40E-21 or any order issued pursuant thereto shall be a violation of the water shortage plan adopted in this subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 77.05) 
Sec. 74-306. - Enforcement. 
    Every police officer or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area governed by this Code shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce this subdivision. In addition, the city manager may also delegate such enforcement responsibility to agencies and departments of city government, in accordance with state and local law. 
(Code 1986, § 77.06) 
Sec. 74-307. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of any section of this subdivision shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation, $25.00. 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations, a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days. 
(b)  Each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense. In the initial stages of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, law enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one written warning. The city, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained in this section, may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to emergency injunctive action, to enforce this subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 77.07) 
Sec. 74-308. - Acceptance of service constitutes acceptance of plan. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the sections of this subdivision. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of this subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 77.08) 
Secs. 74-309-74-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLS AND CISTERNS 

Sec. 74-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned well or cistern means a well or cistern which is in a state of disrepair such that it is mechanically not capable of use for its intended purpose. 
    Aquifer means a geological formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding water to a well. 
    Cistern means a structure or device, the intended use of which is the storage of rainwater for household or commercial purposes. 
    Groundwater means water contained in or derived from an aquifer. 
    Owner means the person with legal title to the property on which a well exists. 
    Well means any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed which extends into or above an aquifer and the intended use of which is the location, acquisition, or development of groundwater for household or commercial purposes, but such term does not include temporary dewatering of subsurface formations for construction purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 77.09) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-337. - Registration required. 
    Every owner of real property located within the city limits shall register any well and cistern located on his property, excluding abandoned wells and cisterns, with the city building department. Registration of new wells and cisterns shall be completed prior to the start of excavation. Owners shall provide the city building department with information regarding location on the property, diameter, depth, height, extraction or storage capacity, current status as active or inactive, and current extraction or usage rate if any. 
(Code 1986, § 77.10) 
Secs. 74-338-74-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY SYSTEM 

Sec. 74-361. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
    Annual rate resolution means the resolution approving a stormwater assessment roll for a specific fiscal year. 
    Assessed property means all parcels of real property included on the stormwater assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the stormwater improvements and stormwater management services identified in an annual rate resolution. 
    Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction. 
    Costs of construction means costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion thereof, including but not limited to, the costs of: 
(1)  Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and easements therefor; 
(2)  Physical construction, installation and testing, including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith; 
(3)  Architectural, engineering, legal and other professional services; 
(4)  Insurance premiums taken out and maintained during construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction and installation; 
(5)  Any taxes or other charges which become due during construction; 
(6)  Expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or subcontractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to construction; 
(7)  Principal of and interest of any bonds; and 
(8)  Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto. 
    Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan adopted by the city pursuant to Chapter 163, Part II, Florida Statutes. 
    Debt service means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of: 
(1)  All interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year, plus; 
(2)  Any principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal year. 
    Developed property means real property other than undisturbed property. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Equivalent stormwater unit and ESU mean the average impervious area of residentially developed property per dwelling unit located within the city and as established by city commission resolution as provided in this article. 
    ESU rate means a fee charged on each ESU as established by city commission resolution or ordinance as provided in this article. 
    Exempt property means public rights-of-way, public streets, public alleys and public sidewalks, public parks, undisturbed property, conservation areas and easements; any property on which is retained 100 percent of the total volume of runoff within the property (measured on the basis of a 72-hour, 100-year storm event); any property which does not contribute any storm water runoff to the city's stormwater management systems (as determined by the city manager's designee and/or the process set forth in section 74-365(f)(3)), and any property owned by the U.S. Navy which by agreement with the city is deemed exempt. 
    Extension and replacement means costs of extensions, additions and capital improvements to, or the renewal and replacement of capital assets of, or purchasing and installing new equipment for, the system, or land acquisition for the system and any related costs thereto, or paying extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction, or any other expenses that are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt service. 
    Final assessment resolution means the resolution which shall confirm, modify or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the imposition of the initial stormwater assessment. 
    Fiscal year means a 12-month period commencing on October 1 of any year, or such other 12-month period adopted as the fiscal year of the city. 
    Impervious area means the number of square feet of surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into soil as water would otherwise enter it under natural conditions if the surface were undisturbed property; and/or causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions on undisturbed property. Impervious area includes, but is not limited to, structures, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, pavement and athletic courts. 
    Initial assessment resolution means the resolution which shall be the initial proceeding for the imposition of the stormwater assessment. 
    Nonresidential developed property means developed property that is put to a commercial, governmental, philanthropic or other purpose that is not set forth under the definition of residential developed property. 
    Obligations mean a series of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness including but not limited to, notes, commercial paper, capital leases or any other obligations of the city issued or incurred to finance any portion of the capital cost of a stormwater improvement and secured, in whole or in part, by proceeds of the stormwater improvement assessments. 
    Operating budget means the annual system operating budget adopted by the city for the succeeding fiscal year. 
    Operations and maintenance means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of the system, as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative expenses, labor, executive compensation, the cost of materials and supplies used for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but which are such as may reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Pledged revenue means, as to any series of obligations: 
(A)  The proceeds of such obligations, including investment earnings, 
(B)  Proceeds of the stormwater improvement assessments pledged to secure the payment of such obligations, and 
(C)  Any other legally available non-ad valorem revenue pledged to secure the payment of such obligations, as specified by the resolution authorizing such obligations. 
    Property appraiser means the office of the county property appraiser. 
    Residential developed property means developed property that is used for dwelling, including, but not limited to, single-family, duplex, accessory residential, multifamily, manufactured housing, group homes, mobile homes, residential dwellings holding a transient rental license, residential properties where home occupations occur, and vacant residential dwelling units. 
    Revenues mean all rates, fees, assessments, rentals, or other charges or other income received in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Runoff coefficients are those numbers approved by the city commission that are used to estimate the impervious area for each nonresidential developed property. A list of the coefficients used for Key West is attached hereto as Exhibit "A". 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Stormwater assessment means either a stormwater improvement assessment, a stormwater service assessment, or both. 
    Stormwater assessment roll means the roll created that includes all parcels within the city and their assigned stormwater assessment relating to stormwater improvements or stormwater management services approved by a final assessment resolution or an annual rate resolution. 
    Stormwater basin means a part of the earth's surface that contributes stormwater runoff to a drainage system, which consists of diffuse surface waters, together with all natural or artificial tributary surface streams and/or bodies of impounded surface water. 
    Stormwater basin plan means a policy document that is adopted by the city commission for each stormwater basin or hydrologic subarea thereof in which stormwater improvements are proposed and that provides for implementation of the stormwater master plan. 
    Stormwater improvement means land, capital facilities and improvements acquired or provided to detain, retain, convey or treat stormwater. 
    Stormwater improvement assessment means a special assessment imposed by the city within a stormwater improvement area to fund the capital cost or the debt service and related cost of obligations issued to finance the project cost of a stormwater improvement. 
    Stormwater management system and system shall mean and include all natural and manmade elements used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with the surface of the earth to a suitable receiving water body or location internal or external to the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes all pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention basins, ponds, and other stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities. 
    Stormwater service area means the geographic area described in the initial assessment resolution that encompasses all parcels within the city which specially benefit from the stormwater management service and all parcels to which stormwater management services are provided. 
    Stormwater service assessment means a special assessment imposed by the city within the stormwater service area to fund the stormwater service cost. 
    Stormwater service cost means the estimated amount for any fiscal year of all expenditures and reasonable reserves that are properly attributable to the stormwater management service provided within the stormwater service area under generally accepted accounting principles, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, reimbursement to the city for any moneys advanced for the stormwater management service, and interest on any interfund or intrafund loan for such purpose. 
    Tax collector means the Monroe County Tax Collector. 
    Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
    Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Undisturbed property means real property that has not been altered from its natural state. 
    User fee means a user fee authorized by state law and this article which is established to pay operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-362. - Findings, determinations and powers. 
(a)  It is hereby found, determined, and declared that those elements of the system that provide for the collection, treatment, and disposal of stormwater and the regulation of groundwater are of benefit and provide services to all property within the incorporated city limits, including property not currently served by the storm elements of the system. The beneficiaries of the system include all real properties within the city that benefit by the provision, operation, and improvement of the system. Such benefits may include, but are not limited to, the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment, and release of stormwater; the reduction of hazard to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff; improvement in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions; and improvement to the water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters. 
(b)  The city, under the direction of the director of utilities or other authorized city personnel, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Prepare regulations as needed to implement this article, and forward the regulations to the city commission for consideration and adoption, and adopt such procedures as are required to implement such regulations or carry out other responsibilities of the system; 
(2)  Administer the acquisition, design, construction, maintenance and operation of the system, including capital improvements designated in the comprehensive drainage plan; 
(3)  Administer and enforce this article and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the alteration of the system including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby; 
(4)  Inspect private systems as necessary to determine the compliance of such systems with this article and any regulations adopted under this article; 
(5)  Advise the city commission, city manager and other city departments on matters relating to the system; 
(6)  Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for adoption by the city commission periodically; 
(7)  Review plans, approve or deny, inspect, and accept extensions to the system; 
(8)  Establish and enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality within the system in compliance with water quality standards established by state, regional and/or federal agencies as now adopted or hereafter amended; and 
(9)  Analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, fines, and other revenues of the system annually. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 2, 6-18-2002) 
Sec. 74-363. - Creation of stormwater user fees. 
    Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 1 of the Florida Constitution, F.S. ch. 166, and the powers granted in the Charter of the city, there are hereby established stormwater user fees and accompanying regulations, whereby the city will be responsible for the operation, construction, maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities; for stormwater system planning; and for water quality management. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 3, 6-18-2002) 
Sec. 74-364. - Operating budget. 
    The city shall adopt an operating budget not later than the first day of each fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 74-365. - User fee. 
(a)  Fee established. Subject to the provisions of this article, there is hereby imposed on each and every residential developed property and nonresidential developed property, other than exempt property, and the owners thereof, a user fee. The user fee shall be an annual service charge. 
(b)  User fee for residential developed property. The user fee for residential developed property shall be the ESU rate multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units existing on the property. 
(c)  User fee for nonresidential developed property. 
(1)  The user fee for nonresidential developed property shall be the ESU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by multiplying the gross area of a property by the runoff coefficient for that property. The minimum user fee for any nonresidential developed property shall be equal to the charge for one ESU rate. In the event of newly developed nonresidential developed property, the charge for the user fee attributable to that development shall commence, or increase in the case of additional development to property that is already developed property, upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for such additional development, or in the event that no certificate of occupancy will be issued for that development, or in the event development has halted, then on the date that the city manager's designee determines, in his or her reasonable judgment, that the development is substantially complete or has been halted for at least three months. 
(2)  In the event of separately metered nonresidential developed property with joint users of common impervious areas, the city manager's designee shall calculate and allocate the pro rata user fee among the users. Any owner or non-owner user disagreeing with the city manager's designee's calculation or allocation may appeal such determination to the city manager's designee as provided in paragraph (e)(5) of this section. 
(d)  Dwelling unit and impervious area calculation. 
(1)  The city manager's designee shall initially, and from time to time, determine the number of dwelling units located on residential developed property in order to establish the user fee provided by subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential developed property in the city shall have its gross square footage calculated in order to establish the user fee provided by subsection (c) of this section. The city manager's designee shall make the initial calculation and may from time to time change this calculation from such information and data deemed pertinent by the city manager's designee. 
(e)  Appeal of dwelling unit and impervious area calculation. Any person disagreeing with the calculation of the stormwater user charge, as provided in this section, may appeal such determination to the city manager's designee. Any appeal must be filed in writing and shall include a survey prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer showing dwelling units, total property area, impervious area or nonresidential developed property, as appropriate. The city manager's designee may request additional information from the appealing party. Based upon the information provided by the city and the appealing party, the city manager's designee shall make a final calculation of the user fee. The city manager's designee shall notify the parties, in writing, of the city manager's designee's decision. If still dissatisfied, a party may request, in writing, a review by the city manager of the city manager's designee's decision. Such request must cite specific error by the city manager's designee and provide the calculation that the party believes is correct. The city manager shall review the record presented and render a written decision. The city manager may request additional information from either party. 
(f)  User fee adjustments and exempt property determinations. After the city has determined a user fee based on impervious area calculations, residential and nonresidential developed property owners may be eligible for an exempt property determination or a user fee adjustment when certain criteria are met. It is the property owner's responsibility to provide proof that conditions exist that may qualify a property for a particular adjustment or exempt property determination. 
(1)  Retention/detention fee adjustment. The city may allow adjustment of stormwater user fees for privately maintained retention and/or detention facilities upon an inspection and approval of such facilities by a certified engineer. French vertical drains are not acceptable stormwater facilities when determining fee adjustment eligibility. The rate of adjustment for privately maintained retention/detention facilities is based on the following: 
a.  Where stormwater management facilities are constructed and maintained, which collect and retain 100 percent of runoff on the property (measured on the basis of a 72-hour, 25-year storm event), the property owner shall receive a reduction of the user fee by 15 percent. 
b.  Where stormwater management facilities are constructed and maintained, which collect and retain 100 percent of runoff on the property (measured on the basis of a 72-hour, 50-year storm event), the property owner shall receive a reduction of the user fee by 25 percent. 
The following conditions must be met in order for an eligible property owner to receive the user fee adjustment: The property owner must apply for the user fee adjustment in writing and provide proof of 100 percent runoff retention on the property by submitting hydraulic/hydrologic calculations and topographic maps signed and sealed by a certified engineer to the city manager's designee. The city manager's designee must agree that 100 percent of the property's runoff will not have an impact on city owned or maintained stormwater facilities. The property owner must enter into a maintenance agreement with the city for continued maintenance of private stormwater facilities. 
(2)  Senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled residential developed property user fee adjustment. The senior citizen and permanently and totally disabled residential user fee adjustment shall mean a 15 percent reduction in the user fee for a property which is the residence of a qualified senior citizen or other citizen who is totally and permanently disabled. Any subscriber who is 60 years of age or older by October 1 of the year in which the base charge adjustment is established, or who is totally and permanently disabled, and whose total annual income does not exceed the maximum social security benefit amount established each year shall be entitled to the reduction upon submission of such proof of age, disability, residency, and income as the city manager may reasonably require. Proof of age may be submitted anytime after the October 1 date at which time the fee adjustment will be made effective from that day forward. 
(3)  Exempt property determinations. The following conditions must be met in order for an eligible exempt property owner to receive an exempt property determination: 
a.  The property owner must apply for the exempt property determination in writing to the city manager's designee and provide proof that the property constitutes an exempt property as defined in section 74-361 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. The proof submitted by the property owner shall include, but shall not be limited to, survey data and engineering reports, performed by either a registered professional land surveyor currently registered in the State of Florida or a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Florida where appropriate to support the request and as deemed necessary by the city manager's designee. 
b.  The city manager's designee will review the proof and information submitted by the property owner and make a determination as to whether the subject property constitutes an exempt property as defined in section 74-361 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. The determination of the city manager's designee shall be in writing. Any credit or refund of user fees resulting from the exempt property determination shall be retroactive to the date the application was complete, including submission of all required documentation but in no event shall exceed one year from the date of the determination. 
c.  In the event a property owner is not satisfied with the determination of the city manager's designee, the property owner may, within 30 days of the determination, appeal in writing to the city manager. Thereafter, the city manager will review any material submitted by the property owner or city manager's designee and within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal, issue a final written determination. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 5, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-366. - Stormwater service assessments. 
(A)  The commission is hereby authorized to impose stormwater service assessments against property located within the stormwater service area. The stormwater service cost may be assessed against developed property located within the stormwater service area at a rate of assessment based upon the special benefit accruing to such property from the stormwater management service provided by the city, measured by the number of ESUs attributable to each parcel or classification of property. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the commission specifically determines that any portion of the stormwater service area receives a distinct special benefit from any component of the stormwater management service that is materially different in kind or degree from the special benefit received by other portions of the stormwater service area, the stormwater service cost related to such component shall be assessed against the portion of the stormwater service area receiving the distinct special benefit. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-10, adopted June 18, 2013, repealed § 74-366, which pertained to collection of fee, and derived from Ord. No. 01-06, adopted June 5, 2001; and Ord. No. 02-16, adopted June 18, 2002. Said ordinance then enacted new provisions designated as § 74-366 as herein set out. 
Sec. 74-367. - Stormwater improvement assessments. 
(A)  The commission is hereby authorized to impose stormwater improvement assessments to fund all or any portion of the capital cost or the debt service and related cost of obligations issued to finance the project cost of a stormwater improvement identified in any stormwater basin plan. Stormwater improvement assessments to fund the capital cost or the debt service and related cost of obligations issued to finance the project cost of each stormwater improvement may be imposed against all parcels of property within the stormwater improvement area at a rate of assessment based upon the special benefit accruing to such property from the stormwater improvement measured by the number of ESUs attributable to each parcel or classification of property. 
{B)  If stormwater improvement assessments are imposed to fund the debt service and related cost of obligations issued to finance the project cost of a stormwater improvement, the stormwater improvement assessment may include the amount required to fund any amounts withdrawn during the prior fiscal year from any debt service reserve account established for obligations and the amount of any principal of and interest on obligations that has become due and remains unpaid. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-10, adopted June 18, 2013, added provisions to be numbered 74-367-74-384, and renumbered §§ 74-367-74-369 as §§ 74-385-74-387, respectively. 
Sec. 74-368. - Initial assessment resolution. 
    The initial proceeding for imposition of the stormwater assessments shall be the commission's adoption of an initial assessment resolution. The initial assessment resolution shall: 
(A)  Describe the stormwater improvement or stormwater management service proposed for funding from the proceeds of the stormwater assessments and stormwater fees; 
(B)  Estimate the capital cost or stormwater service cost; 
(C)  Describe with particularity the proposed method of apportioning the capital cost or stormwater service cost among the parcels of property located within the stormwater improvement area or stormwater service area, as applicable, such that the owner of any parcel of property can objectively determine the amount of the stormwater assessments, based upon its value, use or physical characteristics; and 
(D)  Include specific legislative findings that recognize the equity provided by the apportionment methodology and specific legislative findings that recognize the special benefit provided by the stormwater improvement or stormwater management service. At its option, the commission may adopt separate initial assessment resolutions for the stormwater service assessment and each stormwater improvement assessment. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 74-367. 
Sec. 74-369. - Stormwater assessment roll. 
(A)  The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, a preliminary stormwater assessment roll that contains the following information: 
(1)  A summary description of each parcel of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) subject to the stormwater assessment; 
(2)  The name of the owner of record of each parcel as shown on the tax roll; 
(3)  The number of ESUs (or other units used to determine the amount of the stormwater assessment) attributable to each parcel; 
(4)  The estimated maximum stormwater assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each ESU or other units used to determine the amount of the stormwater assessment; 
(5)  The estimated maximum stormwater assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each parcel: and 
(6)  At the option of the commission, the stormwater assessment roll may also include the estimated maximum annual stormwater assessment to become due in any future fiscal year for each ESU (or other units used to determine the amount of the stormwater assessment) and each parcel. 
(B)  Copies of the initial assessment resolution and the preliminary stormwater assessment roll shall be on file in the office of the city manager and open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the stormwater assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the stormwater assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available for use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 74-367. 
Sec. 74-370. - Notice by publication. 
    After filing the stormwater assessment roll in the office of the city manager, as required by section 3.05 [section 74-369] hereof, the city manager shall publish once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that a public hearing of the commission will be held on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, at which hearing the commission will receive written comments and hear testimony from all interested persons regarding adoption of the final assessment resolution and approval of the stormwater assessment roll. The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for purposes of the stormwater assessments. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-371. - Notice by mail. 
    In addition to the published notice required by section 74-370, the city manager shall provide notice of the proposed stormwater assessments by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the stormwater Assessments, which notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each property owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll on the twentieth calendar day prior to the date of mailing. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the U.S. Postal Service. The city manager shall provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the stormwater assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for the payment of a stormwater assessment imposed by the commission pursuant to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-372. - Final assessment resolution. 
    At the time named in such notice, or such time to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken, the commission shall receive written objections and hear testimony of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the commission, adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(A)  Confirm, modify or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the commission; 
(B)  Approve the stormwater assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(C)  Determine the method of collection. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-373. - Annual rate resolution. 
    During its budget adoption process, the commission shall adopt an annual rate resolution for each fiscal year following adoption of the final assessment resolution. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year. The annual rate resolution shall approve the stormwater assessment roll for such fiscal year. The stormwater assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the initial assessment resolution, as confirmed or amended by the final assessment resolution. If the proposed stormwater assessment for any parcel of developed property exceeds the maximum amount established in the final assessment resolution or if a stormwater assessment is imposed against property not previously subject thereto, the commission shall provide notice to the owner of such property in accordance with section 74-371 hereof and conduct a public hearing prior to adoption of the annual rate resolution. Failure to adopt an annual rate resolution during the budget adoption process for a fiscal year may be cured at any time. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-374. - Effect of stormwater resolutions. 
    The adoption of the final assessment resolution or annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the apportionment methodology, the rate of assessment, the adoption of the stormwater assessment roll and the levy and lien of the stormwater assessments), unless proper steps are initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of commission adoption of the final assessment resolution. The stormwater assessments for each fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the annual rate resolution. The stormwater assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution or annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, or such other official as the commission, by resolution, deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-375. - Lien of stormwater assessments. 
(A)  Upon adoption of the annual rate resolution for each fiscal year, stormwater assessments to be collected under the uniform assessment collection act shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, titles and claims, until paid. The lien shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the commission of the annual rate resolution and shall attach to the property included on the stormwater assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes. 
(B)  Upon adoption of the final assessment resolution, stormwater assessments to be collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 74-377 hereof shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, titles and claims, until paid. The lien shall be deemed perfected on the date notice thereof is recorded in the Official Records of Monroe County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-376. - Method of collection of stormwater assessments. 
    Unless directed otherwise by the commission, stormwater assessments shall be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions thereof. Any hearing or notice required by this ordinance may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-377. - Alternative method of collection of stormwater assessments. 
    In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city may elect to collect the stormwater assessment by any other method which is authorized by law or under an alternative collection method provided by this section. 
(A)  The city shall provide stormwater assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property, other than government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the stormwater assessment, 
(2)  A description of the ESU calculation used to determine the amount of the assessment, 
(3)  The number of ESUs attributed to the parcel, 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's stormwater assessment for the appropriate period, 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted, 
(6)  The date on which the stormwater assessment is due, and 
(7)  A statement that the stormwater assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(B)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the stormwater assessments shall be recorded in the Official Records of Monroe County, Florida. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(C)  The city shall have the right to appoint or retain an agent to foreclose and collect all delinquent stormwater assessments in the manner provided by law. A stormwater assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her stormwater assessment within 60 days from the date the stormwater assessment was due. Such notice shall stale [state] in effect that the city or its agent will initiate a foreclosure action and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent stormwater assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real estate, or otherwise as provided by law. 
(D)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as an individual person or corporation. The city may join in one foreclosure action the collection of stormwater assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent property owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent stormwater assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent stormwater assessments including, but not limited to, costs paid for draws on a credit facility and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(E)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent stormwater assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that: 
(1)  Notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by law and this ordinance, and 
(2)  Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent stormwater assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the stormwater assessment roll to the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-378. - Collection of stormwater assessments from government property. 
(A)  Unless directed otherwise by the commission, the city may provide stormwater assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the stormwater assessment, 
(2)  A description of the ESUs or other unit used to determine the amount of the stormwater assessment, 
(3)  The number of ESUs (or other units used to calculate the amount of the stormwater assessment) attributed to the parcel, 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's stormwater assessment for the appropriate period, 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted, and 
(6)  The date on which the stormwater assessment is due. 
(B)  A stormwater assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its stormwater assessment within 60 days from the date the stormwater assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(C)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described therein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent stormwater assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent stormwater assessments including, but not limited to, costs paid for draws on a credit facility and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-379. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The city and its agent, if any, shall maintain the duty to enforce the prompt collection of stormwater assessments by the means provided herein. The duties related to collection of stormwater assessments may be enforced at the suit of any holder of obligations in a court of competent jurisdiction by mandamus or other appropriate proceedings or actions. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-380. - Revisions to stormwater assessments. 
    If any stormwater assessment made under the provisions of this ordinance is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the commission is satisfied that any such stormwater assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the commission has failed to include any property on the stormwater assessment roll that should have been so included, the commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new stormwater assessment against any such property, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this ordinance and in case such second stormwater assessment is annulled, the commission may obtain and impose other stormwater assessments until a valid stormwater assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-381. - Procedural irregularities. 
    Any irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any stormwater assessment under the provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any stormwater assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such stormwater assessment was duly levied, that the stormwater assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such stormwater assessment were duly had, taken and performed as required by this ordinance; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section 74-381, any party objecting to a stormwater assessment imposed pursuant to this ordinance must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed in section 74-372 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-382. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(A)  No act of error or omission on the part of the commission, city manager, property appraiser, tax collector, clerk, or their respective deputies, employees or designees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of any stormwater assessment imposed by the commission under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(B)  The number of ESUs attributed to a parcel of property may be corrected at any time by the city manager. Any such correction which reduces a stormwater assessment shall be considered valid from the date on which the stormwater assessment was imposed and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the stormwater assessment imposed under the provisions of this ordinance. Any such correction which increases a stormwater assessment or imposes a stormwater assessment on omitted property shall first require notice to the affected owner in the manner described in section 74-371 hereof, providing the date, time and place that the commission will consider confirming the correction and offering the owner an opportunity to be heard. 
(C)  After the stormwater assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector, any changes, modifications or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to errors and insolvencies for ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-383. - Applicability. 
    This ordinance and the city's authority to impose stormwater assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-384. - Alternative method. 
    This ordinance shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This ordinance, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 74-385. - Program responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of the city's department of utilities to administer the stormwater management user fee system. The department shall keep an accurate record of all persons using the services and facilities of the stormwater management system of the city and to make changes in accordance with the rates and changes established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 6, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- See editor' note following § 74-367. 
Sec. 74-386. - Stormwater management utility enterprise fund. 
(a)  All user fees collected by the city shall be paid into a separate fund which is hereby created, to be known as the "stormwater management fund". Such fund shall be used for the purpose of paying the costs of construction, operations, and maintenance, and administration of the stormwater facilities of the city and to carry out all other purposes of the system. To the extent that the user fees collected are insufficient to construct the needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of the same may be paid from such city fund as may be determined by the city commission, but the city commission may order the reimbursement of such fund if additional charges are thereafter collected. 
(b)  The fees paid shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government thereof. Other than as described above, the fees shall be used solely as provided herein. 
(ord. No. 01-06, § 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 7, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 74-367. 
Sec. 74-387. - Equivalent stormwater unit (ESU) rate. 
    The user fee charged on each ESU shall be $7.80. This rate may be adjusted by resolution of the city commission each October 1, by up to 100 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI-(U), the U.S. City Averages (as of June). The city commission shall enact an ordinance amendment to this section in order to increase the ESU in excess of the CPI. 
(Ord. No. 02-17, § 1, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-26, § 1, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 06-20, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 74-367. 
Chapter 78 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compensation means payment by a passenger of a vehicle for hire or contract vehicle for hire which may be in the form of a fare, a gratuity, or any other form of consideration. 
    Contract means a written agreement between a passenger and the contract vehicle for hire that originates with the passenger at least 24 hours in advance of the service and states: (i) the time of origin of the contact; (ii) the names of specific passengers to be transported; (iii) the schedule of transportation; and (iv) the contact person, address, and phone number of the passenger or group that is paying the compensation. A contract will not be considered valid unless signed by both a passenger or passenger group representative and the contract vehicle for hire company representative. A reasonable change in time or itinerary due to weather or other delays does not invalidate a contract. 
    Contract vehicle for hire (C.V.H.) means any van with seating capacity of up to 14 persons, other than the driver, engaged in the transportation of such persons and their accompanying baggage, if any, for compensation over the public streets of the city and not operating on a fixed route. A contract vehicle for hire shall not include vehicles owned by the city, passenger vehicles for hire, sightseeing vehicles as defined in section 78-231, limousines as defined in section 78-4, or motorized entertainment vehicles as defined in section 6-116. A contract vehicle for hire has neither a taximeter installed nor undertakes any transportation on demand or in response to a street hail. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-23, adopted Dec. 3, 2009, deleted § 78-231 and provided for definitions of sightseeing vehicles in this section. 
    Cruising means the driving of a passenger vehicle for hire on the streets, alleys or public rights-of-way in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    Dispatch system means a communication system which receives requests for service and transmits this information to licensed passenger vehicles for hire. 
    Manifest means a daily record prepared by a driver of all trips made by such driver showing the time and place of origin, the destination, the number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Passenger means a person who is not permitted to drive, but may only ride within any vehicle. 
    Passenger vehicle for hire means any vehicle for hire engaged in the transportation of persons and their accompanying baggage, if any, for compensation over the public streets, not operated on a fixed route, and not including vehicles owned by the city, contract vehicles for hire, sightseeing motor vehicles as defined in section 78-231, or motorized entertainment vehicles as defined in section 6-116. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-23, adopted Dec. 3, 2009, deleted § 78-231 and provided for definitions of sightseeing vehicles in this section. 
    Passenger vehicle for hire driver permit (P.V.H. driver permit) means the authorization granted by the city to a stated person to operate any duly licensed passenger vehicle for hire for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance, which authorization shall be reflected in a document issued by the city identifying the permittee and the expiration date thereof. 
    Passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license (P.V.H. vehicle license) means the authorization granted by the city to a stated person to operate a specific vehicle as a passenger vehicle for hire. This authorization shall be reflected in a document issued by the city identifying the vehicle, the licensee, and the expiration date thereof. 
    Prearranged transportation means transportation for compensation on the public right-of-way by a contract vehicle for hire arranged at least 24 hours in advance of the service. Prearranged transportation shall be by contract with the specific passenger. 
    Seating capacity means the maximum number of passengers allowed in a vehicle for hire, which shall be as determined by the manufacturer of the vehicle. 
    Sightseeing motor vehicles operated pursuant to business license means and includes every motor vehicle designed primarily for the purpose of carrying passengers for sightseeing for hire, operated on a scheduled route, and operated pursuant to article IV of this chapter. 
    Sightseeing motor vehicles operated pursuant to franchise means and includes every motor vehicle designed primarily for the purpose of carrying passengers for sightseeing for hire or shuttle transportation, including vehicles operated for amphibious tours, and operating under a franchise ordinance granted by the city pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
    Standing by and stand by mean the parking, waiting or standing of a contract vehicle for hire in front of any business or along any public right-of-way for the purpose of soliciting or inducing passengers without a prearranged contract. 
    Stop, with respect to sightseeing vehicles, shall mean a location utilized solely for the loading and unloading of passengers. A stop shall not be utilized for the purpose of waiting, soliciting or inducing passengers who have not previously purchased a ticket for transport. 
    Taximeter means an electronic or mechanical device attached to a vehicle for hire which measures the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled device by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon any public road, and which is propelled wholly or in part by a motor or engine. 
    Vehicle for hire means any vehicle offered for rent or lease, or within which space is offered for rent or lease including, but not limited to, passenger vehicles for hire, contract vehicles for hire, sightseeing motor vehicles operated pursuant to business license, and sightseeing motor vehicles operated pursuant to franchise. 
    Waiting time means the elapsed period between the moment of acceptance of a passenger and the moment of discharge of the passenger during which a passenger vehicle for hire is held motionless. 
(Code 1986, § 92.01; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 12-3-2009) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Private vans excluded. 
    A van owned by a business entity and used exclusively for its customers and charging no compensation for services, gratuities excluded, is not deemed to be a contract vehicle for hire or a passenger vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1986, § 92.40) 
Sec. 78-3. - Taxicab stands. 
    The city manager is authorized to establish up to seven taxicab stands at locations and with restricted hours in the city, in consultation with the passenger vehicle for hire license holders. Taxicab stands shall not be used by contract vehicle for hire license holders. 
(Code 1986, § 92.41) 
Sec. 78-4. - Limousines. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "limousine" shall be defined as follows: a luxury automobile sedan having four or more doors, over 20 feet in length, providing eight seats or less exclusive of the driver, not having a meter, not having business advertising on the exterior, rented or hired by appointment only at least two hours in advance, rented on a time basis rather than a per-mile basis, and intended for limited use and special ceremonies, and not including vans. For special ceremonies only, including but not limited to weddings, a Rolls Royce and a Bentley shall constitute a limousine. 
(b)  Limousines shall be exempt from requirements contained in the following sections: 78-62, 78-95(a)(5), 78-128(a)(3) and (5), 78-129(a)(2)-(6) and (13), 78-131, 78-161, 78-163 and 78-164. Otherwise, they shall be subject to all provisions of sections 78-1, 78-31, 78-32, 78-61 through 78-63, and divisions 3 and 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Operation of a vehicle meeting the definition of limousine set forth in subsection (a) of this section on other than a by-appointment-only, two-hours-in-advance basis shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the licensee to the penalties set forth in section 78-32. 
(d)  The passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license granted to a limousine will so designate on the face of the license. 
(Code 1986, § 92.231; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-17-2007) 
Sec. 78-5. - Business license or franchise required for all vehicles for hire. 
(a)  Before any person shall conduct or maintain a business of renting, leasing or providing any vehicle for hire within the territorial boundaries of the city as set forth in section 2.01 of the Charter, entitled "Boundaries," such person shall, as applicable make application with, and receive from, (i) the city manager for a license, or, (ii) the city commission for a franchise, to operate such business. The pickup of a passenger for compensation within the territorial boundaries of the city shall constitute conducting or maintaining such a business. The application shall conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall state the exact location of the intended place of business and any intermediate or way stations. No such business shall be conducted or maintained unless such license or franchise is duly issued, upon fees paid, in conformance with this chapter, as applicable, and unless the applicant has caused to be executed and shall maintain in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each vehicle in amounts as prescribed in this chapter, the terms of which shall provide protection for all persons or property suffering injury, damage or loss because of the negligent operation of such vehicle by any person. 
(b)  The operation of a vehicle for hire within the territorial boundaries of the city is prohibited unless the vehicle is: 
(1)  Licensed as a contract vehicle for hire; 
(2)  Engaged in motor transportation of passengers which is within the stream of interstate commerce within the scope of 49 CFR 1047.45; 
(3)  Licensed as a sightseeing motor vehicle operating pursuant to a business license under article IV of this chapter, or licensed as a sightseeing motor vehicle operating pursuant to a franchise under article V of this chapter; or 
(4)  Licensed as a passenger vehicle for hire pursuant to sections 78-4, 78-31, 78-32 and 78-64 and divisions 3, 4 and 5 of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Both a passenger vehicle for hire and a contract vehicle for hire are limited to a maximum capacity of 14 passengers. Any vehicle for hire with a capacity in excess of 14 passengers is prohibited to conduct business on the city streets, unless it is a sightseeing motor vehicle operated pursuant to business license, a vehicle in the stream of interstate commerce, a city-operated bus, or a sightseeing motor vehicle operated pursuant to franchise. 
(d)  Operating a vehicle for hire without a license shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 09-23, § 2, 12-3-2009) 
Secs. 78-6-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PASSENGER VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Enforcement. 
    Enforcement of this article shall be by citation to the county court or code enforcement special master. Violations of any section except 78-127 may result in a civil fine of up to $500.00. 
(Code 1986, § 92.175) 
Sec. 78-32. - Regulatory penalties. 
(a)  Upon receipt of reasonable evidence of violation of sections 78-94 through 78-96, 78-127 and 78-129 through 78-131 by a permittee granted a valid passenger vehicle for hire driver permit or by a licensee granted a valid passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license, the city manager shall, after conforming with subsection (c) of this section, issue a written warning for any such violation. 
(b)  Upon receipt of reasonable evidence of three or more violations of any section or combination of sections listed in subsection (a) of this section or of a single violation of sections 78-92, 78-93, 78-128, 78-130 and 78-161(a), the city manager may, after conforming with subsection (c) of this section, impose a determinate suspension or revocation of the permittee's or licensee's passenger vehicle for hire driver permit or passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license. 
(c)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the permittee or licensee a reasonable, informal opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the permittee's or licensee's past record of compliance with the sections of this Code, if any; and 
(3)  Consider any apparent risk to public peace and safety. 
(d)  No licensee may transfer his license during the period commencing with a notice of violation and the completion of the suspension or revocation period. 
(e)  The city manager's decision shall be rendered in writing and shall include notice to the permittee/licensee of a right to appeal the decision within ten days thereof. Appeals not filed in writing with the city clerk within the period shall be deemed waived and shall not be heard by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 92.18) 
Secs. 78-33-78-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license tax, § 66-86 et seq. 

Sec. 78-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 09-23, adopted Dec. 3, 2009, deleted § 78-61, which pertained to required business license, and derived from § 92.02 of the 1986 Code. Ord. No. 09-23 further provided for similar provisions which can be found in § 78-5. 
Sec. 78-62. - Limits on passenger vehicle for hire licenses. 
(a)  Excluding independent passenger vehicle for hire licenses issued pursuant to section 78-64 and contract vehicle for hire licenses issued under this chapter, there shall be a maximum of 56 passenger vehicle for hire vehicle licenses issued for the operation of one passenger vehicle for hire per license. 
(b)  These licenses may be transferred upon application to the city manager. Such transfer application must include all applicable provisions of section 78-128 and section 78-129 and must include a bona fide transfer document from the transferor (seller) to the transferee (buyer). 
(c)  These licenses may be renewed from year to year; however, any license not renewed by July 31 will become void and of no further use whatsoever to the license holder. 
(d)  Available licenses will be distributed on a random basis by November 30 of each year, in a method approved by the city manager. However, no available license may be offered to an applicant unless applicable provisions of sections 78-128 and 78-129, including the four-vehicle requirement, can be met by the applicant. 
(e)  In October of each even-numbered year beginning in 2008, the city commission shall hold a public hearing upon request regarding requests or applications under this chapter to determine whether the public interest requires the issuance of new passenger vehicle for hire licenses. At the public hearing, if the issuance of new licenses is deemed necessary, the city commission shall adopt a resolution making such finding of necessity and stating the number of passenger vehicle for hire licenses to be issued on a random basis by a method approved by the city manager. However, no available license may be offered to any applicant unless applicable provisions of sections 78-128 and 78-129, including the four- or eight-vehicle requirement, can be met by the applicant. The public hearing may be continued, deferred, rescheduled, or cancelled by the city commission. Nothing in this section shall operate to prevent an owner of jitneys to apply for licensing before 2008. In making the findings as to whether the public interest requires the issuance of new licenses, the city commission shall take into consideration the number of passenger vehicles for hire already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, demonstrated demands necessitating the need for additional services, and the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 92.025) 
Sec. 78-63. - Liability insurance. 
    Every insurance policy required by section 78-61 or 78-128 shall be executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. Such policy shall insure the operation of each vehicle in a sum of not less than $50,000.00 for injury or death to any one person, in a sum of not less than $100,000.00 for injury or death to all persons caused by one accident, and in a sum of not less than $50,000.00 for damage to property resulting from any one accident. A duly authenticated copy of every such insurance policy, covering all vehicles used in such business, shall be filed with the city clerk. All such policies shall remain in full force and effect at all times during the operation of such business. 
(Code 1986, § 92.03) 
Sec. 78-64. - Independent passenger vehicle for hire licenses. 
(a)  There shall be a maximum of eight independent passenger vehicle for hire licenses issued for the operation of one passenger vehicle for hire per license holder. This total of eight licenses shall mean three independent licenses in effect on September 30, 1984, and an additional five independent licenses created in 1992. These eight licenses are the only independent licenses authorized for independent passenger vehicle for hire vehicles to operate in the city. 
(b)  Independent passenger vehicle for hire vehicle licenses shall be issued in a random drawing, held by the city clerk, from applications received by the city manager on or before 15 working days after occurrence of a vacancy among existing licenses through failure to renew or revocation. Such drawing shall be held by a procedure approved by the city manager. They shall be issued only to individuals and not to corporations, partnerships, or other business entities unless previously issued to a corporation, partnership, or other business entity. To be eligible for the drawing, any individual must demonstrate at least five years' experience in the vehicle for hire industry as an owner, driver, or dispatcher prior to license issuance. Existing license holders shall have the right to and must renew by September 30 of every year by complying in full with each provision of section 78-128, and by providing to the city manager a signed document stating that the licensee has complied with sections 78-128 and 78-129 and other applicable sections of this Code while operating under the license being renewed. Licensees who cannot comply with sections 78-128 and 78-129 and other applicable sections may receive a renewed license subject to the regulatory penalties provided in section 78-32. Only one license shall be issued to each successful applicant. Licenses may be transferred under the following conditions: 
(1)  Those three licensees who hold licenses which were effective on September 30, 1984, may hold more than one passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license only if they purchase the additional license from one of the other two of the licensees. 
(2)  In no other case will transfer be allowed where it would result in the transferee's holding more than one license. All eight independent passenger vehicle for hire license holders may have more than one driver. 
(c)  Any independent passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license which lapses, through nonrenewal or revocation, shall be declared void. Upon a showing by the applicant of compliance with all prerequisites contained in this chapter for license issuance, such license shall be reissued to the person whose name is drawn in a random drawing held as described in subsection (b) of this section. If this person does not meet the licensing requirements within 30 days of the drawing, the city clerk shall again conduct a random drawing from the remaining applicants. 
(d)  Each independent passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license holder shall apply to the city manager for a passenger vehicle for hire license for his vehicle. 
(e)  Independent passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license holders shall be subject to the requirements contained in sections 78-31, 78-32, 78-61 through 78-63, division 3 of this article, sections 78-126 through 78-129 and 78-131 and division 5 of this article, with the exception of sections 78-128(a)(5) and (6) and 78-129(a)(4) and (13). 
(Code 1986, § 92.23) 
Sec. 78-65. - Wheelchair accessible vehicles. 
(a)  Irrespective of the limitation on passenger vehicle for hire licenses set out in Key West City Code of Ordinances sections 78-62 and 78-64, each operator currently operating pursuant to a validly issued passenger vehicle for hire license(s) shall be entitled to add one wheelchair accessible vehicle to its fleet in accordance with this section. A "wheelchair accessible vehicle" is defined as a vehicle that a person in a wheelchair, scooter or similar device may enter and exit independently or with assistance while seated, and which prioritizes requests for service from wheelchair, scooter or similar device users. 
(b)  In order to add one wheelchair accessible vehicle, an operator must: 
(1)  Apply to the licensing division, on a form to be provided by the division, within sixty (60) days from enactment of this ordinance. 
(2)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days from date of application, the operator must place an approved wheelchair accessible vehicle into service. 
(3)  Any entity failing to meet the timelines set forth herein shall be ineligible to add a wheelchair accessible vehicle into service. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 78-66. - Operational requirements for wheelchair accessible vehicles. 
    In addition to meeting the other requirements of this article, except as otherwise expressly provided in this division, an operator must: 
(a)  Upon a request for wheelchair accessible service, the operator shall immediately dispatch the first available wheelchair accessible taxicab prior to responding to a request for standard service. 
(b)  All requests for wheelchair accessible taxicab service shall be provided with no additional charge or deposit required. 
(c)  The wheelchair accessible vehicle must be compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act standards and such certification of compliance must be submitted to the licensing division prior to placing the vehicle in service and thereafter upon request. 
(d)  If a wheelchair accessible vehicle becomes inoperable for any reason for more than forty-eight (48) hours, the operator must notify the licensing division in writing. If such vehicle is inoperable for more than seven (7) days, the operator must submit a plan and schedule to the license division to put the vehicle back in operation. Failure of the operator to meet these requirements, or failure to place the vehicle or substitute wheelchair accessible vehicle back into service within one hundred twenty (120) days of the notification shall result in revocation of the operator's ability to operate a wheelchair accessible vehicle under this division in accordance with the procedures in subsection 78-67 below. 
(e)  Under no circumstances may a non-wheelchair accessible vehicle be substituted for a wheelchair accessible vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 2, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 78-67. - Revocation of authorization to operate a wheelchair accessible vehicle. 
(a)  Any operator failing to meet the requirements of section 78-66(a)-(e) may have its authorization to operate a wheelchair accessible vehicle revoked in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Prior to any revocation, notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the operator. All hearings required by this section shall be preceded by a minimum of ten (10) days notice. Said notice shall specify the grounds upon which the action is based. The hearing shall be scheduled before the city manager. Failure to appear at a duly noticed hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to hearing and an admission of the acts specified in the notice. 
(2)  In order to revoke the authorization, the city manager must find: 
A.  The holder thereof has failed to comply with any provisions of this division or any lawful order of the licensing division; and 
B.  The public interest will best be served by revocation or suspension; provided, however, that good cause be shown. 
(3)  Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall issue a statement of findings, conclusions and recommendations. The city manager shall promptly notify all parties of his or her decision. 
(4)  The city manager's decision may be appealed to the city commission within ten (10) days of the date of said decision. Such appeal shall not stay the city manager's decision. Upon such an appeal, the city commission shall consider the transcript of the hearing and all evidence produced at the hearing. No further testimony or exhibits shall be permitted. The city commission, by majority vote, may affirm, reverse or modify the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 3-18-2014) 
Secs. 78-68-78-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 78-91. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a passenger vehicle for hire within the city without carrying a valid passenger vehicle for hire driver permit document reflecting the operator's legal name. Violations of this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 92.04) 
Sec. 78-92. - Requirements for issuance. 
(a)  Upon application and upon expiration of a reasonable investigation period for new applicants not seeking to renew a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit issued under section 78-93, the city manager shall issue a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit only to any applicant who: 
(1)  Is 21 years of age or older; 
(2)  Possesses a valid class A, B, C or D license issued in the applicant's name by the state; 
(3)  Is able to read and write the English language; 
(4)  Has not, within the ten years preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony against person or property; 
(5)  Has not been convicted of more than two moving traffic violations within the one year preceding the date of the application; 
(6)  Submits at the time of application a written document, signed no more than 60 days previously by a physician licensed by the state, which document states the physician's opinion that the applicant is not addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicants, that the applicant is not carrying an infectious disease, and that the applicant has sound health, hearing and eyesight suitable for driving a motor vehicle for 12 consecutive hours; 
(7)  Within two years of the date of the application, has not had a driver license suspended or revoked: 
a.  For moving traffic or safety-related violations; 
b.  Upon recommendation of the state medical advisory board; or 
c.  Pursuant to an adjudication of mental or physical incompetency; 
(8)  Submits written acknowledgement from the chief of police that the applicant's class A, B, C or D license is current and valid; 
(9)  Submits two passport-size photographic portraits of the applicant; 
(10)  Provides all of the following information regarding the applicant on a form provided by the city manager: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number; 
b.  Age, height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
c.  Date and place of birth; 
d.  Explanations of all felony convictions within the ten years preceding the date of application; 
e.  Descriptions of all driver's licenses previously held, including date, location, and an explanation of any suspension or revocation thereof; and 
(11)  Pays a fee of $30.00 for the passenger vehicle for hire driver permit, which fee shall be used to defray the city's investigation and regulatory costs, and is not refundable. 
(b)  Applicants who fail to comply with each requirement of this section shall not be issued a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit. Applicants who knowingly misrepresent information provided under this section shall suffer suspension or revocation of the permit in accordance with section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.05) 
Sec. 78-93. - Renewal. 
(a)  Upon application, the city manager shall renew the passenger vehicle for hire driver permit for any applicant who: 
(1)  Has provided the city with updated and current information as required by section 78-92 and continues to meet all requirements for the permit listed within the section, except that the physician's document required by section 78-92(a)(6) must have been signed by the physician within 24 months preceding the renewal application; and 
(2)  Pays a permit fee of $30.00 for the renewed passenger vehicle for hire driver permit, which fee shall be used to defray the city's investigative and regulatory costs, and is not refundable. 
(b)  Applicants for renewed permits who fail to comply with each requirement of this section shall not be issued a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit. Applicants who knowingly misrepresent information provided under terms of this section shall suffer suspension or revocation of the permit in accordance with section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.06) 
Sec. 78-94. - Display. 
    No person shall operate a passenger vehicle for hire in the city unless a current and valid passenger vehicle for hire driver permit, reflecting the operator's name, is at all such times displayed inside the vehicle in full view from each passenger seat. Drivers who fail to comply with this section shall suffer regulatory penalties as provided in section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.07) 
Sec. 78-95. - Driver actions prohibited. 
(a)  The following actions by any holder of a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit are prohibited: 
(1)  Using obscene language, shouting, disorderly conduct, engaging in verbal or physical abuse of passengers, using illegal substances or narcotics at any time, using intoxicants while on duty or driving under their influence at any time. 
(2)  Receiving or discharging passengers in any manner which causes unnecessary blocking of traffic, or discharging or receiving passengers from the left side of the vehicle on a two-way street. 
(3)  Permitting any other person to occupy or ride in a passenger vehicle for hire, unless the person first employing the vehicle consents thereto or unless the posted service schedule gives clear notice of shared-ride service. 
(4)  Carrying more persons than allowed by the manufacturer's rated seating capacity. 
(5)  Charging in excess of the schedule of fares on file with the city clerk and posted in the vehicle. 
(6)  Failing to notify the city manager immediately and in writing of all changes in the information filed pursuant to sections 78-92 and 78-93. 
(7)  Cruising in such areas and at such times as may be designated by the city manager upon determination that such would cause traffic congestion or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles, provided that the city manager's decisions may be appealed in writing to the city commission. 
(8)  Driving a passenger vehicle for hire for more than 12 hours within any 24-hour period. 
(9)  Failing to carry an accurate manifest at all times while driving a passenger vehicle for hire. 
(10)  Refusing or neglecting to transport any orderly person upon request, unless previously engaged, off duty, or unable or forbidden by this Code to do so. 
(11)  Willfully defacing, or using while defaced or illegible, the passenger vehicle for hire driver permit. 
(12)  Failing to participate in the licensee's cleanliness program. 
(13)  Knowingly taking a fare that has been dispatched to another licensee or driver. 
(14)  Using or having in possession a scanner or any other device adjustable to or adjusted to the dispatch frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission to another passenger vehicle for hire licensee while driving a licensed passenger vehicle for hire. 
(15)  Failing to maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded the time and place of origin of each trip, together with the number of passengers so transported and the total fare charged, and making such manifests available upon request by the city manager for one full year beyond the latest date on the manifest. 
(16)  Refusing legitimate service to anyone regardless of race, creed, or color, except where the driver has good reason to believe that a potential customer represents a danger to himself or is unable to pay for the fare. 
(b)  Permittees who violate this section shall suffer regulatory penalties prescribed by section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.08) 
Sec. 78-96. - Receipts. 
    Any holder of a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit shall, upon request by any passenger, provide the passenger with a receipt showing the amount of all charges, the name of the driver, the permit number on his passenger vehicle for hire driver permit, and the date of the transaction. Violations of this section shall be penalized as provided by section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.09) 
Secs. 78-97-78-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE LICENSE 

Sec. 78-126. - Required. 
    No person shall offer any passenger vehicle for hire within the city before obtaining from the city manager a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license for each such vehicle. Violations of this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 92.10) 
Sec. 78-127. - Display of decal; standby vehicles. 
(a)  For each passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license issued, the city manager shall issue a corresponding decal which shall be affixed to the left side of the rear bumper of the vehicle for which the passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license has been issued. 
(b)  A passenger vehicle for hire license holder may obtain one temporary passenger vehicle for hire license and temporary decal, if there is a need to place a standby vehicle into service when a licensed vehicle for hire becomes temporarily inoperable. The temporary passenger vehicle for hire license may be obtained and issued only if the requirements of sections 78-128 and 78-129 have been met. In no event shall the standby vehicle be placed into service unless another licensed passenger vehicle for hire has been removed from service within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(c)  Operating a vehicle for hire without a license decal or a temporary decal shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 92.105) 
Sec. 78-128. - Requirements for issuance. 
(a)  Upon application, the city manager shall issue a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license only to any applicant who: 
(1)  Provides proof of, and agrees to maintain, insurance as described in section 78-63. 
(2)  By written signed document, agrees to maintain the vehicle in sound, safe operating condition and in conformance with applicable federal, state, and local laws throughout the duration of the license and to allow inspection by the city manager upon request. 
(3)  Files with the city clerk and agrees to maintain on file an accurate, current schedule of services offered and rates charged. 
(4)  Produces a valid and appropriate commercial state vehicle registration and pays a fee of $125.00 for each passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license issued, which license shall expire on September 30 of each year following the date of its issuance; provided that the cost of such licenses shall be annually adjusted by the city manager on or about the anniversary date of the enactment of Ordinance No. 85-7 to meet the costs to the city of administering the passenger vehicle for hire licensing requirements. 
(5)  Upon licensing, provides proof of ability to meet applicable requirements of section 78-129, including the four-vehicle requirement. 
(6)  Provides proof of a properly zoned business location with appropriate sewer and waste accounts. 
(7)  Files with the licensing division a current description of the passenger vehicle for hire logo, color scheme, and other identifiers of the business and agrees in writing not to imitate the logo or color scheme of another city-licensed passenger vehicle for hire. 
(b)  An applicant who fails to comply with each requirement of this section shall not be issued a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license. An applicant who knowingly misrepresents information required under this section shall suffer suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with section 78-32. Conviction for any offense in connection with the application for a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license shall render an applicant ineligible for receipt of a license for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Code 1986, § 92.11) 
Sec. 78-129. - Requirements of licensee. 
(a)  Any licensee to whom a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license has been granted must: 
(1)  Permit the licensed vehicle to be operated for hire only by a permittee named on a valid passenger vehicle for hire driver permit. 
(2)  Maintain on file with the city clerk an accurate current schedule of services offered and rates charged and post on the exterior of the licensed vehicle and within the licensed vehicle in view of each passenger seat a copy of the schedule, of a size approved by the city manager as being reasonable and legible, together with a current copy of the passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license. 
(3)  Maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded the time and places of origin and destination of each trip, together with the number of passengers so transported and the total fare charged, and make such manifests available upon request by the city manager for one full year beyond the latest date on the manifest. 
(4)  Maintain or participate with other licensees in a dispatch system offering service on a 24-hour, 365 days-per-year basis in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations and maintain at least four duly licensed passenger vehicles for hire in the city, three of which must be in service at all times. However, this requirement shall not apply to any licensee whose license was in effect on September 30, 1984, and who on September 30, 1984, was licensed to operate only one passenger vehicle for hire or to any person issued an independent passenger vehicle for hire driver permit pursuant to section 78-64. Further, if 28 or more duly licensed passenger for hire vehicles participate in a single dispatch system, eight vehicles must be maintained in the city, of which six must be in service at all times. Licensees are temporarily excused from performing in accordance with this subsection at times of street flooding, hurricane or other natural disaster. 
(5)  Maintain a sign attached to, or painted upon, each licensed vehicle, with the term "taxicab," "taxi," "cab," or "for hire" thereon, of a size and design approved by the city manager as being reasonable, durable and legible. 
(6)  Charge fares which are equal to or below, but not higher than, the rate schedule on file with the city clerk and posted in and on the vehicle. 
(7)  Notify the city manager of any change in the condition of the vehicle or of any change in information which could reasonably constitute a violation of the applicable standards contained in sections 78-1, 78-31, 78-32 and 78-61 through 78-63 and divisions 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(8)  Not use or have in his possession a scanner or any other device adjustable to or adjusted to the dispatch frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission to another passenger vehicle for hire licensee. 
(9)  Operate no vehicle that is, by reasonable maintenance standards, unsafe or likely to jeopardize the safety of passengers or the public at large. 
(10)  Register all d/b/a business names with the city manager. 
(11)  Maintain a vehicle cleanliness program that covers the interior and exterior of the vehicle. 
(12)  Upon request, give all prospective customers an estimated time of arrival. 
(13)  Maintain the business location as described in section 78-128(a)(6). 
(14)  Operate no vehicle that imitates the logo or color scheme or any other business identifier of another city-licensed passenger vehicle for hire 
(b)  The holder of a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license who fails to comply with each subsection of this section shall suffer regulatory penalties as provided in section 78-32. Nothing in this chapter shall require the holder of a passenger vehicle for hire license to provide service to a business with an exclusive contract with a contract vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1986, § 92.12) 
Sec. 78-130. - Renewal. 
    Any licensee granted a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license may renew the license by complying in full with each provision of section 78-128 and by furnishing to the city manager a signed document stating that the licensee has complied with section 78-129 and other applicable sections of this Code while operating under the license being renewed. A licensee who cannot comply with section 78-128 shall not be eligible for a renewed passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license. A licensee who has not fully complied with section 78-129 and other applicable sections of this chapter may receive a renewed license subject to the regulatory penalties provided in section 78-32. Any license not renewed by July 31 will become void and of no further use whatsoever to the license holder. 
(Code 1986, § 92.13) 
Sec. 78-131. - Advertising. 
    Subject to any regulations adopted by resolution of the city commission, any vehicle lawfully licensed under terms of sections 78-31 and 78-32 and divisions 3, 4 and 5 of this article may carry advertising matter, whether installed within or affixed to the exterior of the vehicle. A licensee whose vehicle is in violation of any such regulations shall be penalized as provided in section 78-32. 
(Code 1986, § 92.15) 
Sec. 78-132. - Provisional license. 
    Any applicant for a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license, upon request and upon submitting evidence of full compliance with section 78-128(a)(3) and upon full payment in compliance with section 78-128(a)(4) for each passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license sought, shall be granted by the city manager a provisional passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license, which shall entitle the applicant to apply for any Federal Communication Commission license necessary for compliance with the terms of this Code, but which shall not entitle the applicant to operate such vehicle as a passenger vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1986, § 92.21) 
Secs. 78-133-78-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 78-161. - Meters; zones. 
(a)  The holder of a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle license may install a taximeter in the passenger vehicle for hire fastened in front of the passengers and visible to them at all times. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically or electronically by a mechanism of standard design and construction and shall be approved, certified, and affixed with a security seal by the state bureau of weights and measures or that department's official city designee. A passenger vehicle for hire may not be commercially operated unless the security seal is in place. If a taximeter breaks down or is inaccurate, a flat rate or estimated rate that is less than or equal to the meter rate may be offered to a passenger, provided that it is disclosed in advance of departure. Taximeters that are inaccurate or broken must be reported to the city manager and repaired and resealed within one business day. Violations of this subsection will be subject to section 78-32(b). 
(b)  When there are four or more passengers and the per-person rate is disclosed in advance of departure, the passenger vehicle for hire driver may charge fares by zones. If the driver elects to charge by zones, the charge shall be on a per-person basis in accordance with the following zones: 
(1)  Zone 1, all areas west of White Street (old town zone). 
(2)  Zone 2, all areas east of White Street and west of Kennedy Drive (midtown zone). 
(3)  Zone 3, all areas east of Kennedy Drive and west of Cow Key Channel, including South Roosevelt Boulevard (uptown zone). 
(4)  Zone 4, Stock Island, Key Haven zone. 
(c)  Zone fares shall be as follows: 
(1)  Travel within a single zone, $2.00 per person. 
(2)  Travel within two zones, $2.50 per person. 
(3)  Travel within three zones, $3.00 per person. 
(4)  Travel within four zones, $3.50 per person. 
(d)  A map delineating zones shall be posted in and on the passenger vehicle for hire. All passengers disembarking on a zone line shall be charged the lowest rate applicable in conformity with the posted schedule of services and rates. Such map shall also be attached as an exhibit to Ordinance No. 99-1, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 92.16) 
Sec. 78-162. - Airport zone fares. 
    The zone fare rate ceilings in this section shall apply to holders of passenger vehicle for hire vehicle licenses who are authorized to operate from the Key West International Airport and may be charged only when picking up passengers from the airport or discharging passengers to the airport. The zone designations shall be those described in section 78-161(b). The city manager may adjust the zone fare ceilings in section 78-161 and this section upon request and upon provision of substantial and competent documentation that an adjustment is warranted. The first such request shall occur not before January 1, 2002, and not more frequently than once every four years. The zone fare rate ceilings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Zone 1, $7.00 per person, including all accompanying baggage. 
(2)  Zone 2, $6.00 per person, including all accompanying baggage. 
(3)  Zone 3, $5.00 per person, including all accompanying baggage. 
(4)  Zone 4, $6.00 per person, including all accompanying baggage. 
(Code 1986, § 92.161) 
Sec. 78-163. - Rate ceilings. 
    The meter rate ceilings in this section shall apply except as provided in sections 78-161, 78-162 and 78-164. The city manager may adjust these meter rate ceilings upon request and upon provision of substantial and competent documentation that an adjustment is warranted. The first such request shall occur not before January 1, 2002, and not more frequently than once every two years. The meter rate ceilings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Meter first one-fifth mile ..... $1.75 
(2)  Meter each additional one-fifth mile ..... 0.45 
(3)  Waiting charge per 50 seconds ..... 0.45 
(Code 1986, § 92.17) 
Sec. 78-164. - Special event rate. 
    Sections 78-161(b) and 78-163 shall not apply during special events as defined by the city manager, including Fantasy Fest and New Year's Eve; however, the maximum charge per person per trip during special events shall be $3.50. Special event rates shall be advertised on the exterior of the vehicle in lettering no less than three inches high reading as follows: 
"FARE: $3.50 PER PERSON." 
(Code 1986, § 92.171) 
Sec. 78-165. - Wrongful refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any passenger vehicle for hire after having hired, and been transported in, the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to hire any passenger vehicle for hire with intent to defraud the driver or licensee of the value of such service. Violations of this section shall be subject to penalties provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 92.19) 
Sec. 78-166. - Demand for prepayment. 
    A holder of a passenger vehicle for hire driver permit may demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid. 
(Code 1986, § 92.20) 
Sec. 78-167. - Clean up fee. 
    In the event that a taxicab passenger soils the interior of a taxicab with bodily fluids or solids, a $50.00 clean-up fee will be added to the trip fare. Notice of this fee must be posted in a location inside the vehicle that is plainly visible to the passengers. 
(Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Secs. 78-168-78-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACT VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 78-196. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Upon receipt of reasonable evidence of contract vehicle for hire violations of this chapter by a permittee granted a valid contract vehicle for hire driver permit or by a licensee granted a valid contract vehicle for hire vehicle license, the city manager shall, consistent with subsection (c) of this section, issue a written warning for any such violation. 
(b)  Upon receipt of reasonable evidence of three or more violations of this chapter, the city manager shall, consistent with subsection (c) of this section, impose a determinate suspension or revocation of the permittee's or licensee's contract vehicle for hire driver permit or contract vehicle for hire vehicle license. 
(c)  Before reaching any decision under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Afford the permittee or licensee a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  Consider the permittee's or licensee's past record of compliance with the applicable sections of this Code, if any; and 
(3)  Consider any apparent risk to public safety and welfare. 
(d)  No licensee may transfer his license during the period commencing with a notice of violation and the completion of the suspension or revocation period. 
(e)  The city manager's decision shall be rendered in writing and shall include notice to the permittee or licensee of a right to appeal the decision to the city commission within ten days thereof. Appeals not filed in writing with the city clerk within this period shall be deemed waived and shall not be heard by the city commission. 
(f)  Any contract vehicle for hire or passenger vehicle for hire license holder or other private party damaged by a violation of Ordinance No. 00-1 by a contract vehicle for hire license holder may seek injunctive relief against the contract vehicle for hire license holder in the circuit court. The prevailing party shall be entitled to recover attorneys' fees and costs. 
(Code 1986, § 92.38) 
Sec. 78-197. - Licensing. 
    Before any person shall conduct or maintain a business of renting, leasing, or providing any contract vehicle for hire within the territorial boundaries of the city, such person shall make application to the city as provided in section 78-128, shall conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter, and shall state the exact location of the intended place of business and any intermediate or way stations. No such business shall be conducted or maintained unless such license is duly issued, upon fees paid in the amount set forth in section 78-128(a)(4), and unless the applicant has caused to be executed and maintains in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each vehicle in the amounts set forth in section 78-63. 
(Code 1986, § 92.33) 
Sec. 78-198. - Limits on issuance of licenses. 
(a)  One contract vehicle for hire license shall be issued per each licensed vehicle. There shall be a cap on the number of contract vehicle for hire licenses issued. For the purposes of this section, the maximum number of contract vehicle for hire vehicles shall be based upon the number of such vehicles in operation and insured as of January 28, 1999, the date the city issued notice to van operators of its intention not to renew their business tax receipts based on F.S. § 341.102. Documentation, including proof of insurance and contracts with business entities as of January 28, 1999, and VIN numbers of such insured vehicles shall be provided to the licensing division. Upon such proof, a contract vehicle for hire license will be granted to the following entities only, so long as the potential licensees make full and proper application on or before 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives: 
(1)  Eggs Transportation, Inc.; 
(2)  GDS; 
(3)  Southernmost Shuttle; 
(4)  Conch Kids Commute; 
(5)  ARM; 
(6)  Island City Bus; and 
(7)  Florida Keys Ground Transportation. 
If one of the entities named in this subsection fails to obtain a license consistent with the terms of this chapter, the license shall become void and shall not be granted to the applicant or any other person. 
(b)  Contract vehicle for hire licenses may be transferred upon application to the city manager. Such transfer application must include all the applicable provisions of sections 78-128 and 78-129 and must include a bona fide transfer document executed by the transferor (seller) and transferee (buyer). No transfer may be made to an existing contract vehicle for hire license holder. 
(c)  Contract vehicle for hire licenses may be renewed from year to year; however, any license not renewed is void and shall neither be of further use to the license holder nor be transferred or issued to another entity. 
(d)  In October of every even-numbered year commencing in 2008, the city commission shall hold a public hearing, after written request to the city manager, to determine if it is in the public interest to issue additional contract vehicle for hire licenses. If at this public hearing the issuance of new contract vehicle for hire licenses is deemed necessary, the city commission shall adopt a resolution making such finding of necessity and stating the number of licenses to be issued on a random basis by a method approved by the city manager. In making findings as to whether the public interest requires the issuance of new licenses, the city commission shall take into consideration the number of contract vehicle for hire and passenger vehicle for hire vehicles already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet public need, demonstrated demands necessitating additional services, and the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions. 
(e)  Contract vehicle for hire contracts in existence as of the January 4, 2000 which do not require 24-hour advance booking may remain in effect. 
(Code 1986, § 92.34; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-199. - General regulations. 
(a)  Contract vehicle for hire vehicles and drivers shall be subject to section 78-63, division 3 of article II of this chapter and sections 78-126 through 78-130, as they pertain to contract vehicles for hire and their drivers. 
(b)  A contract vehicle for hire license holder may only transport passengers who are under contract. A contract vehicle for hire vehicle shall not cruise the streets or stand by. The driver of the contract vehicle for hire vehicle shall maintain in his possession a copy of the contract that governs the transaction with the passenger. 
(c)  A contract vehicle for hire vehicle shall not imitate a passenger vehicle for hire vehicle, including but not limited to the use of existing passenger vehicle for hire company color schemes; the carrying of advertising material; the use of roof lights and signage, checkers, top lights; and the posting of rates. No contract vehicle for hire vehicle shall carry the term "taxi," "livery," "jitney," "shuttle" or any other term that could be construed as on-demand transportation. 
(Code 1986, § 92.35) 
Sec. 78-200. - Advertising prohibited. 
    Contract vehicle for hire vehicles shall not carry any exterior advertising except for the name, address and phone number of the contract vehicle for hire business. A licensee whose vehicle is in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 78-196. 
(Code 1986, § 92.36) 
Sec. 78-201. - Fares. 
    Contract vehicle for hire licensees shall not use or install meters or any other electronic device to calculate fares. Fares shall be determined and set forth in the contract between the contract vehicle for hire licensee and the passenger; provided, however, that a contract vehicle for hire fare shall not be less than a passenger vehicle for hire fare (per person or group rate) for the same route. For prearranged transportation, the fare shall be provided to the passenger in writing prior to the commencement of the service. A holder of a contract vehicle for hire driver permit may demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid. 
(Code 1986, § 92.37) 
Sec. 78-202. - Wrongful refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any contract vehicle for hire after having hired and been transported in the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to hire any contract vehicle for hire with intent to defraud the driver or licensee of the value of such service. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1986, § 92.39) 
Secs. 78-203-78-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGHTSEEING VEHICLES OPERATED PURSUANT TO BUSINESS LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 09-23, adopted Dec. 3, 2009, amended Art. IV, Sightseeing Vehicles, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 78-231. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 09-23, adopted Dec. 3, 2009, deleted § 78-231, which pertained to definition of sightseeing motor vehicles, and derived from § 92.24 of the 1986 Code. Ord. No. 09-23 further provided for similar definitions which can be found in § 78-1. 
Sec. 78-232. - Regulatory power. 
    The city commission is granted the right to make such other rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the vehicles under this article as may be recommended by the chief of police and city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 92.32) 
Sec. 78-233. - Number authorized. 
    The number of sightseeing vehicles authorized and declared as a public convenience and necessity shall not exceed seven; provided, however, as the licenses are not renewed or applied for, the city commission, in its discretion, may reduce the number of licenses from time to time. Any person who has purchased such license for a sightseeing vehicle is not authorized to transfer the license except with the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 92.31) 
Sec. 78-234. - Inspection. 
    The police department is granted the right to inspect the vehicles operated under this article at all reasonable times for safe operation. If the department determines that any such vehicle is unsafe for transportation of passengers for hire, the licensee thereof must immediately place the vehicle in a safe condition and obtain a certificate from a licensed garage certifying to the safety of such vehicle before it may be again used for such operation. 
(Code 1986, § 92.27) 
Sec. 78-235. - Length. 
    No person shall operate any sightseeing vehicle as contemplated by this article upon the city streets when the overall length exceeds the maximum length specified under state law. 
(Code 1986, § 92.25) 
Sec. 78-236. - Liability insurance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sightseeing vehicle unless such person shall have first procured and filed with the city clerk and shall thereafter maintain and keep in full force and effect and on file in the office of the city clerk, at all times while such vehicle is being driven or operated, a liability insurance policy, issued by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, in the amount of $100,000.00 for one person injured or killed and $300,000.00 for more than one person injured or killed in any one accident, and $50,000.00 for all property damaged or destroyed in any one accident, covering such vehicle. Such policy shall conform with section 78-63. 
(Code 1986, § 92.30) 
Sec. 78-237. - Seating capacity generally. 
    No sightseeing motor vehicle for sightseeing for hire shall exceed the passenger capacity of such vehicle as may be determined to be safe for such passengers, and such capacity must be forthwith registered with the police department and approved by it. 
(Code 1986, § 92.26) 
Sec. 78-238. - Passenger fare rates. 
    The city commission is authorized to establish rates for sightseeing motor vehicle passenger fares, upon recommendation of the city manager, and such rates shall be publicly displayed at the off-street parking area or depot and on each of the motor vehicles where the rates may be plainly seen and read by the public. 
(Code 1986, § 92.28) 
Sec. 78-239. - Ticket sales and solicitations restricted. 
    No licensee of sightseeing motor vehicles shall be permitted, either personally or through an agent, servant or employee, to solicit business for sightseeing at any public place within the city or to sell tickets for such purpose, except to persons on the off-street parking area of the depot. However, the prohibition against the sale of tickets shall not apply to any licensed ticket sales agency or to the sale of tickets on the off-street parking area of any point of interest in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 92.29) 
Secs. 78-240-78-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGHTSEEING VEHICLES OPERATING PURSUANT TO FRANCHISE 

Sec. 78-250. - [Regulatory power.] 
    Pursuant to applicable law, the city commission may regulate vehicles for hire, including, but not limited to, sightseeing motor vehicles operating within the Key West city limits. 
    Other than sightseeing motor vehicles operating pursuant to business licenses, as outlined in article IV, above, all other sightseeing motor vehicles operating within the City of Key West must operate pursuant to a franchise ordinance approved by the Key West City Commission pursuant to article 7.01(4) of the City Charter. 
    The commission may, from time to time, enter into franchise agreements with particular grantee(s), granting the right, privilege, and franchise to use designated streets, avenues and other public highways, together with other public property designated by the city commission in said city, for and during periods of up to ten years. Said franchise agreements shall be for the purpose of a particular grantee's operating and maintaining sightseeing motor vehicles in said city, the enjoyment and exercise of the right so granted to be at all times in conformity with, and subject to, all provisions, terms and conditions of this article. A grantee's right to use the city's streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant the use of all streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of any franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
    This article V shall apply to any franchise issued after the effective date of this ordinance, whether a renewal of an existing franchise or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 09-23, § 6, 12-3-2009) 
Sec. 78-251. - Franchise application process. 
(a)  Any person or corporation desiring to obtain a new or renewal franchise to operate sightseeing motor vehicles pursuant to this article V shall file an application with the city manager, along with an application fee of $5,000.00 made payable to the City of Key West to subsidize the costs of processing applications. Applications shall only be accepted within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this ordinance and thereafter only between November 1 and November 30th of each odd-numbered year. 
(b)  In order for a franchise application to be considered by the city commission, the application shall contain the following (all submitted in electronic and paper format) to the city manager: 
(1)  Proposed franchise ordinance meeting the requisites of section 78-252(a); 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation, a letter of good standing issued by the Florida Department of State, Division of Corporations, certifying that the applicant is either a Florida corporation, or a foreign corporation, which is duly registered with the Florida Division of Corporations; 
(3)  Proposed number of vehicles to be operated under the franchise, with true and accurate color photographs of the vehicles to be used in the operation, along with accurate dimensions, seating capacity, fully loaded weight and turning radius of such vehicles. Except for sightseeing vehicles currently operating pursuant to Florida Statutes section 316.515(6), or otherwise excepted by the Florida Legislature, the maximum length of vehicles operated under a franchise shall be thirty-nine feet (39'), the maximum width shall be eight feet six inches (8'6?), the maximum height shall be twelve feet (12'), the maximum height above the ground at which the driver is seated shall be eighty inches (80?) and the maximum gross vehicle weight shall be twenty-six thousand pounds (26,000 lbs); 
(4)  Proposed fixed route, schedules, stops and hours of the operation delineated on a Key West city map and a plan to minimize noise and traffic impacts on the residents and guests of the City of Key West; and 
(5)  Proposed script of the sightseeing tour to be given to passengers. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application meeting all the requirements listed in this article, the city manager shall deem an application "duly-submitted". The applicant shall meet with the city manager and the city attorney within thirty (30) days of receipt of a duly-submitted application to discuss contents of the application and any suggested modifications. The city manager shall place the item as an ordinance for first reading to appear on the agenda for a regularly scheduled city commission meeting occurring within 60 days of the city manager's designation of the application as being duly-submitted. 
(Ord. No. 09-23, § 6, 12-3-2009; Ord. No. 15-19, § 1, 12-16-2015) 
Sec. 78-252. - City commission consideration of duly-submitted application. 
    The Key West City Commission has plenary authority regarding any duly-submitted franchise application. 
    Consistent with the requirements specified in this chapter, the city commission may grant any application, deny any application, or grant any application with amendments, or conditions, upon any reason in which the city commission deems appropriate for the protection of health, safety and welfare and which advances the public convenience. 
(a)  Subject to the above plenary authority, the city commission shall not approve a proposed franchise ordinance hereunder unless such franchise ordinance includes: 
(1)  A provision requiring: that the franchisee shall, at all times, maintain liability insurance in an amount of not less than $10,000,000.00 per occurrence. Such insurance shall comply with the laws and regulations of the State of Florida. All insurance policies insuring said sightseeing/shuttle vehicles shall be issued by an insurance company registered to do business in the State of Florida, subject to the laws and regulations of the State of Florida. Insurers issuing the above-referenced policies must maintain an A.M. Best rating of no less than "A". The City of Key West shall be named as an additional insured on all liability policies. The policies shall contain a waiver of subrogation provision whereas the franchisee's insurer waives any claim against the City of Key West. Certificates of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk evidencing the minimum limits of insurance cited above. All policies shall provide they may not be terminated or modified without the insurer providing the city at least 30 days' advance notice. The franchisee shall immediately notify the city of any cancellation of such insurance. 
At the request of the city manager, the franchisee shall meet with the city's representatives to review the extent and amount of insurance coverage provided hereunder. Should the city manager believe that the coverage provided is not sufficient to protect its interest, it may specify the increased level of insurance required. If franchisee objects to the level of coverage, city and franchisee shall enter into a binding arbitration within 15 days of the date of the dispute to resolve the issue. If city and franchisee are unable to agree on a neutral arbitrator, each party shall select an arbitrator who will then appoint a third arbitrator to resolve the matter. If an arbitrator is not selected through no fault of the city, the coverage required by the city shall be placed. 
(2)  A provision requiring an annual franchise fee be paid to the City of Key West in an amount equal to the greater of (i) five percent of gross revenues it receives from all sources derived from operations pursuant to the franchise agreement (including, but not limited to, shuttle services), or (ii) $7,500.00 per vehicle authorized in the franchise agreement (this amount shall be referred to as the "guaranteed minimum payment"). If a franchisee elects to sell advertising on its sightseeing vehicles, no more than twenty percent (20%) of the surface area of the vehicle available for such purposes may be used. In consideration of the allowance to provide advertising, franchisee agrees not to enter into any agreement that requires it to operate any sightseeing vehicle on a minimum basis. The $7,500.00 per vehicle fee shall be increased yearly in an amount equal to the increase in the United States Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Said five percent shall be paid at the end of each calendar month with a 15-day grace period. The yearly guaranteed minimum payment per vehicle shall be payable at the end of each 12-month period with a ten-day grace period. The guaranteed minimum payment per vehicle is payable based upon the number of vehicles authorized in the franchise agreement and not the number actually operated pursuant to the franchise. Failure to pay any sum when due shall result in imposition of interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum of the delinquent amount per month or such maximum amount permitted by law until paid in full. 
(3)  A provision which includes, with detail and specificity, each and every location where vehicles operated pursuant to the franchise will pick up or drop off passengers (hereinafter referred to as "stop(s)") and each and every location deemed a "stand" where vehicles will stage operations. 
(4)  A provision requiring that the city manager shall have the authority to disapprove any stop, which in the city manager's opinion disrupts traffic, city operations, or is otherwise unreasonably injurious to the public welfare. Should franchisee or any affected party or entity disagree with the decision of the city manager, it shall, by filing written notice with the city clerk appeal the decision to the city commission. 
Should franchisee disagree with the decision of the city manager, it shall, by filing written notice with the city clerk within three days of the city manager's written determination, appeal the decision to the city commission. 
Upon the establishment of any proposed stop, the city manager shall mail notice to all property owners and franchisees located within 300 feet of the proposed stop. Such property owners and franchisees shall have 20 days from the mailing of the notice to appeal the decision of the city manager to the city commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall also cause notice to be mailed to all property owners and franchisees located within 300 feet of any location that the city manager has denied the franchisee an opportunity to establish a stop, and for which the franchisee has appealed, informing them of the city commission meeting at which such appeal will be considered. 
The city commission shall set the matter for hearing with appropriate public notice for the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. By majority vote, the commission may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager based upon the factors considered by the city manager and those contained in subsection (b) below. 
Such authorized stops shall be for the loading and unloading of passengers only. The franchisee shall not solicit persons or transact ticket sales on the city streets or sidewalks. The city manager shall have the authority to move stops and to reasonably regulate their use by the franchisee, including requiring of the sharing of stops with other franchisees. The location of stops may be marked on city streets in accordance with the City Code of Ordinances by the city for the benefit of the franchisee. The franchisee, with the consent of the city manager, may install signage at such stops subject to any applicable city regulations. If the city should lawfully decide to alter or change the grade of any street or to make any other public improvements which, in the city manager's sole discretion, requires the franchisee to relocate, modify, or otherwise alter its operations under this franchise, the city manager shall give the franchisee at least 48 hours' notice of such decision and may require the franchisee to remove its signs, vehicles, or other property in order to facilitate such city project. The franchisee shall acknowledge and agree to release the city from any losses, injuries, or damages it may suffer as a result of such decision by the city. The movement or relocation of any stops on public property shall be applied equally to all operators under city franchises. The city shall not require a franchisee to relocate, temporarily or otherwise, unless the same request is made to all similarly situated franchisees. 
(5)  A provision which delineates, with detail and specificity, the fixed route of the operation along with an acknowledgment that no operator of a sightseeing vehicle authorized under the franchise shall drive at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. 
The city manager shall have the authority to disapprove any route which in the city manager's opinion disrupts traffic, city operations, or is otherwise unreasonably injurious to the public welfare. 
(6)  If the franchise permits shuttle operations, a provision which requires all such shuttle operations to be subject to the franchise fee provisions; 
(7)  A provision including the duration and term of the franchise, which duration or term shall not exceed ten years. If a franchise is granted for ten (10) years, it shall be in the form of a five (5) year term, with an option for an additional five years conditioned upon franchisee's compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement during the initial term; 
(8)  A provision which, subject to due process considerations, authorizes the city, upon reasonable notice, to terminate the franchise ordinance upon a finding that the operator has defaulted under, or otherwise violated, the franchise agreement and has not corrected the default after reasonable notice; 
(9)  A provision requiring the franchisee to indemnify the City of Key West for any and all claims related to the franchisee's operations; 
(10)  A provision whereby the operator expressly acknowledges that the operator is prohibited from transacting ticket sales on the streets or sidewalks of the city; and 
(11)  A provision requiring that all sightseeing vehicles operated pursuant to the franchise agreement use propane fuel or some other environmentally sensitive alternative fuel. 
(12)  A provision requiring the franchisee to have its gross revenues and payments to the city audited at least every three years by a certified public accounting firm pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles, and the results of said audit be promptly transmitted to the city. City shall also retain the right to have gross revenues and payments to the city audited at its own expense by a certified public accounting firm selected by city upon 14 days' written notice to franchisee and further provided that the results of such audit be immediately transmitted to franchisee promptly upon completion. Upon 14 days' written notice to franchisee, city shall be permitted to inspect franchisee's books, records and other pertinent financial information to ensure compliance with the provisions of paragraph (2) above. 
(13)  A provision whereby the proposed number of vehicles must be placed into service within three hundred sixty days (360) from the effective date of the franchise agreement. The number of permitted vehicles allowed under the franchise agreement shall be reduced by the number not placed into service within three hundred sixty days (360) of the effective date of the franchise agreement. Placed into service shall mean the sightseeing vehicle is located within the area governed by the franchise agreement and available for operation in the franchisee's regular course of business. 
(14)  A provision requiring the franchise operator to keep records of the number of vehicles operated each day and the number of fare paying passengers on each vehicle type. The records shall be provided to the city on a quarterly basis to determine the percentage of occupancy and ridership. 
(15)  Reserved. 
(16)  Reserved. 
(17)  Reserved. 
(18)  A provision that requires a franchise operator to report any damage to persons or property involving a vehicle used in the operation of the franchise on a quarterly basis. 
(19)  A provision that details the franchisee's plan to contain sound from the tour's narration within the public right-of-way. Franchisee shall acknowledge the requirement to comply with the city's sound control ordinance as may be amended from time to time. 
(20)  A provision providing for an annual performance review of the franchise operation. The provision shall provide that the city manager or his/her designee shall review the performance of the franchise holder. The evaluation shall include, but not be limited to, the following categories: Compliance with the terms and conditions of this article and grantee's franchise agreement; percentage of ridership and need for alteration of the number of vehicles permitted under the franchise agreement; responsiveness to customer complaints; safety of operations; cleanliness, condition and appearance of sightseeing motor vehicles. After each such evaluation an evaluation report specifically addressing any area of concern shall be provided to the evaluated franchise holder ("evaluation report"). Each franchise holder may respond to areas of concern noted in the report. The city manager or his/her designee may issue such follow up reports, or take such other action as is warranted, up to and including termination, as set forth herein. 
(21)  Reserved. 
(22)  A provision that details the training plan for the operators of each sightseeing vehicle, including, but not limited to, licensure requirements and ensuring historical accuracy of tour narration. 
(b)  Subject to the plenary authority of the city commission regarding the issuance and renewal of franchise hereunder, factors which the city commission shall take into consideration in acting upon a duly submitted franchise application include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Public safety; 
(2)  Traffic impacts, including whether the grant of a franchise would unreasonably increase congestion in the historic district; 
(3)  Performance history of the applicant, if applicable; 
(4)  Financial responsibility and wherewithal of applicant; 
(5)  Consistency of vehicle aesthetics and city environment; 
(6)  Consistency between vehicle aesthetics and historical neighborhoods; 
(7)  Environmental impacts; 
(8)  Capacity and volume of noncommercial and commercial traffic; 
(9)  Public input; 
(10)  A demonstrated public benefit for the services to be provided; and 
(11)  Any other factors in which legislative bodies would normally consider in acting upon proposed ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 09-23, § 6, 12-3-2009; Ord. No. 15-19, § 1, 12-16-2015) 
Chapter 82 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city commission in development of free port, § 1.03. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; coastal construction and floodplain management codes, § 14-391 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110; coastal resources, § 110-181 et seq.; zoning, ch. 122; waterways, watercraft and marine-related structures, § 122-1186. 
State Law reference- Vessels, F.S. ch. 327. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15. Penalties imposed under section 1-15 shall not be exclusive of any other applicable penalty or remedy under federal, state or local law. 
(Code 1986, § 42.12) 
Sec. 82-2. - Alteration of Key West's main ship channel. 
(a)  Unless approved by a super majority vote of the city commission, the city commission, its boards, committees, agencies, authorized representatives or employees in the course of their duties, shall not take any action individually or in cooperation with any person or entity which could result in the widening, deepening or other alteration of Key West's main ship channel. Any such super majority vote may only occur after notice by publication at least twenty-one (21) days in advance of the meeting at which the vote is to take place. 
(b)  This ordinance [section] may only be amended, rescinded or otherwise altered by a super majority vote of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Secs. 82-3-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VESSELS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Extension of police powers in the tidal waters, § 1.02; power for development of municipal free port, § 103. 
State Law reference- Vessel safety, F.S. ch. 327; beautification and improvement of waterways by municipalities, F.S. § 342.03. 

Sec. 82-31. - Unlawful docking and mooring. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dinghy means a small boat usually 13 feet or less, either inflatable or rigid, that serves to provide transportation between a larger anchored vessel and land. 
    Tender means a small boat larger than 13 feet but normally less than 20 feet, either inflatable or rigid that serves to provide transportation between a larger anchored vessel and land. 
(b)  It is unlawful to tie, moor, anchor, beach or attach in any way a vessel to public or private property, including seawalls, structures, other vessels, waterway markers, signposts or fence posts, vegetation (trees, bushes, plants) and submerged lands, without prior written permission from the owner within the city limits, unless authorized by state and/or federal law. When the owner of the property is the city, the written permission must be granted by the city manager or his/her designee. This written permission shall be specific to the vessel by registration number and operator by name and shall include the duration of permission to stay. Failure to provide written permission to a law enforcement official may result in the removal and storage of the vessel at the owner's expense consistent with state and local law. Responsibility of compliance with this section is the burden of the vessel owner/operator. 
(c)  All vessels docking at a city marina or mooring in a city mooring field shall abide by the rules and regulations of the city. The respective dockmasters are authorized to enforce such rules and regulations. 
(d)  The city manager or his/her designee shall designate areas to be used as dinghy docks. 
(e)  Dinghies in disrepair, with protruding edges or any other conditions that may damage a neighboring docked dinghy will not be permitted to dock at the dinghy dock. 
(f)  Prior to securing a dinghy at any city-owned dinghy dock designated by the city manager or his/her designee or prior to securing a tender at any city-owned dock, the owner of the dinghy or tender shall provide payment for dockage in advance. In addition, the owner of the dinghy or tender shall present proof that the dinghy or tender was tethered to a vessel which is currently enrolled and participating in the pump-out service administered by Monroe County. In the alternative, the owner of the dinghy or tender may present a valid receipt establishing that the dinghy or tender was tethered to a vessel which was serviced by a pump-out service within fourteen (14) days of the owner's request to dock. 
(g)  In the event a dinghy is placed at a city-owned dock designated by the city manager or his/her designee or a tender is placed at a city-owned dock without permission and without complying with subsections (e) and (f) above, a notice of the violation will be placed on the dinghy or tender directing the owner to contact the dock master to correct the violation or violations and to pay the dockage fee within one (1) hour. In the event the violations are not remedied within the prescribed period, the dinghy or tender will be towed by the dock master to the dock master's office where it will be impounded and secured. A $25.00 impound fee to the marina will be required for release of the dinghy or tender to its owner. 
(Code 1986, § 42.01; Ord. No. 14-10, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 82-32. - Certain prohibitions for Salt Ponds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motorized vessel means any vessel powered by fuel, including but not limited to gasoline and diesel fuel. 
    Salt Ponds means the following described area: From the intersection of South Roosevelt Boulevard with the south bank of Riviera Canal, proceed south and then west along South Roosevelt Boulevard to Bertha Street; thence north along Bertha Street to Flagler Avenue; thence east along Flagler Avenue to 11th Street; thence south along 11th Street to the south bank of Riviera Canal; thence along the south bank of Riviera Canal to its intersection with South Roosevelt Boulevard, but excluding the extension of Riviera Canal, between Salt Run Creek and 11th Street, and excluding the two finger canals extending southward from Riviera Canal and located within the Riviera Shores Subdivision. 
    Vessel means every type of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on or in water. 
(b)  Prohibitions. No person shall: 
(1)  Operate a motorized vessel in the Salt Ponds. 
(2)  Conduct a commercial tour in the Salt Ponds using any type of vessel. 
(c)  Exemption. Emergency craft shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1986, § 42.02) 
Sec. 82-33. - Marine sanitation systems. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compost system means a self-contained dry composting toilet. 
    Habitable vessel means a waterborne craft, including liveaboard vessels, that is equipped with an onboard toilet which is connected to a fitting that allows for the overboard discharge of sewage. 
    Habitation means overnight occupation of a vessel or floating home by one or more persons, while the vessel or floating home is moored, docked or anchored in any of the public waterways lying within the city. 
    Incineration device means a facility approved by the United States Coast Guard located on a vessel which is capable of reducing waste from any vessel to clean ash. 
    Marine sanitation device means a functioning facility capable of removing waste from any vessel and discharging the waste into a disposal system approved by all governmental authorities having jurisdiction over this system and available for use by persons living aboard habitable vessels. 
(b)  Use required. Every owner of a habitable vessel where habitation is occurring and which is docked or moored within the jurisdictional limits of the city and every real property owner who has a habitable vessel where habitation is occurring 
docked or moored at his property shall be required to have such vessel at all times use one of the following: 
(1)  A marine sanitation device consistent with F.S. § 327.53; 
(2)  An approved incineration device; 
(3)  A dock or shoreside holding tank; 
(4)  A compost system; or 
(5)  A city sewer line. 
(c)  Consistency with federal and state laws. All marine sanitation requirements of the city shall be consistent with applicable federal and state laws. 
(d)  Operators in Key West Bight. All operators of habitable vessels in the jurisdiction of the Key West Bight shall abide by the following terms set forth in the Sovereignty Submerged Land Leases between the city and the state: 440027185 page 6 section J & K and D.E.P. Marina Permit 440027185 section 9 & 10 (j&9): "The marina operator shall direct all vessels entering the facilities, for the purpose of mooring, to the sewage pumpout facilities where 1. All holding tanks shall be pumped 2. All vessels without holding tanks shall have the head discharge sea cock closed and sealed. It is the responsibility of the lessee (City of Key West) to ensure thereafter that the holding tanks of liveaboards are pumped at required intervals, and that vessels without holding tanks shall have their sea cocks sealed.... The Lessee (City of Key West) and marina operations staff shall inform all slip occupants in writing of the availability and requirements to use the sewage pumpout facilities provided at the docking facility." 
(e)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge untreated or inadequately treated sewage or, if it so pertains, to violate subsection (d) of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person in the jurisdiction of the city to rent, lease, or otherwise provide dock space for any habitable vessel unless the vessel is equipped with a marine sanitation system pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, install or use any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance, the use of which will conceal any discharge that would otherwise constitute a violation of any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 42.03) 
State Law reference- Marine sanitation, F.S. § 327.53. 
Sec. 82-34. - Noise. 
    All vessels shall comply with the muffle and other requirements in F.S. § 327.65. 
(Code 1986, § 42.04) 
State Law reference- Muffling devices, F.S. § 327.65. 
Sec. 82-35. - Dockage fees. 
    All vessels docked in city marinas or moored at city mooring fields that are subject to dockage fees shall have the dockage fees applied on a length-overall basis. To determine the length overall of a vessel, the dockmaster shall measure the vessel from the furthermost portion of the bow to the aftermost portion of the stern or platform, including additions or extensions. 
(Code 1986, § 42.05) 
Sec. 82-36. - Charterboats. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "charterboat" means any vessel for hire or other watercraft operated from a city dockage facility or private property for the purpose of providing a charter to private parties. 
(b)  All operators of charterboats and vessels for hire docked at a city marina shall execute a lease with the city and shall be subject both to the lease terms and applicable marina regulations. 
(c)  All operators of charterboats and vessels for hire shall hold a business tax receipt from the city for each vessel. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the vessel. 
(d)  All fish caught by any particular person on any charterboat shall belong to the person catching it, who may, however, give the fish to the captain or the operator of the charterboat to dispose of as he sees fit. 
(e)  The city commission shall determine at a public hearing whether and to what extent the city will continue to establish a reasonable number of charterboats within all city-operated marinas. The Key West Bight Board is authorized to extend such limitation to its tenants with respect to their subtenants, if the board so deems necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 42.06; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 82-37. - Liveaboard vessels. 
(a)  Liveaboard vessels within the jurisdictional waters of the city are not subject to the city's BPAS ordinance when such vessels are intended for permanent habitation by docking or mooring. Therefore, liveaboard vessels attempting to be established after the effective date of the BPAS ordinance shall not be limited thereby. Unless otherwise provided in the land development regulations, privately owned bay bottom shall not be recognized as the same as upland property for the purposes of density. Liveaboard vessels shall only be located in marinas duly approved for liveaboards and the number of liveaboard vessels shall not exceed the number of approved slips per any city, state, or federal approvals. 
(b)  Liveaboard vessels shall be docked or moored consistent with sections 82-31 and 82-33. No liveaboard shall be kept on public or private property in violation of the city zoning laws. 
(c)  No private or public utility shall provide water, electricity or other utility service to a liveaboard vessel that is in violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 42.07; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-5-2018) 
Sec. 82-38. - Abandonment; mooring creating menace to navigation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vessel in the public waterways within the jurisdictional limits of the city or to moor such vessel in such manner as to cause it to become a menace to navigation. 
(Code 1986, § 42.08) 
Sec. 82-39. - Blocking navigation channel. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Device means any net, seine, rope, stake, piling, pontoon, floatline wire, trap, buoy or any similar device, except a hand-thrown cast net. 
    Navigation channel means any channel between two land masses, fingers or landfills designed for use by watercraft of any type; any project channel marked and maintained by the federal government; a natural channel marked either by the federal government or a local governmental agency; or any natural or artificial channel which is neither marked nor maintained by any governmental authority. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to place into any navigation channel any device that either temporarily or permanently obstructs the navigation channel in such a manner as to impede the movement of vessels within the navigation channel or that impedes the ingress and egress of vessels in such navigation channel, except where placement of such devices is required in carrying out duly authorized dredging and channel maintenance programs. 
(Code 1986, § 42.09) 
Sec. 82-40. - Removal and impoundment of dangerous or hazardous vessels. 
(a)  Any vessel, due to fire, explosion, accident, act of God, or other disaster, which, in the opinion of the city manager, in consultation with the U.S. Coast Guard, constitutes a clear and present danger to life or property shall be subject to removal and impoundment by the city in a manner consistent with the paramount interest of providing for the safety of the public, and costs incident thereto shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  Any sunken vessel which, in the opinion of the city manager, in consultation with the U.S. Coast Guard or the state marine patrol, constitutes a hazard to navigation shall be subject to removal and impoundment by the city in a manner consistent with the paramount interest of maintaining the waterways in a safe and navigable condition, and the costs incident thereto shall be borne by the owner. 
(Code 1986, § 42.10) 
Sec. 82-41. - No discharge zone. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "vessel" means any boat, houseboat, charterboat, fishing boat, or floating structure, whether or not habitable. 
(b)  The jurisdictional waters of the city are declared to be a no discharge zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge treated or untreated sewage into the jurisdictional waters of the city from any vessel, whether moored, docked, in transit, or otherwise located within these waters. 
(c)  Every marina in Key West shall install sanitary sewage pump-out facilities to serve every vessel and floating structure that docks at the marina. The marina proprietor shall require that the owner or operator of each vessel and floating structure both lock out the black water discharge pipe and use the pump-out facilities as a condition of dockage; all leases or other agreements for dockage shall include this pump-out requirement, as well as a statement that the jurisdictional waters of Key West are a no discharge zone. Each marina owner shall post conspicuous signage informing vessel operators of the no discharge zone. Except as provided in section 82-33(d), pump-out shall occur within 24 hours of the vessel's arrival at the marina, unless the vessel departs within 24 hours of arrival, in which case pump-out is not required. Every such private marina shall maintain a pump-out log showing the sewage disposal history of each vessel and floating structure during its dockage at the marina. Every owner of a vessel docking or mooring within the jurisdictional waters of Key West shall also maintain such a pump-out log at all times that the vessel is in Key West waters. The marina proprietor shall file with the director of utilities a plan for the collection and disposal of vessel and floating structure sewage not later than December 1, 2002, at which date enforcement of the requirements of this subsection shall commence. 
(d)  Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 82-1. A conviction under this section may result in eviction from a city marina. 
(Code 1986, § 42.11; Ord. No. 02-25, § 1, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 82-42. - Mooring field; no anchoring zone. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Personal watercraft means a small class A-1 or A-2 vessel as defined in F.S. § 327.02(27), as amended. 
    Vessel means any boat, houseboat, charterboat, fishing boat, or floating structure, whether or not habitable. 
(b)  Mooring field. Requirements for the mooring field are as follows: 
(1)  All vessels within the seaplane basin are required to moor and tie up to an assigned buoy within the mooring field, which shall serve as a permanent mooring site for transient and liveaboard vessels. The map and description of the mooring field established within the seaplane basin is attached to Ordinance No. 00-32 as composite exhibit A, adopted by reference as if set out at length in this section, and is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(2)  The city shall grant a permit for a fee to tie up to an assigned buoy within the mooring field. A mooring fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission as a user's fee for the anticipated length of use and to provide for continued garbage services, restroom facilities, sewage pumpout for vessels, dingy dock, maintenance of these facilities and other boater-related recreational facilities. 
(3)  Reservations for space within the mooring field shall be accepted by the city, provided space is available for the entire term of the time period sought in the reservation and provided the daily mooring fee is prepaid to cover the time period to be reserved. Such fees shall be nonrefundable. Space availability priority shall be given to county-registered vessels. 
(4)  Accepted reservations shall take priority over applications for extensions when space availability for the term of the reservation and that of the applied for extension conflict. 
(5)  The daily mooring fee shall be paid in advance for the number of days the vessel shall be moored. The monthly mooring fee shall be paid on the first day of each calendar month, and a security deposit and late payment penalties may be charged. 
(6)  The operators or occupants of all vessels moored in the mooring field shall at all times comply with the permit rules and regulations and this Code. Any vessel for which a permit has been granted for use of the mooring field is declared not to be exercising a right of navigation. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a personal watercraft within the mooring field, except for the limited purpose of ingress or egress to or from a vessel for which a permit has been granted for use of the mooring field. 
(c)  No anchoring zone. Requirements for the no anchoring zone are as follows: 
(1)  The area commonly known as the seaplane basin is declared to be a no anchoring zone. The map and description of such land is attached to Ordinance No. 00-32 as composite exhibit A, adopted by reference as if set out at length in this section, and is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor or otherwise attach or intentionally ground any vessel, temporarily or permanently, to the bottom within the seaplane basin, except in an emergency. Any vessel anchored or intentionally grounded in violation of this subsection is declared not to be exercising a right of navigation. 
(d)  Violations. Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 82-1. 
(Code 1986, § 42.13) 
Sec. 82-43. - Marine park established; restrictions on motorized vessels. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Key West Marine Park. It shall be located within an area reserved for swimming to be identified by demarcation buoys (the swim areas). The legal description of the swim areas is attached to and made a part of the ordinance from which this section is derived in exhibit A. A map of the swim areas shall be kept on file and be available for inspection in the city clerk's office. No motorized vessels shall operate in the swim areas. 
(b)  The city shall designate lanes for motorized vessels for ingress to and egress from the shoreline. The legal description of the two lanes (entry lane one and entry lane two) is attached to and made a part of the ordinance from which this section is derived in exhibit A. A map of such lanes shall be kept on file and be available for inspection in the city clerk's office. Vessels operating within these lanes shall operate at an idle speed, creating no wake. 
(c)  Violations of this section are punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 82-1. 
(Ord. No. 01-16, § 1(42.14), 9-18-2001) 
Charter reference- Exhibit A, referred to in this section is not set out herein but is available for inspection in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 82-44. - Idle speed/no wake zone established. 
(a)  Definitions. [As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Idle speed/no wake zone means an area of water where a vessel shall not proceed at a speed greater than that speed which is necessary to maintain steerageway. 
    Vessel means a boat and includes every description of watercraft, barge, and airboat, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on or in the water. 
(b)  An idle/no wake zone is hereby established in the Garrison Bight and described as follows: To include the entire basin of Garrison Bight, as well as the adjacent marked approach channel running west from the entrance to the basin along Trumbo Point, extending out to 300 feet from the residential shoreline. A map describing the boundaries of this zone is Attachment "A" to Ordinance No. 03-08, and is available in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The idle speed/no wake zone described in subsection (b) shall be marked on the waters with uniform regulatory markers in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(d)  The city shall consent to the execution of an agreement with the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, holding their respective agencies harmless for claims arising from alleged negligence in the placement, maintenance or operation of agency-approved markers. 
(e)  Violations of the section are punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 82-1 of this Code and/or F.S. § 327.74. 
(Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, 2-19-2003) 
Secs. 82-45-82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEACHES 

Sec. 82-71. - Removal of sand, rock or fill. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove sand, rock or fill in any quantity whatsoever from the South Roosevelt Boulevard Bathing Beach or any other municipally owned beach. 
(Code 1986, § 81.10) 
Sec. 82-72. - Watercraft prohibited near beaches and parks. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "motorized watercraft" shall mean any watercraft being propelled by any motor, including but not limited to motorboats, sailboats under engine-assisted power, motorized jet skis, wet bikes, and all other craft capable of being propelled on or through water. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated or knowingly rent or lease to any person intending to operate any motorized watercraft within 300 feet of the apparent shoreline of any public beach or public park in the city or within the confines of city or state parkland wetland habitats of the city or there to disturb migratory or wading or other indigenous bird species. 
(c)  Any person in the city offering or causing to be offered any motorized watercraft for rent or lease shall at all such times prominently display upon the rental business premises written public notice of the terms of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  No embarkation or disembarkation of passengers of commercial boating, recreational, or sightseeing operations shall take place on, across, by way of, or within 600 feet of any shoreline or any public beach or public park in the city or within the confines of city or state park and wetland habitats of the city, except when taking place at a boatramp designated by the city manager for that purpose, a marina, or a dock or similar concession; nor shall any commercial watercraft, whether motorized or nonmotorized, be anchored, tied off or otherwise stored within 600 feet of such shoreline, public beach or public park in the city or within the confines of city or state park and wetland habitats of the city, unless specifically authorized in a valid franchise or lease agreement with the city or other proprietary entity or when located in a marina or on private property or in a channel marked for navigation. 
(e)  Subsection (b) of this section shall have no application to operation of motorized watercraft directly and immediately engaged in temporary use of the Simonton Street or Bertha Street boatramps or docks or operating pursuant to a franchise approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 81.11) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 86 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 86-1. - Title. 
    This subpart B shall be entitled the "City of Key West Land Development Regulations." When used in this subpart B, unless the context indicates otherwise, the term "this ordinance" or "land development regulations" refers to the city land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-2. - Legislative authority and binding effect. 
    The legislative authority for the land development regulations is as follows: 
(1)  F.S. § 163.3202 mandates that local governments shall adopt or amend and enforce land development regulations that are consistent with and implement their adopted comprehensive plan. 
(2)  F.S. § 163.3202 requires that land development regulations shall contain specific and detailed provisions necessary or desirable to implement the adopted comprehensive plan and shall as a minimum: 
a.  Regulate the subdivision of land. 
b.  Regulate the use of land and water for those land use categories included in the land use element and ensure the compatibility of adjacent uses and provide for open space. 
c.  Provide for protection of potable water wellfields. 
d.  Regulate areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and provide for drainage and stormwater management. 
e.  Ensure the protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the comprehensive plan. 
f.  Regulate signage. 
g.  Provide for concurrency management. The concurrency management system must require that no development order or permit for development be issued unless such order or permit is conditioned on the availability of required public facilities and services concurrent with the impacts of the development. The concurrency management system is further elaborated in chapter IX, Capital Improvements, of the city comprehensive plan. 
h.  Ensure safe and convenient on-site traffic flow considering needed vehicle parking. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-3. - Legislative purpose, intent and scope. 
    The purpose of the land development regulations is to assist implementation of the city's comprehensive plan. More specifically the land development regulations are intended to carry out comprehensive plan policies concerned with land use; transportation; housing, parks; recreation and open space; conservation; public facilities including water, wastewater and drainage system improvements; fiscal management; and intergovernmental coordination. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-4. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    The land development regulations, pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3201 and 163.3202, are adopted to assist in carrying out the desired general policies of the comprehensive plan for managing the use of land and water within the city. The land development regulations are and shall remain consistent with the comprehensive plan as mandated by F.S. ch. 163, part II: "County and Municipal Planning and Land Development Regulation." The land development regulations shall be amended as necessary to ensure consistency with the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  General applicability. The land development regulations shall apply to all development, including redevelopment or changes in land use throughout the city. No development, as defined in this subpart B, or change in land use shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this subpart B. 
(b)  Status of previously issued construction permits. The provisions of this subpart B and any amendments thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective construction permit if the development activity authorized by the permit commenced prior to the effective date of this subpart B, and the building permit has not expired. Upon expiration of any such building permit, the developer shall comply with the provisions of the land development regulations as amended as well as the building codes as amended in obtaining a new building permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-6. - Interpretation and conflict. 
(a)  General interpretations. In the interpretation and application of this subpart B, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(b)  Conflicts. More specific provisions of this subpart B shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. Where the provisions of this subpart B appear to conflict with another law, the most restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-7. - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the land development regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of the land development regulations are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.11), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-8. - General interpretation of certain terms. 
    For the purpose of the land development regulations, certain terms used in the land development regulations are defined in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "structure" shall include the word "building." The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used. The word "lot" includes the word "plot," "tract," and "building site." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(5-21.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-9. - Definition of terms. 
    Terms not otherwise defined in this section shall be interpreted first by reference to the comprehensive plan and this subpart B; secondly, by reference to generally accepted engineering, planning, or other professional terminology if technical; and otherwise according to common usage, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. For the purpose of enforcing and administering this subpart B, the following words shall have the definition and meanings ascribed: 
    Abandon means to discontinue a land use for a period of 24 months without demonstrating an intent to continue the use as indicated by the following: 
(1)  Allowing licenses to lapse; 
(2)  Removing meters; 
(3)  Not maintaining a structure in a habitable condition; 
(4)  Not making a unit available for occupation (i.e., advertising or marketing through a Realtor or other agent); and/or 
(5)  Failure to perform pursuant to the terms of an active building permit. 
    Abutting. See "adjoining." 
    Access, point of, means a driveway or other opening for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians onto a public street or right-of-way. 
    Accessory unit means a dwelling unit, limited in size, with a separate entrance, for use as a complete, independent living quarters, with provisions for living, sleeping, bathing, and cooking which meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Deed-restricted as affordable. 
(2)  Restricted to occupancy by permanent residents. 
(3)  Occupied by a person or household for whom the unit is a primary residence. 
(4)  May not be rented transiently nor can it be granted a business tax receipt for transient use and cannot be sold separately as a condominium. 
(5)  Shall not exceed 600 square feet and the minimum size shall be 300 square feet. 
(6)  Subject to BPAS availability and allocation at 0.78 ESFU. 
(7)  Adequate public utilities and public facilities shall be available concurrent with the permitting of such unit. 
    For properties located within the single-family (SF) zoning district containing a single-family detached dwelling unit or principal unit, one (1) accessory dwelling unit is allowed as of right, and performance criteria, as provided for in chapter 122, subdivision II, single-family residential zoning district regulations. 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate structure that is detached from the principal structure and located on the same parcel or property, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal structure. 
    Accessory use means a use that is clearly incidental to the principal use, that is subordinate in area extent or purpose to the principal use, and that is supportive of the principal use. An accessory use contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the principal use, and/or provides support services to the principal use, and is located on the same lot with such principal building or use. In a residential district, the accessory use shall not be nonresidential in character. 
    Accessory unit infill means the development of new residential accessory units associated with commercial development within the HDR, CL, CG, CT, RO, HRCC-1-3, HNC-1-3, HCT, and HRO zoning districts in order to encourage the addition of affordable work force housing within mixed use districts, that are close to jobs and transportation routes. Accessory unit infill development is subject to performance criteria as provided for in section 122-1470 of the Work Force Housing Ordinance. 
    Accommodations, overnight means any hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, rooming-house, RV park or campground that is intended to be used for overnight lodging, rented for a period of less than 28 days. See also "transient living accommodations" or "transient lodging." 
    Addition means a structural extension, or expansion, or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. Types of additions are defined as follows: 
a.  Addition (Type A) means habitable space, attached to the principal structure, which includes a separate entrance, lockable internal connection and a full and/or half bathroom only. No BPAS allocation is required. 
b.  Addition (Type B) means habitable space which is attached to the principal structure, includes a separate entrance, unlockable internal connection of at least fifty (50) inches in width, and a kitchen and/or wet bar, full and/or half bathroom. No BPAS allocation is required. 
c.  Addition (Type C) means habitable space which is attached to the principal structure with no internal connection, includes a separate entrance, kitchen and a full bathroom. BPAS allocation is required. 
    Adjoining or adjacent lot or land means a lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line including a common right-of-way with another lot or parcel of land. 
    Administrative official and city official means the official appointed by the city manager to administer and enforce the land development regulations. 
    Advanced award means the borrowing ahead or reservation of future year building permit allocation system (BPAS) residential units for the development of multi-unit, affordable housing projects only. Units may only be reserved one year in advance through the BPAS application process, and may be awarded. However, such awards shall not be allocated for building permit until July of the award year for which they were borrowed. An advanced award must be granted by the planning board in response to a recommendation by the planning department for a specific project which requires more than the available number of building permit allocations in a single year, or if not enough units remain in the award year to complete the project. In order to consider an award for advanced award, the project must meet the prerequisites and have obtained at least 10 points through the competitive application process. 
    Advertising structure means a structure of any kind or character, including any sign, billboard, or other object or structure erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed. 
    Affordable housing shall be in accordance with F.S 420.0004, and means a dwelling unit in which a household spends no more than 30 percent of its gross income on housing costs. Eligibility income levels are very low, low, median, middle and moderate as defined herein. Rental housing costs include contract rent and utilities. Owner occupied housing costs include mortgage principal and interest, property taxes, insurance, and where applicable, homeowners' association fees. Permanent deed restrictions are required to maintain affordability and must be executed prior to certificate of occupancy. 
    Affordable housing (low income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 80 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size). For an owner occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (low income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed two and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable housing (median income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 100 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (median income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed three and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. The definition of "affordable housing median income" shall be applied to all required deed restrictions for units constructed or built prior to July 1, 2005. 
    Affordable housing (middle income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 140 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (middle income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed six and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable housing (moderate income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 120 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (moderate income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed five times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable housing (very low income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceeded 30 percent of that amount which represents 60 percent of the monthly median income (adjusted for family size). 
    Affordable Work Force Housing Trust Fund shall mean the trust fund established and maintained by the city for revenues from fees in lieu of constructing affordable work force housing, and revenues from any other source earmarked for the trust fund by land development regulation, ordinance or donation. 
    Affordable work force housing means affordable deed restricted housing required to be 30% of the aggregate total of all market rate units proposed on any one site subject to specific eligibility requirements and performance criteria as contained in division 10, work force housing, chapter 122. Affordable work force housing shall include low income, median income, moderate income and middle income housing. 
    Alley means any public or private right-of-way set aside for secondary public travel and servicing which is less than 30 feet in width. 
    Allocation award, BPAS allocation, and residential unit building permit allocation mean the issuance of a residential unit allocation by the planning department, documented in the city's BPAS records, in accordance with a planning board final determination of award. 
    Allocation application means the permanent and/or transient residential building permit allocation application submitted by a property owner seeking a unit allocation award. 
    Allocation award year or award year means the calendar year in which a final determination of allocation award is made, and is the year immediately following the application year. The first award year is 2014, and shall continue until 2024 unless amended or extended by an appropriate action of the city commission. 
    Alteration means any change in the arrangement of a building, including work affecting the structural parts of a building or any change in occupancy, or change in wiring, plumbing, or heating systems. 
    Apartment means a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment building arranged, intended or designed to be used as a home or residence of one family and with full bathing and kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the one family. 
    Apartment building means a building which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for three or more families living in separate apartments. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of a decision, finding, order, interpretation or other action concerning the land development regulations. 
    Application year means the calendar year in which allocation applications are received by the city planning department. The first application year is 2013, and shall continue until 2023 unless amended or extended by an appropriate action of the city commission. 
    Assisted living facility (ALF) means community housing facilities for people with disabilities and/or suffering from the effects of advanced aging. These facilities provide supervision or assistance with activities of daily living; ALFs are an eldercare alternative on the continuum of care for people, for whom independent living is not appropriate but who do not need the 24-hour medical care provided by a nursing home. Assisted living is a philosophy of care and services promoting independence and dignity as licensed by the State of Florida. 
    Automotive vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle or conveyance designed and used for the purpose of transporting or moving persons, animals, freight, merchandise or any substance. The phrase shall include passenger cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, scooters and station wagons, but shall not include tractors, construction equipment or machinery or any device used for performing a job except as stated in this definition. 
    Awning means a light, protective appurtenance to a building. 
    Baseline green building certification means the Florida Green Building Coalition (FGBC) bronze level certification or leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED) certified. 
    Bathroom or full bath means a group of fixtures consisting of a sink, a toilet and a bath or shower. A half bath contains a toilet and a sink, but can be used in conjunction with an outdoor shower to be considered a full bath. 
    Beneficial use or pre-existing reserve units/permits means the remaining BPAS allocations associated with the 1993 allocation period that the city has reserved to address property rights associated with existing vacant lots of record as of January 1, 1994, and which as of the effective date of the 2013 Comprehensive Plan have not been allocated to a particular address, building or development. 
    Boat means every description of watercraft, barge and airboat other than a seaplane, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on or under the water. 
    BRAC means the Federal Base Realignment and Closure Commission pursuant to the Defense Closure and Realignment Act of 1990, Public Law 101-510, as amended. 
    Buffer strip means a parcel or tract of land, plant material, or other landscaping that is used to separate one use from another and to shield or block noise, light or other nuisances, and or provide stormwater retention areas and beautification. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after dimensional requirements for building setbacks, yards, required open space and landscaped areas have been provided. 
    Builder means any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, realtor or corporation who constructs residential dwellings and commercial properties for sale or rental to the public. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building coverage means the percentage of lot area covered by buildings and including roofed porches, eaves, decks and similar structures as well as all structures, including structural elements such as raised decks, 30 inches or more above grade. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the crown of the road to the highest point of the roof. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which the principal use of the lot in which it is located is conducted. 
    Building permit allocation system or BPAS means the city's policies and procedures for limiting residential development, through the allocation of residential building permit units, pursuant to provisions found in chapter 108, division [article] X, building permit allocation system and the Principles for Guiding Development F.A.C 28-36.003 and F.S 380. 
    Building site means a defined parcel of land which is or may be constructed upon, and including any structures and open spaces (yard setbacks) required; see the definition of "lot." 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document issued by the historic architectural review commission as provided by this subpart B. 
    City green building standard or city green building rating system means the Florida Green Building Council (FGBC) or leadership in energy and education design (LEED) green building rating system. 
    Compact infill development means mixed commercial and residential use development within the general commercial and limited commercial zoning districts where density bonuses are allowed pursuant to regulations found within chapter 108, division [article] X, building permit allocation system, compact infill development. 
    Comprehensive plan means the city comprehensive plan, as may be amended, and which was prepared and adopted pursuant to the "County and Municipal Planning and Land Development Regulation Act," F.S. Ch. 163, part II. 
    Conditional use means a use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon successful demonstration that the use as proposed on a specific site will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location, design, and/or operation of such use as specified in the land development regulations and as authorized by the city. 
    Conditional use permit means any administrative permit issued pursuant to article III of chapter 122. 
    Contiguous means next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is coterminous. 
    Continuum of care means a comprehensive homeless assistance system that includes: a system of outreach and assessment (to determine the needs and conditions of the homeless); emergency shelters and transitional housing with appropriate supportive services; housing with, or without supportive services that has no established limitation on the amount of time in residence; and any other activity that clearly meets an identified need of the homeless and fills a gap in services. 
    Courtyard means an open, unobstructed, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with the principal building and fully enclosed on at least three adjacent sides by walls of the principal building. 
    Density means the maximum number of units divided by the gross land area. It is typically expressed in units per acre. 
    Density, maximum gross residential, means the density which shall be determined by dividing the maximum allowable units by the gross acres of land (i.e., dwelling units/gross land acres). All residential densities denoted on the future land use map and the official zoning map stipulate the maximum gross densities permitted for development on the land. Gross land area shall be defined as those contiguous land areas under common ownership proposed for residential development. 
    Developer means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this subpart B to effect the subdivision and/or development of land in the city and includes the term "subdivider," including model homes. 
    Development means the carrying out of any building activity or excavation, including the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, or the dividing of land into two or more parcels. The following activities or uses shall be taken for the purposes of these land development regulations to involve development: 
(1)  A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land. 
(2)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(3)  Alteration of a shore, stream, lake, pond, or canal, including any coastal construction as defined in F.S. § 161.021. 
(4)  Commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples or excavation on a parcel of land. 
(5)  Demolition of a structure. 
(6)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(7)  Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land. 
    District means any section area of the city to which these land development regulations apply, within which the zoning requirements are uniform. 
    Drive-through establishment, including drive-in and drive-up, means an establishment which, by design, physical facilities, service or by packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle. 
    Dwelling means a building that is used intended, or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes. 
    Dwelling, attached, means a one-family dwelling attached to one or more one-family dwellings by a common wall. 
    Dwelling, detached, means a dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any structural means. 
    Dwelling, duplex or two-family, means a detached residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, one-family or single-family, means a dwelling unit containing only one dwelling unit and occupied exclusively by one family as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, transient living accommodation includes a mobile home or recreational vehicle as defined in F.S. § 513.01 that forms a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be occupied for living, sleeping, and sanitation by one family at a time. 
    Dwelling unit and living unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Easement means a grant to another party by a property owner of the right to use land for a specific purpose, such as but not limited to drainage or placement of utility lines. 
    Emergency housing generally refers to housing used to alleviate an immediate housing crisis, where the individual or family resides for 30 days or less. 
    Emergency shelter means any facility with sleeping accommodations, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the homeless in general, or for specific populations of the homeless e.g. persons with alcohol and other substance abuse problems and/or mental illness. 
    Equivalent single family unit means the fractionalized unit allocation based on the ratio of the average number of vehicles per unit derived from the 2010 U.S. Census for the respective residential structure types (1.0 for single family) divided by the vehicles per single-family unit (i.e. 1.28 vehicles per unit). 
    Excavation means removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface, whether exposed or submerged. 
    Extended care facility means a long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical institution. 
    Family means: 
(1)  One person or a group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care occupying a dwelling unit as a separate, independent, not-for-profit housekeeping unit with a single kitchen and set of culinary facilities. Such family may also include up to two unrelated persons who serve as servants or caretakers for the housekeeping unit; or 
(2)  Up to four unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit as a separate, independent, not-for-profit housekeeping unit with a single kitchen and set of culinary facilities. 
    Fence and wall mean a structure intended to separate or enclose or define space, basically freestanding; constructed of one or more of materials such as wire, wood, stone, cement or brick; designed to be decorative or ornamental or to serve utilitarian purposes as to control ingress or egress or persons or animals. A hedge, wall, or landscaped berm may constitute a fence. 
    Final determination of award means a project that has been reviewed and approved for BPAS unit award by the planning board. For projects that do not require further approvals, an allocation award will subsequently be distributed to the applicant from the planning department in order that building permits may be pursued. 
    Flag lot means a lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way. 
    Floodplain means an area likely to flood based on the officially adopted flood issuance rate map (FIRM). 
    Floodplain, tidal, means an area likely to flood or become inundated from water which is subject to tidal action. 
    Floor area ratio means the total floor area of the buildings on any lot, parcel or site divided by the area of the lot, parcel or site. 
    Florida Green Building Coalition or FGBC is the organization responsible for creating, and rating the FGBC Green Certification Program. FGBC is a nonprofit Florida corporation dedicated to providing a statewide green building program that defines, promotes, and encourages sustainable efforts particular to the Florida climate with environmental and economic benefits. 
    Foster care facility means a residential facility which provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall not be more than three residents. Reference section 122-1246. 
    Front lot line means the dividing line between the lot and the street. 
    Frontage means all the property abutting measured along the street line. 
    Governmental facility means any office, facility, building or property owned, leased, or used by the federal government, the state, or any unit of local government, except such uses as are specifically listed elsewhere in the land development regulations as specific uses, and except housing projects sponsored by government agencies. 
    Green area. See "open space." 
    Green building certification means building(s) constructed, rated and certified to prove they comply with a recognized third party green building rating system. The third-party rating systems recognized by the building permit allocation system prerequisite criteria area the Florida Green Building Coalition (FGBC) and the leadership in education and environmental design (LEED) green building standards. 
    Green building certification upgrade means a rating level of green building certification above the baseline green building certification standard as follows: 
Certification Upgrade 1 - FGBC Silver or LEED Silver 
Certification Upgrade 2 - FGBC Gold or LEED Gold 
Certification Upgrade 3 - FGBC Platinum or LEED Platinum 
    Group home facility means a residential facility which provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall be at least four residents but not more than 15 residents. For the purposes of this section, group home facilities shall not be considered commercial enterprises. Reference section 122-1246. 
    Habitable space is a room or space in a building designed for human occupancy that may be used for living, sleeping, eating or food preparation, or in which individuals congregate for amusement, educational or similar purposes or in which occupants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means of egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the requirements of provisions. Storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable space. All habitable space shall be accessible from the interior of exterior walls. 
    Habitable space, - non, means spaces and structures used for non-habitable purposes, including, but not limited to, radio towers, antennae, spires, storage or utility spaces and similar areas. 
    Home occupation means any money-raising occupation or activity carried on within a residential property, where the activity is conducted only by members of the family living within the residence; where products are not offered for sale from the premises; where no evidence of the occupation is visible or audible from the exterior of the residential property, except for allowable signage; where traffic is not generated in excess of that customary of a residence; and where no commercial vehicles are kept on the premises or parked overnight on the premises unless otherwise permitted by the land development regulations. The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change residential character thereof. Reference sections 122-1306 and 122-1307. 
    Homeless means an individual or family who lacks a fixed and regular nighttime place of rest or has a primary nighttime shelter that is a homeless facility. The term does not include any individual imprisoned or otherwise detained. 
    Homeless assistance conveyance means that method of conveying military property at no cost, to local redevelopment authorities (LRAs) or homeless providers, in order to address the needs of homeless individuals as identified in a continuum of care program. 
    Homeless persons with special needs means a homeless person that has special physical, mental, or other social needs such as, (but not limited to) persons with alcohol and/or drug addiction, mental illness, single women with children, abused individuals, etc. 
    Homeless shelters or shelters for the homeless means a public or private institutional facility designed to provide a continuum of care that is considered an essential public service for the homeless. A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing for persons with mental illness). 
    Hotel means a building with dwelling units for accommodation of transient guests or tenants and providing services common to hotels, including, but not limited to, a central office or lobby, room service, food service and daily maid service, and otherwise complying with requirements of the state hotel and restaurant commission. For the purpose of this definition, the term "dwelling unit" shall be defined as a sleeping room with bath, flush toilet, lavatory and storage closet. 
    Housing unit means an occupied or vacant house, apartment, or single-room occupancy (SRO) that is intended as separate living quarters. 
    Hurricane Evacuation Clearance Time Memorandum of Understanding or HEM MOU means the signed Hurricane Evacuation Memorandum of Understanding between the Cities of Key West, Layton, Marathon, the Village of Islamorada, and Key Colony Beach, and the county, and the State Department of Economic Opportunity and Emergency Management, dated August 2, 2012. 
    Initial announcement of award means the planning department publication of the administrative BPAS application ranking. 
    Intensity means the floor area ratio as defined in this section. 
    Kitchen means any food preparation facility larger than a wetbar. Plumbing stub outs for more than a wetbar shall be considered a kitchen. 
    Land use classifications. The purpose of the land development regulations is to classify uses into specially defined types on the basis of common functional characteristics and land use compatibility. These provisions apply throughout the zoning regulations. All land use activities are classified into the following activity types: 
(1)  Residential activities: 
a.  Single-family/two-family dwellings and accessory residential units. Reference sections 122-231 through 122-234. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings. 
c.  Manufactured housing. Reference section 122-1276. 
d.  Group homes. 
e.  Approved home occupations. 
(2)  Community facilities: 
a.  Airport facilities means activities which are customarily incidental to airport operations and maintenance including airport terminal; heliport; fixed base operators; airport hangars; runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons for the landing, takeoff, or surface maneuvering of aircraft; and communicative and visual guidance systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations shall govern placement and specifications of structures within the airport operations area. 
b.  Cemetery means property used for the interring of the dead. 
c.  Community centers, clubs, and lodges mean not-for-profit activities typically operated by a government or by a group of persons for social or recreational purposes and primarily including services which are not customarily carried on as a business for profit. 
d.  Cultural and civic activities means activities typically performed by public or private not-for-profit private entities for the promotion of a common cultural or civic objective such as historical, literary, scientific, musical, dramatic, artistic or similar objectives, 
e.  Educational institutions and day care. 
(1)  Educational institutions includes a place for systematic instruction with a curriculum the same as customarily provided in a public school or college. These activities include nursery school and kindergarten facilities designed to provide a systematic program to meet organized training requirements. 
(2)  Day care includes activities typically performed by an agency, organization or individual, any of which must by duly licensed by the state, providing day care without living accommodations for persons not related by blood or marriage to, and not the legal wards or foster children of, the attendant adult. 
f.  Golf course and support facilities means large unobstructed acreage with enough room over which to walk or ride a prescribed course, and to stroke one ball long distances. Commercial miniature golf courses and driving ranges and similar facilities are excluded from this activity as defined. 
g.  Hospitals and extensive care facilities means institutions providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care; including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
h.  Nursing homes, rest homes, assisted living facilities and convalescent homes mean activities customarily performed at a home for the elderly or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food, shelter and care for compensation. This activity shall not include duly state-licensed volunteer adult foster care homes in which three or fewer foster adults are placed. Neither does the principal activity include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions that diagnose and treat the sick or injured. 
For purposes of permitted density and intensity, the floor area ratio shall govern, not units per acre. Individual living units or resident nursing beds shall be treated as 0.1 equivalent unit under the city's building permit allocation ordinance, section 108-994. If a facility is developed to remain operational during and after a category 5 hurricane, and therefore does not contribute to the evacuation of vehicles, the city commission may exempt this facility from the requirements of the building permit allocation ordinance or may authorize an alternate equivalency factor. 
i.  Place of worship means activities customarily performed in a building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory building and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
j.  Protective services means fire, law enforcement and emergency medical related facilities planned and operated for the general welfare of the public. 
k.  Public parks and recreation areas means public parks and recreation land and facilities developed for use by the general public. 
(1)  Active parks and recreation means leisure-time activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields. This may include is not limited to swimming, tennis and other court games, baseball and other field sports, and playground activities. 
(2)  Passive parks and recreation means leisure-time activities not considered active. This may include water-related activities such as boardwalks and interpretive trails, fishing piers as well as boating. Passive recreation may also include non-water-related activities such as hiking, golfing, observation towers, and picnicking. 
l.  Public and private utilities means use of land which is customary and necessary to the maintenance and operation of essential public services, such as electricity and gas transmission systems; water distribution, collection and disposal; communication; and similar services and facilities. 
(3)  Commercial activities. 
a.  Amusement means active or passive recreation facilities by profit oriented firms. 
b.  Bar and lounge mean a commercial establishment selling and dispensing for the drinking on the premises of liquor, malt, wine or other alcoholic beverages. This shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages accessory to and within a restaurant use. 
c.  Boat sales and service means a commercial establishment were boat sales and rentals may occur together with minor servicing and sale of marine supplies but excluding boatbuilding or shipbuilding. 
d.  Business and professional offices means government offices, not-for-profit administrative services, and private for-profit offices extending advice, information or consultation of a professional nature; insurance, real estate, and financial services; banking services; and executive management and administrative activities. Offices exclude commercial storage of goods and chattels for the purpose of sale or resale as a principal use. 
e.  Commercial retail use means a use that sells goods or services at retail which is subdivided into the following three classifications in which total area includes both sales area under roof and any outside sales area: 
(1)  Commercial retail low intensity means commercial retail uses that generate less than 50 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
(2)  Commercial retail medium intensity means commercial retail uses that generate between 50 and 100 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
(3)  Commercial retail high intensity means commercial retail uses that generate above 100 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
f.  Funeral home means undertaking and funeral services involving care and preparation of human deceased prior to burial, excluding crematories, crematory operations and columbariums. Such a premises, structure or site shall not be used for the burial, prolonged storage or permanent disposition of deceased human remains. 
g.  Gasoline station means a structure or place where gasoline, oil and greases, and incidental accessory sales and services are supplied and dispensed to the motor vehicle trade. Uses permissible at a gasoline station do not include major mechanical and body work; straightening of body parts; painting; welding; storage of automobiles not in operating condition; or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. A gasoline station is neither a repair garage nor a body shop. 
h.  Hotel, motel and transient lodging mean any unit, group of units, building, or group of buildings within a single complex which is: 
(1)  Rented for periods of less than 28 days; 
(2)  Advertised or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to transients. 
i.  Marina means a commercial establishment providing for the docking, storage, and servicing of watercraft, including dispensing of motor fuel. 
j.  Medical services means the provision of therapeutic, preventive or other corrective personal treatment services by physicians, dentists and other licensed medical practitioners, as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services. These services are provided to patients who are admitted for examination and treatment by a physician and with no overnight lodging. 
k.  Parking lot and facilities means a governmental or private commercial building or structure solely for the off-street parking of operable motor vehicles. 
l.  Restaurant, excluding drive-through, means any establishment, which is not a drive-through service establishment, where the principal business is the sale of food, desserts and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state. This includes service within the building as well as takeout or carryout service. For the purpose of this subpart B and impact fee assessments, a takeout or carryout restaurant shall be limited to no more than five chairs or bench seats without tables or counter tops. 
m.  Restaurant, drive-through, means any establishment where the principal business is the sale of foods, desserts and beverages generally contained in a ready-to-consume state and the service and/or consumption of foods, desserts, or beverages may by design occur within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises. 
n.  Small recreation power-driven equipment rental means rental of low-speed vehicles, jet skis, mopeds, scooters and/or other similar nonautomotive, two- or three-wheeled, power-driven vehicles, excluding the rental of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or other vehicles. 
o.  Vehicular sales means the sale or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment, with incidental accessory service activities. 
p.  Veterinary medical services means the provision of animal medical care and treatment by a state-licensed veterinarian. 
(4)  Light industrial. The following compatible land uses shall be considered light industry: 
a.  Warehousing, miniwarehousing, and wholesaling within enclosed buildings. 
b.  Mechanical repair and service, including, but not limited, to machine shops and vehicular repair, service and maintenance. 
c.  Light manufacturing including skilled trades and services, light processing and metal fabrication, assembly and distribution functions, electronics, research and development, and similar uses. 
d.  Building materials supply and storage, and contractor's storage. 
e.  Vocational trade schools. 
f.  Accessory uses to those described in this subsection. 
    Leadership in Energy and Education Design or LEED means the green building rating system developed and managed by the U.S. Green Building Council, Inc. The Green Building Certification Institute (GBCI) is responsible for processing and validating the applications for LEED rating. Several green building rating systems exist within LEED depending on the size and scope of the project. The available rating systems include: LEED for Neighborhood Development (LEED ND); LEED for Homes; LEED for Green Building Design and Construction (LEED BD&C); LEED for New Construction and Major Renovations (LEED NC); LEED for Core and Shell; LEED for Schools; LEED for Existing Buildings Operations and Maintenance (LEED EBOM); LEED for Commercial Interiors; LEED for Retail; and LEED for Healthcare. 
    Living area means the minimum floor area of a dwelling as measured by its outside dimensions exclusive of carports, porches, sheds, and attached garages. 
    Loading dock means a platform used for the loading and unloading of freight. 
    Loading space means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
    Lock-out unit means any room or group of rooms which is part of a single family or multi-family dwelling or a transient room, or transient suite of rooms which can be accessed and locked or keyed separately from the principal entry to the dwelling, unit or suite. The access to the lock-out may be by separate door, from a common hallway, foyer or other common area of the units. Lock-outs create a separate habitable space, and shall be considered a unit which requires an additional building permit allocation system (BPAS) unit, when such lock-outs are held out for rent barter or lease for either transient or non-transient purposes separately from the principal dwelling, transient room or suite. 
    Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in the land development regulations. A lot shall be comprised of contiguous land. In no case shall land be divided or combined in a manner which creates a residential lot or parcel which does not meet the requirements of this subpart B. All lots shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of the following: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record, and portions of lots of record; and 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot, buildable, and buildable site means a site of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, including the open spaces mandated. Such buildable site may be a single lot or, for common ownership of two or more adjacent lots, parcels, or fractions thereof which have common street frontage, the entire area under common ownership shall be deemed the buildable lot or buildable site. 
    Lot, building, means a building site area which shall be at least the minimum area required for the zone in which the area is located, and such building lot shall be consistent with all lot requirements within the respective zoning district. The term "building lot" is not necessarily synonymous with the term "lot" as defined in this section. A building lot is always at least one lot or one lot plus a part of another lot or a combination of two or more lots or fractions thereof. 
    Lot, corner, means a building site abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. The second or other abutting street is described as the "intersecting" or "secondary" street; other lots often front to that second, or even third, street. A lot abutting on curbed streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, double frontage, and through lot mean a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, illegal nonconforming, means a lot which was never duly approved by the city and fails to conform to the present land development regulations. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
    Lot, legal nonconforming, means a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the land development regulations, but which fails because of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present land development regulations. 
    Lot, reversed frontage, means a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135 degrees) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot or a through lot. 
    Lot, through, means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as a double frontage lot. 
    Lot, zoning, means a tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts thereof, under single ownership located entirely within a block and occupied by or designated by its owner or developer at the time of filing for any zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be developed for a principal building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such open spaces and yards as are designated and arranged, or required under the zoning ordinance, to be used with such building or use. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line measured at right angles to the width. 
    Lot dimensions mean as follows: 
(1)  Depth. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of the straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(2)  Width. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points, where they intersect with the street lines, shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except for lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, where the 80-percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot frontage means the portion of the lot nearest the street. Lots are normally platted within blocks to uniformly front along a street which is the frontage or primary street. On corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of "yard" in this section. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot or buildable site as defined in this section. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been duly approved by the city and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been thus recorded. 
    Low-speed vehicle means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour, including neighborhood electric vehicles. 
    Manufactured building means a closed structure, building assembly, or system of subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating or other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities, for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished building or as part of a finished building which shall include but not be limited to residential, commercial, institutional, storage and industrial structure (F.S. § 553.36). The building plans for such structures must be sealed by the state department of community affairs. 
    Market rate housing or permanent housing means housing occupied on a full time basis or seasonally and is not intended for rent for less than 28 days. 
    Median household income means the median household income published for Monroe County on an annual basis by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Mining means the removal, either in or upon the soil of the earth or beneath the soil, of any valuable inert or lifeless substance formed or deposited in its present position through natural agencies alone, as a commercial business. 
    Noncomplying building or structure means any building or other structure, for which the use is a lawful (permitted or nonconforming), but the building or other structure does not comply with all applicable sections of the land development regulations, including but not limited to size and dimension regulations, off-street parking requirements, landscape requirements, nuisance abatement standards, or height requirements, either on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or as a result of any subsequent amendment. 
    Nonconforming density means the number of dwelling or living units per acre greater than the number allowed by the land development regulations, which were legally established or licensed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of a building or structure or of a tract of land which does not, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, or amendment thereto, conform to any one of the current permitted uses of the zoning district in which it is located, but which was legally established in accordance with the zoning in effect at the time of its inception or which use predates all zoning codes and which use has not changed or been abandoned. This definition shall not operate to make legal an unlicensed transient rental accommodation located in a residential structure. 
    Occupied means the use of a structure or land for any purpose, including occupancy for residential, business, industrial, manufacturing, storage, and public use. 
    Open space (green area) includes the gross area of the site less building coverage, parking surface, internal traffic circulation system, and other impervious surfaces, all of which should be open from the ground to the sky. Open space areas shall remain open and unobstructed to the sky that can be used for active or passive recreation purposes. Parking and loading areas of any type shall not be allowed in any required open space. 
    Parking lot means an area or plot of ground, used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles either for compensation or to provide an accessory service to a business, industrial or residential use. 
    Parking space, off-street, means a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another. For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at 300 square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements of this definition are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case, and in accordance with all city ordinances and regulations. 
    Patio means an open unoccupied space on the same lot fully enclosed on all four sides by the principal building. 
    Permanent housing means affordable and/or assisted housing that is expected to be available to low/moderate income and/or homeless persons, for an indefinite period of time. 
    Permeable surface means any surface permitting full or partial absorption of stormwater into previously unimproved land. 
    Pitched roof means a roof with a pitch of no less than 4/12 (a four-inch rise in a 12-inch horizontal run). 
    Planned development or redevelopment means land under unified control, planned and developed as a whole in a single operation or approved programmed series of operations for dwellings, for dwelling units and related uses and facilities; includes principal and accessory uses and structures substantially related to the character of the development and the surrounding area of which it is part; and is developed according to the comprehensive and detailed plans which include but are not limited to streets, utilities, lots or building sites and the like but also site plans and detailed plans for other uses and improvements, facilities and services as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the planned unit development but will not be provided, operated or maintained at public expense. 
    Port expansion at the Truman Waterfront Parcel means the following activities at the Truman Waterfront Parcel which shall constitute port expansion: 
(1)  Any increase in cruise ship berthing capacity (other than the one existing cruise ship berth on the Outer Mole Pier, which shall be appropriately permitted by the State of Florida). 
(2)  Development of new port facilities designed to accommodate ferry service, or use of the existing cruise ship berth at Outer Mole Pier to provide ferry service. 
(3)  Development of new port facilities that require either new maritime related infrastructure or channel dredging. 
The replacement or repair of existing infrastructure, so long as that activity is in the same location and does not increase capacity, as well as maintenance dredging shall not be considered expansion. 
    Premises means any land together with any structures occupying it. 
    Prerequisite, major construction/renovation means the minimum standards for new development, including additions to existing structures, or redevelopment constituting more than 50% of the value of the building, required in order to be eligible to receive an allocation award from the BPAS system as follows: 
(1)  All new units shall be constructed in compliance with and obtain a baseline green building certification. 
(2)  All new buildings shall be constructed so as to have the first habitable floor 1.5 feet above the required base flood elevation, with the exception of properties located within the historic zoning districts, where the applicant must first demonstrate that such elevation does not interfere with the essential form and integrity of properties in the neighborhood by obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  All new buildings shall be constructed with a rainwater catchment system that will hold a minimum 1,000 gallons of water or an amount equivalent to 100% of the new roof area in gallons whichever is greater. 
    Prerequisite, minor renovation means the minimum standards for redevelopment constituting less than 50% of the value of the building, required. In order to be eligible to receive an allocation award from the BPAS system applicants must demonstrate water and energy use 15% below the Florida Building Code using recognized energy and water rating standards. 
    Principal structure means a building occupied by the principal use of the premises or lot. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot where it is located. An attached carport, shed, garage, or any other structure with one or more walls or a part of one wall being a part of the principal building and structurally dependent, totally or in part, on the principal building shall comprise a part of the principal building and be subject to all regulations applied to the principal building. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage, or other structure shall conform to the requirements of an accessory building. A detached and structurally independent garage, carport, or other structure conforming as an accessory building may be attached to the principal building by an open breezeway not to exceed six feet in width. A connecting breezeway in excess of six feet and enclosed on one or both sides, including louvers, lattice or screening, shall cause the entire structure to be construed as the principal building and shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the principal building. 
    Project area, for the purpose of computing density, lot coverage, and floor area ratio for any project site, the project area shall not include public rights-of-way, or land lying below the mean high water line. 
    Public rental housing means government owned affordable and/or assisted rental housing that is expected to be available to low/moderate income and/or homeless persons at rents that do not exceed the established fair market rent (FMR) as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
    Public use means any use of land or structures owned and operated by a municipality, county, state or the federal government or any agency thereof and for a public service or purpose. 
    Public water and sewer service means water and sewer systems, including pipes, rights-of-way and treatment plants, owned and operated by the city or operated under a franchise granted by the city. 
    Rainwater catchment system means an on-site rain water harvesting system including an associated reuse/redistribution system/plan, designed and built to American Rainwater Catchment System Association (ARCSA) standards. 
    Recovered unit means a final BPAS allocation award which has not been implemented by the awardee, and has been recaptured by the city, due to the failure of the awardee to obtain a valid building permit for the principal structure for the project enabled by the BPAS award within the two year timeframe from the date of the final announcement and determination of award. 
    Recreational and landscaped open space means unroofed or screen roofed ornamental landscaped areas and recreational areas which are easily accessible and regularly available to occupants of all dwelling units on the lot wherein the open space is located. Rooftops, porches, raised decks, parking spaces, driveways, utility and service areas are not calculated as open space. 
    Redevelopment constitutes "development" and shall be subject to the land development regulations. 
    Recaptured unit means an existing or recognized residential unit recaptured by the city from the owner though the waiver and release of building permit allocation process due to the voluntary reduction of on-site residential density and/or change in residential use. Recaptured units shall be reserved for beneficial use allocations only. 
    Residential building permit allocation system unit is for all residential dwellings including single family and multiple family dwellings, all units defined as transient living accommodations or transient lodging, manufactured homes or mobile homes, accessory units, and single room occupancies. 
    Semipublic use means any use of land or buildings owned and operated by an individual, firm, corporation, lodge or club, either as a profit on [or] nonprofit activity, for a public service or purpose. This shall include privately owned utilities, transportation, recreation, education, and cultural activities and services. 
    Separate entrance means any exterior building entrance that can be accessed independently from a right-of-way and can be locked and keyed from the exterior area. For purposes of BPAS management an exception to the definition may be made if the entrance is onto an enclosed courtyard or pool area. Care should be applied to ensure that a secondary residential dwelling unit is not created by a separate entrance. 
    Setback means the required open spaces of a lot where buildings are not permitted. 
(1)  Setbacks are required for the purpose of providing and ensuring open space and become part of the yard but not necessarily the total yard. 
(2)  Setbacks shall be measured from the lot, building site, boundary lines and will be designated as "front yard setback," "rear yard setback," "side yard setbacks," combining to surround and define the remaining buildable area. 
(3)  Setbacks go with the land and are not intended to control or direct the actual placement or orientation of buildings. 
(4)  Buildings may be designed and constructed to fit on any part of the buildable area and are not required to front on the platted front of the lot or building site. 
    Sheltered means families and persons whose primary nighttime residence is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter, including emergency shelters, transitional housing for the homeless, domestic violence shelters, residential shelters for runaway and homeless youth, and any hotel/motel/apartment voucher arrangements made because the person is homeless. The term does not include persons living doubled-up or in overcrowded or substandard conventional housing. 
    Shoreline means the mean high water line for tidal water bodies and ordinary high water line for nontidal waters for inland water bodies. 
    Short-term housing generally refers to housing that accommodates the immediate needs of individual (up to six months), and provides both housing and supportive services to homeless persons to facilitate movement to transitional or permanent housing. 
    Sign means any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located; provided, however, that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations in this subpart B: 
(1)  Number and surface area. In determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or where reasonable doubt exists about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
(2)  Off-site sign means a sign other than on-site sign. 
(3)  On-site sign means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
    Sleeping unit means a sleeping room with bath, flush toilet, lavatory and storage closet. 
    Social services special needs housing means short-term housing units which provide continuum of care services to a capacity of not more than 36 homeless persons with special needs. 
    Solar reflectance index or SRI means a measure of a materials ability to reject solar heat. Standard black is 0 and standard white is 100. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or any portion of a building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. A basement or cellar not used for human occupancy shall not be counted as a story. 
    Street means, in addition to the definition contained in section 1-2, a public or private right-of-way set aside for public travel which is 30 feet or more in width. A street affords principal means of access to abutting property. Street classifications include the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets. Arterial streets serve as principal routes through the city. The purpose of these facilities is to move large volumes of traffic from one part of the region or county to another. Arterial roads also provide connections between major activity centers of the county or city. 
(2)  Major collector streets. Major collector streets collect and distribute traffic from residential access streets to arterial streets or other collector streets. 
(3)  Minor collector streets. Minor collector streets collect traffic from local streets and feed traffic to major collectors and arterials. 
(4)  Residential access streets and local streets. Residential access streets and local streets are streets which directly serve abutting properties and residences. These streets should be relatively safe and quiet and should be completely free of any through traffic. 
    Street centerline means the midpoint between the street right-of-way or the surveyed centerline of the street. 
    Street right-of-way line means the property line which bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a street. Where sidewalks exist and the exact location of the right-of-way is unknown, the side of the sidewalk farthest from the centerline of the traveled street shall be considered as the right-of-way line. 
    Structural alteration means any change, except for repair or replacement in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure means anything built, constructed or assembled with a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, signs and poster panels, driveways, pools, and ponds. 
    Subdivision means the division and recording in accordance with the city's land development regulations of a parcel of land into two or more lots or blocks for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development for development, sale or lease. 
    Supportive housing means housing, which includes housing units and group quarters, that have a supportive environment and include a planned supportive service component. 
    Supportive services means services that include (but are not limited to): case management, housing counseling, job training and placement, primary health care, mental health services, alcohol/drug abuse treatment, emergency food, domestic violence and family services, child care, veterans services, etc. 
    Swimming pool means a water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing. 
    Terrace means an unoccupied open space adjacent to the principal building on one or two sides, prepared with a hard, semihard, or improved surface, and uncovered, for the purpose of outdoor living. 
    Total floor area and gross floor area means the areas of all floors of a building, including finished basements and all covered areas, including porches, sheds, carports, and garages. If the first finished floor level of an elevated building or structure is elevated to a height greater than seven feet above the finished grade, the area below such first floor shall be included in calculating gross floor areas of the building or structure. 
    Townhouse means a one-family dwelling in a group of at least three and no more than ten such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, and the units are designed with distinctive facades or varied setbacks. No unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls. 
    Transient living accommodations or transient lodging means any unit, group of units, dwelling, building, or group of buildings within a single complex of buildings, which is 1) rented for a period or periods of less than 28 days, or which is 2) advertised or held out to the public as a place rented to transients, regardless of the occurrence of an actual rental. All entrances to a single transient living accommodation or transient lodging unit shall share the same key or means of controlling access so that the hotel or motel room as defined herein is not divisible into separately rentable units. Such a short-term rental use of or within a single-family dwelling, a two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling (each also known as a "residential dwelling") shall be deemed a transient living accommodation. See also "accommodations, overnight." 
(1)  Campground means a place set aside and offered by a person, for either direct or indirect remuneration of the owner, lessor, or operator of such place, for the parking, accommodation, or rental of five or more recreational vehicles or tents, and the term also includes buildings and sites set aside for group camping and similar recreational facilities; and the rental of cottages and apartments. 
(2)  Guesthouse and rooming-house mean any place wherein tourists, transients, travelers or persons desiring temporary residence are provided with sleeping and sanitary facilities. Cooking facilities may or may not be provided in a guesthouse. The number of rooms in a guesthouse shall not exceed 25. The minimum room sizes for a guesthouse shall be as follows: 
a.  Single room, 80 square feet. 
b.  Double room, 100 square feet. 
c.  Multiple occupancy room, 100 square feet; in addition, 50 square feet for each occupant over two. 
(3)  Hotel means a structure typically confined to one principal building with sleeping units for accommodation of transient guests or tenants and providing services common to hotels, including, but not limited to, a central office or lobby, room service, food service and daily maid service, that may be found within other necessary accessory buildings, and otherwise complying with requirements of the state hotel and restaurant commission. 
(4)  Motel means a group of transient accommodation units under one ownership or on one tract of land and designed primarily for access by automobile. Overnight guests may stay for longer periods than overnight. 
(5)  Tourist court means a group of tourist accommodation units under one ownership or on one tract of land providing facilities for longer periods of time, and with cooking facilities within the individual units. 
(6)  Transient apartment means any apartment building or condominium apartment building, in which three or more units are advertised or held out to the public as available for transient occupancy. 
(7)  Transient unit or room means any room accommodating beds, including conventional beds as well as sofa-beds, Murphy beds, or other types of beds with unique multipurpose or space-saving designs, which can be locked and keyed from the exterior of the premises or from a common hallway, foyer, or other common area and quarters for overnight lodging or for a longer period of time. 
    Transitional housing generally refers to housing that accommodates the needs of individuals coming out of emergency shelter situations or short-term housing, and transitioning into permanent housing. Transitional housing provides both housing and supportive services to homeless persons to facilitate movement to independent living within 24 months. 
    Truman Waterfront Port means one of the city's deep water port facilities. 
    Unlockable internal connection occurs when one occupant cannot exclude the other party from another portion of a room or building. An open wall is an unlockable internal connection. A doorway is not an unlockable internal connection. To be an unlockable internal connection, the cased opening must be 50 inches or more in width. 
    Unsheltered means families and individuals whose primary nighttime residence is a public or private place that is not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with reference to the specifications of the zoning ordinance. 
    Unused allocation means a residential BPAS unit that was never assigned to a project address or did not receive a building permit for a principal structure within two years of the final determination of award. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with reference to the specifications of the zoning ordinance. 
    US Green Building Council or USGBC is a non-profit organization whose mission is to transform the way buildings and communities are designed, built and operated, enabling an environmentally and socially responsible, healthy and prosperous environment that improves the quality of life. 
    Vacant means a building or parcel of land which is neither occupied nor used or is in a non-operative state. 
    Vacation of easement or right-of-way means the abandonment of a public easement or right-of-way which results in the removal of the easement or right-of-way, reuse of the property, and/or a change in the ownership of the property. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of the land development regulations where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the land development regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in the land development regulations a variance is authorized only for height, area, size of structure, or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Water-dependent uses means activities which can be carried out only on, in or immediately adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for: waterborne transportation, including ports or marinas; recreation; electrical generating facilities; or water supply. 
    Water-related uses means activities which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods and services that are directly associated with water-dependent or waterway uses and/or provide supportive services to persons using a duly permitted marina. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland which flows either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks or other discernible boundary. 
    Wetland shall be defined based on hydrology as well as hydric soil and wetland vegetation. Wetlands shall include transitional wetlands and shall include those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do or would support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The following vegetative species are wetland species commonly found in the city, although the applicable state and federal list of jurisdictional wetland vegetation shall apply: 
Common Name of 
Wetland Species Scientific Name Black mangrove Avicennia germinas White mangrove Laguncularia racemosa Red mangrove Rhizophora mangle Buttonwood Conocarpus erectus Saltwort Batis maritima Glasswort Salicornia spp., Sea purslane Sesuvium protul acastrum Sea blite Suada linearis Sea oxeye daisy Borrichia spp. Salt grass Distichlis spicata Dropseed Sporobilus virginicus Key grass Monanthochloe Fringe-rushes Fimbristylis spp. Cordgrass Spartina spartinae Sawgrass Cladium jamaicewiss Spike rush Eleocharis celluosa Cattail Typha spp.  
    Wetland jurisdictional determinations shall be consistent with those of the state department of environmental protection, the South Florida Water Management District, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Wet bar means a food or drink preparation area limited to a total counter surface area of 16 square feet (including sink with design limitations of one bin and limited to (1) one square foot in size) with electricity limited to 110 volt services. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied, open to the sky and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the structure shall be used (a driveway or off- street parking area may be a portion of a yard). 
    Exception of corner lots. On corner lots abutting two intersecting streets, the front, side and rear lot lines shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  One street frontage shall be declared a front yard; and 
(2)  The other street frontage shall be a street side yard; 
(3)  The rear yard shall be the yard opposite the declared front yard; 
(4)  The remaining yard shall be the interior side yard. 
    Yard, front, means the yard abutting a street (i.e., street frontage lot). The depth of required front yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the front lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the front (street frontage) property line. The front yard regulations shall apply to all lots fronting on a street. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than projections or encroachments specifically provided for in this subpart B. For all corner lots, the rear yard shall be as indicated in the definition of the term "yard" under "exception of corner lots." The depth of required rear yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the rear property line. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the sideline of the lot and extending form the front lot line to the rear yard, which is the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereof. For all corner lots, the side yard shall be as indicated in the definition of the term "yard" under "exception of corner lots." The width of required side yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the side property line. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(5-21.2), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 97-20, § 1(ex. A, B) , 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 98-31, § 1, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 98-32, § 1, 12-1-1998; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 00-04, § 27, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 00-10, § 3, 6-7-2000; Ord. No. 00-14, § l(Exh. A), 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 04-07, § 1, 4-6-2004; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 13-19, § 1, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 7-3-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-10. - Status of Code, prior offenses. 
    Any prosecution arising from a violation of any ordinance repealed by this subpart B, which prosecution may be pending at the time this subpart B becomes effective, or any prosecution which may be started within one year after the effective date of this subpart B as a consequence of any violation of any ordinance repealed therein, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this subpart B, shall be tried and determined exactly if such ordinance had not been repealed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.10), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-11. - Violations and penalties. 
    In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may exercise authority provided for through section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.11), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-12. - Codification. 
    The land development regulations shall be incorporated in the Code of Ordinances, and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section," "article," or other appropriate word, and the sections of the land development regulations may be renumbered or relettered to accomplish such intention. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.12), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-13. - Injunctive relief. 
    In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any section of this subpart B or any condition duly imposed by the city, the city may bring suit in the circuit court to enjoin, restrain, or otherwise prevent the violation of any section of this subpart B or any condition duly imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.13), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 86-14. - Saving clause. 
    The obligations, restrictions, rights and/or regulations existing before the effective date of the ordinance from which this subpart B derives on land located in the corporate city limits shall not be impaired, affected or avoided by the adoption of this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-1.9), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 5-5-1998) 
Chapter 90 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; floods, ch. 34; human relations, ch. 38; planning and development, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 66; concurrency management, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-26-90-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 90-51. - Established; designated as local planning agency; authority and responsibilities generally. 
(a)  Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 163.3174 of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, the city commission finds that planning of land use and continuing growth management evaluation within the city is a public purpose benefiting the safety, economic and cultural welfare of the citizens of the city. The city commission further finds that this public purpose can best be achieved by establishing the planning board, which is established and designated as the local planning agency (LPA) for the city. 
(b)  Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 163.3175(5) and F.S. § 163.3177(1) of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, the city commission finds that there is a public purpose in coordinating the planning of the city with the Monroe County School Board and the U.S. Military in Key West and adjacent areas. 
(c)  The planning board shall have the authority and responsibility to review land use in the city and evaluate planning and regulatory techniques for resolving physical, economic, social, environmental and fiscal issues. The city commission directs the planning board to carry out functions and powers identified in the land development regulations. The planning board shall use the power and authority conferred upon it by the land development regulations to further its stated public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 90-52. - Membership, terms and removal. 
(a)  The planning board shall consist of seven members. The five members serving on the board upon adoption of this ordinance shall continue in office, subject to the other provisions in this code, until the expiration of their term. The five members serving on the planning board upon adoption of this ordinance and the two additional members shall be assigned to individual commission members via a lottery system. The two commission members drawing the two new board seats shall expeditiously appoint a member to comprise the new seven person board. Thereafter the appointments shall be as specified in paragraph (b) below. All planning board members must be residents of the city and shall remain city residents for the duration of their memberships on the board. 
(b)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one member of the board. The term of the board member shall be for a period of three years except that appointments to replace a member vacating before the expiration of the term shall be for the unexpired term of that member. Board members may be reappointed at the expiration of their term. 
(c)  All planning board members shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed by majority vote of its full membership. If a member is absent from two of three consecutive regular meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the planning board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the chairperson shall notify the city commission that the member's office is vacant. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 4-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-53. - Compensation. 
    All members of the planning board shall serve without compensation but, as authorized by the city commission, may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-54. - Liaisons. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint one of its members to maintain a liaison with the planning board. 
(b)  There shall be a nonvoting ex-officio member of the planning board appointed by the Monroe County School District. 
(c)  The base commander of the Naval Air Station Key West or designee shall be a nonvoting ex-officio member of the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 90-55. - Functions and powers. 
(a)  The planning board shall have the power and authority to carry out the duties and responsibilities conferred upon it by the land development regulations consistent with F.S. § 163.3174 and shall perform these duties in the best interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. The planning board shall have the following functions: 
(1)  Be responsible for preparation and review of the comprehensive plan. During preparation of the plan prior to any recommendations to the city commission, the planning board shall hold at least one public hearing with due public notice on the proposed plan or element or portion thereof, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174(4)(a), and make recommendations to the city commission concerning enactment; 
(2)  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan, review any proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan, prepare periodic reports required pursuant to F.S. § 163.3191, and make recommendations to the city commission concerning enactment; 
(3)  Review proposed land development regulations and amendments thereto and make recommendations to the city commission as to the consistency of proposed land development regulations with the adopted comprehensive plan or element or portion thereof, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174(4)(c); 
(4)  Review major development plans submitted pursuant to article II of chapter 108 and make recommendations to the city commission regarding such plans; 
(5)  Review minor development plans submitted pursuant to article II of chapter 108; 
(6)  Review conditional uses as provided in article III of chapter 122, which may be part of a minor or major development plan; 
(7)  Review and authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of the land development regulations where the requirements of section 90-394 are met; 
(8)  Review subdivision proposals submitted pursuant to chapter 118 and street dedication and reconfiguration proposals and make recommendations to the city commission regarding compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
(9)  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to carry out the functions set forth in this subsection; and 
(10)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174(4)(d), perform any other duties which are assigned to the planning board by the city commission or by general or special law. 
(b)  In performing functions set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (5) and (8) of this section, the planning board shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city commission and shall not render final determinations. When the planning board reviews and recommends actions regarding a conditional use which is part of a major development plan as referenced in subsection (a)(7) of this section, the recommendation of the planning board is advisory only, and the city commission shall render the final determination. Any appeal available by provisions of the land development regulations, where the planning board is acting only in an advisory capacity, shall be taken from the final determination of the city commission, and not from the recommendation of the planning board. For minor development plan review and conditional uses under subsections (a)(6) and (7) of this section, the decision of the planning board shall be final, unless the decision is appealed to the city commission within ten days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 2, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-56. - Appropriation of funds. 
    The city commission shall appropriate funds necessary for expenses incurred by the planning board in its performance of the functions listed in section 90-55. The planning board shall not have the power to contract with private or governmental persons or entities or to commit or expend city funds. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-57. - Rules of procedure. 
    The planning board shall establish and adopt rules of procedure, which shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Election and duties of officers; 
(2)  Meeting schedule, time, and place; 
(3)  Establishing the order of business and the method of transaction; 
(4)  Procedure for action and voting by members; 
(5)  Conduct of public hearings; 
(6)  Rules of conduct; 
(7)  Parliamentary procedure; 
(8)  Maintenance of records; and 
(9)  Method of amending the rules. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-58. - Officers. 
    From among its voting members the planning board annually shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-10, § 3, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 90-59. - Regular meetings. 
    The planning board shall attempt to convene on a regularly scheduled basis at least once each month, or more frequently if necessary, and at a designated place to be determined by the planning board. The planning board may meet at such other times as the chairperson or planning board may determine. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-60. - Notice of meetings. 
    All meetings of the planning board shall be open to the public, and notice of such meetings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days in advance thereof. At any special or regular meeting the planning board may set a future meeting date. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-61. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the planning board may be called by the chairperson or by written notice signed by four voting members. No official action shall be taken during any special meeting unless four members concur. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 7-6-2016) 
Sec. 90-62. - Quorum. 
    Four voting members of the planning board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may act only to adjourn meetings for lack of a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum shall be required to pass any action of the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(5)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-10, § 4, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 16-12, § 2, 7-6-2016) 
Sec. 90-63. - Preparation of agenda, minutes and other records. 
(a)  All meetings of the planning board shall be open to the public. Except for emergencies so designated by a majority of the full membership, notice of all meetings shall be published as for a regular meeting, and an agenda shall be available to the public at city hall 48 hours in advance thereof. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the planning board or committees thereof. 
(c)  The planning board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a properly indexed record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. Such record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-64. - Schedule for comprehensive plan review. 
    The planning board rules of procedure shall establish a schedule for the review of the comprehensive plan pursuant to F.S. § 163.3191 to determine whether comprehensive plan amendments are desirable. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-65. - Public participation. 
    The planning board shall provide for effective citizen participation in the comprehensive planning process to the fullest extent possible consistent with F.S. § 163.3181. These procedures shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Broad dissemination of detailed proposals and alternatives; 
(2)  The opportunity for written public comments; 
(3)  Public meetings after reasonable notice; 
(4)  Provisions for open discussion at all meetings; 
(5)  Development of communication programs; 
(6)  Informational services; 
(7)  Reasonable consideration of and response to public input; and 
(8)  Assurance that real property owners are provided with notice of all official actions which will regulate the use of their property. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-66. - Updates and other revision to rules of procedure. 
    From time to time, and by October 1 of each year, the planning board shall recommend to the city commission regulations for the conduct of its business, which recommendation shall govern the planning board upon approval or amendment by the city commission or upon the expiration of 45 days without final city commission action thereon. The rules are at all times subject to amendment by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(G)(9)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-67. - Personnel. 
    The city manager shall provide staff support necessary to the planning functions of the planning board and shall provide secretarial support for the planning board in the execution of its duties and in order to record and transcribe in summary form, subject to planning board approval, the minutes of all planning board meetings. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-68. - Appeal of final actions. 
    Provisions for appeal of final actions of the planning board are stated in division 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.4(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-69-90-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 90-96. - Established; composition. 
    The city commission shall serve as the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall be a quasi-judicial body consisting of the members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-97. - Powers. 
    The board of adjustment may authorize in specific cases a variance from the maximum height requirements of the land development regulations and Article 1.05 of the Charter of the City of Key West where the requirements of section 90-394 are met. In addition, the city commission shall hear all appeals to the final orders and administrative and enforcement decisions of the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.5(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 3, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-98. - Officers; rules of procedure; meetings; oaths. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its regular members. The administrative official shall appoint a secretary to serve the board of adjustment. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record and shall be maintained in the office of the administrative official. 
(c)  Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The chairperson or, in his absence, the acting chairperson may administer oaths. The board of adjustment shall carry out and comply with procedures and public hearing notice requirements cited in division 2 of article VIII of this chapter 90 and section 90-393, together with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.5(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 2, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-99. - Appeals of decisions. 
    Any person, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may apply, in the manner provided by law, to the county circuit court in the 16th judicial circuit for judicial relief within 30 days after rendition of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-100-90-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 90-126. - Established. 
    The city commission finds that the preservation of the character and appearance of the historic preservation districts of the city, as well as buildings, structures, and properties listed in the local register of historic places and the National Register of Historic Places, and buildings, structures, archaeological sites, or districts classified as "contributing" or "contributing but altered" on the city historic preservation survey is a public purpose benefiting the educational, cultural, and economic welfare of the citizens of the city. The city commission further finds that this public purpose can be best achieved through a city agency having the authority and responsibility to review and regulate certain changes in such areas. The city commission hereby creates the historic architectural review commission (HARC), which shall use the power and authority conferred upon it by this Code to further such public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 4, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-127. - Membership, terms and removal. 
(a)  The historic architectural review commission shall consist of seven residents of the city or who shall have a business, employment or profession located in the city and reside in the lower keys from Key West to Big Coppitt Key. Members of the historic architectural review commission shall maintain their qualifications consistent with this section for the duration of their membership. The members serving on the historic architectural review commission upon adoption of this ordinance shall continue in office, subject to the other provisions in this Code until the expiration of their term. Except for the mayoral architectural appointment, the four current remaining regular seats and the two current alternate seats shall be assigned to the six remaining city commission members by lottery system administered by the city clerk. Thereafter, the appointments shall be as specified in paragraph (b) below. Appointments shall be made for a term of two years. Appointments to replace a vacating member shall be for the unexpired term of the member. Historic architectural review commission members may be reappointed at the expiration of their term. 
(b)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one member of the historic architectural review commission. The mayor shall appoint an architect registered in the United States, preferably retired or not practicing in the city. Three members in addition to the mayor's architectural appointment shall be professionals in historic preservation related disciplines. More than two professionals in the same discipline in historic preservation can be members of the commission. Preference in all appointments shall be given to professionals or laymen who have demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation. Professional members shall be from the historic preservation related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or other related disciplines such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology. The city commission may evaluate applicants by using the Florida Certified Local Government Guidelines, a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Additionally, the mayor shall designate a liaison to the historic architectural review commission from among the city commissioners. 
(c)  All members shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed by majority vote of its full membership. If a member is absent from two of three consecutive regular meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the historic architectural review commission shall declare the member's office vacant, and the chairperson shall notify the city commissioner responsible for that seat that the member's office is vacant. All provisions of division 2 of article V of chapter 2 are applicable to members of the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 1, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-128. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the membership of the historic architectural review commission, including those representing expired terms, shall if possible be filled within 60 days by relevant appointing city commissioner or mayor. If the vacancy is not filled within the period, the city may apply to the state historic preservation officer for an extension of up to an additional 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 11-10, § 2, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-129. - Compensation. 
    All members of the historic architectural review commission shall serve without compensation but, as authorized by the city commission, may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-130. - Powers and functions. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall have the power to carry out the duties and responsibility conferred upon it by the Code of Ordinances and land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 4, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 00-21, § 1, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 90-131. - Rules of Procedure. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall establish and adopt rules of procedure, which shall include but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Election and duties of officers; 
(2)  Meeting schedule, time, and place; 
(3)  Establishing the order of business and the method of transaction; 
(4)  Procedure for action and voting by members; 
(5)  Conduct of public hearings; 
(6)  Rules of conduct; 
(7)  Parliamentary procedure; 
(8)  Maintenance of records; and 
(9)  Method of amending the rules of procedure. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-132. - Officers. 
    From among its members the historic architectural review commission annually shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-133. - Regular meetings. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall attempt to convene on a regularly scheduled basis at least once each month. Notice of all meetings will be provided pursuant to section 90-143. At any special or regular meeting the historic architectural review commission may set a future meeting date; however, that meeting must be noticed pursuant to section 90-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 4, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-134. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the historic architectural review commission may be called by the chairperson or by written notice signed by three voting members. No official action shall be taken during any special meeting unless three members concur. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-135. - Quorum. 
    Four members of the historic architectural review commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 11-10, § 3, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-136. - Preparation of agenda and minutes. 
    Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the historic architectural review commission or committees thereof. All meetings shall be open to the public and, except for emergencies so designated by a majority of the full membership, notice of all meetings shall be published as for a regular meeting pursuant to section 90-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(5)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 4, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 11-11, § 2, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-137. - Application for action. 
    Applications for historic architectural review commission action shall be filed with the historic architectural review commission. Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the historic architectural review commission shall vote at its meeting to approve or disapprove such application. The 30-day time period shall not include the following: 
(1)  Periods of plan redrafting or compilation of additional information, where requested by the applicant or by the historic architectural review commission. 
(2)  Application deferrals where the applicant is not present at one or more the historic architectural review commission meetings or where the meeting is canceled. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-138. - Notice and ability to be heard. 
    Notice of the date upon which the vote of the historic architectural review commission will be taken shall be provided to the applicant, as shall written notice of the total vote. Applicants shall be given reasonable opportunity to be heard prior to the vote. The historic architectural review commission shall not accept or take action on any application for a certificate of appropriateness for work requiring planning board approval of a major development plan pursuant to sections 108-165 and 108-166, unless the historic architectural review commission first finds that the applicant has meet the terms of all the requirements of section 90-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(7)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 11-11, § 3, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 90-139. - Authority to approve or disapprove work. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall have authority to disapprove work which does not augment or preserve the character and appearance of the historic districts. The historic architectural review commission shall have authority to approve work which is deemed to augment or preserve the character and appearance of the historic districts. If approved, the certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by signature of the presiding member of the historic architectural review commission. If disapproved, the applicant may modify and resubmit the application according to the historic architectural review commission regulations or may appeal as provided in division 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-140. - Revisions to rules of procedure. 
    From time to time and by October 1 of each year, the historic architectural review commission shall recommend to the city commission regulations for the conduct of its business which guide the historic architectural review commission decisions, which recommendation shall govern the historic architectural review commission upon approval or amendment by the city commission or upon the expiration of 45 days without final city commission action thereon. The rules are at all times subject to amendment by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(F)(9)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 4-7-2009) 
Sec. 90-141. - Personnel. 
(a)  The city manager shall provide sufficient funds within the general fund that will provide a professional historic preservation planner, a clerk and one full-time inspector for the historic architectural review commission and shall cause the minutes of all meetings of the historic architectural review commission to be recorded and transcribed in summary form, subject to historic architectural review commission approval. 
(b)  The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the historic architectural review commission on all matters. 
(c)  When the historic architectural review commission considers applications for certificates of appropriateness or other formal actions that impact properties which are normally evaluated by a professional in a specific discipline, and that discipline is not represented on the historic architectural review commission, the historic architectural review commission shall seek input from a professional in this discipline before rendering a decision. Failure to obtain such advice shall not invalidate its decision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7(G)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 2, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 90-142. - Historic Architectural Commission Design Guidelines adopted. 
    The Historic Architectural Commission Design Guidelines, as amended from time to time per the procedures specified in sections 90-516 through 90-524, are hereby incorporated by reference. The guidelines shall be kept on file at both the city clerk's office and the building department. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § 1, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 6-22-2016; Ord. No. 16-23, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 90-143. - Notice. 
(a)  Scope. The city shall provide notice for all projects that will be reviewed by the historic architectural review commission during their regular meetings in accordance with this section, except as otherwise required or provided by state statute. 
(b)  Newspaper notice. The city shall publish five days in advance the agenda for all meetings in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the city and of general interest and readership in the city, not one of limited subject matter. 
(c)  Posted notice. 
(1)  For all projects that are scheduled for review during a public meeting, with the exception of major development plans and building relocations, the city shall provide a completed public notice form to the applicant or the applicant's representative. The notice shall be posted on the subject property, at least five days prior to the relevant scheduled meeting. The notice shall be posted in a location that is visible from the adjacent public street. The notice shall contain block lettering on a high contrast background color with the words "public notice" in letters three inches or more in height. The applicant or the applicant's representative shall provide a sworn affidavit together with photographic evidence to the historic preservation planner that posting of the notice has been accomplished consistent with this section. Submission shall be made at least three days prior to the relevant scheduled meeting of the historic architectural review commission. 
(2)  For major development plans and building relocation projects the city shall provide a completed public notice form to the applicant or the applicant's representative. The notice shall be posted on the subject property at least 14 days prior to the relevant scheduled meeting. The notice shall be posted in a location that is visible from the adjacent public street. The notice shall contain block lettering on a high contrast background color with the words "public notice" in letters three inches or more in height. The applicant or the applicant's representative shall provide a sworn affidavit together with photographic evidence to the historic preservation planner that posting of the notice has been accomplished consistent with this section. Submission shall be made at least ten days prior to the relevant scheduled meeting of the historic architectural review commission. 
(d)  Content of posted notice. The posted notice required by this section shall contain the date, time and place of the public meeting and a common description of the location of the subject site and the nature of the project. 
(Ord. No. 11-11, § 4, 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 90-144-90-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREE COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Committees, boards and commissions, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 90-171. - Created. 
    There is created the tree commission, as mandated by State Bill 5197, Laws of Fla. ch. 70-765, filed June 24, 1970, which shall have power and authority to accomplish the public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-172. - Composition. 
    The tree commission shall consist of seven residents of the city. The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one member of the tree commission which appointment shall not be subject to approval by the city commission. The seven members serving on the tree commission upon adoption of this ordinance shall be assigned to individual city commission members via a lottery system. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(B)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 18-18, § 1, 9-5-2018) 
Sec. 90-173. - Terms of office. 
    The term of each tree commission member shall run parallel to that of the appointing city commission member. The tree commission member's term shall end at the conclusion of the city commission member's term; a reelected commission member may reappoint a tree commission member. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(B)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-18, § 2, 9-5-2018) 
Sec. 90-174. - Removal of members. 
    All tree commission members shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed by majority vote of its full membership. If a member is absent from two of three consecutive regular meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the tree commission shall declare the member's office vacant, and the chairperson shall notify the city commission that the member's office is vacant. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(B)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-18, § 3, 9-5-2018) 
Sec. 90-175. - Compensation. 
    All members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation but, as authorized by the city commission, may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(B)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-176. - Quorum. 
    Four members of the tree commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-177. - Officers. 
    From among its members, the tree commission annually shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-178. - Schedule of meetings. 
    The tree commission shall convene on a regularly scheduled basis at least once each month. Notice of all meetings including the agenda with the address and description of each project shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days in advance thereof. At any special or regular meeting the tree commission may set a future meeting date. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(C)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 5, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 90-179. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the tree commission may be called by the chairperson or by written notice signed by three members. No official action shall be taken during any special meeting unless four members concur. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-180. - Record of activities. 
    Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the tree commission or committees thereof. All such meetings shall be open to the public and, except in emergencies so designated by a majority of the full membership, notice of such meetings shall be published as for a regular meeting, and an agenda for each meeting shall be available to the public at city hall 48 hours in advance thereof. Copies of tree commission records shall be available to the public for a fee set forth in the tree commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(C)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-181. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 04-20, adopted Nov. 3, 2004, repealed § 90-181, which pertained to recommended rules governing operations, and derived from Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 
Sec. 90-182. - Powers and duties. 
    The tree commission shall have the power and responsibility to carry out the duties conferred upon it by this Code of Ordinances and shall perform the duties in order to protect and enhance the health, growth, and planting of trees in the city. Findings of the tree commission regarding destruction or damage to trees are enforced through the special master. The only appealable decisions of the tree commission concern permits. These decisions may be appealed to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.7.1(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 4, 5-20-2008) 
Secs. 90-183-90-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATIVE AND QUASI-JUDICIAL ACTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-211. - Classification of legislative and quasi-judicial actions. 
    The following table defines the nature of city rulings affecting land use, planning and zoning: 
CLASSIFICATION OF LEGISLATIVE AND QUASI-JUDICIAL RULINGS* 
Type of Ruling Legislative 
(Creates Uniform 
Policy) Quasi-judicial 
(Effectuates or Applies 
Adopted Policy) Comprehensive plan adoption ? Amendment to the comprehensive plan ? Change in future land use map designation ? Adoption of land development regulations ? Amendment of land development regulations ? Generic change in zoning districts ? Rezoning for a specific site ? Conditional use ? Planned redevelopment and development ? Variance ? Dedication/vacation of right-of-way or easement ? Subdivision plat approval ? Site or development plan approval ? Appeal of administrative decisions ? Vesting determination ? Concurrency management determination ? Tree removal permit ? Sign permit ? Building permit ?  
*Current as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this subpart B derives. This table shall automatically be revised to conform to changes in the laws affecting legislative and quasi-judicial decisions of local governments in the state. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-212-90-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEGISLATIVE OR QUASI-LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS 

Sec. 90-241. - Scope. 
    Legislative or quasi-legislative actions result in formulation of a general public rule or policy that is uniformly applicable to a large area or a large number of individuals, interests, or activities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-242. - General procedures for review. 
    The standard of judicial review for legislative or quasi-legislative actions is the "fairly debatable rule." The following procedure will be used during the review of all legislative or quasi-legislative actions before the city commission: 
(1)  Presentation by staff. 
(2)  Public comment in favor of the request. 
(3)  Public comment in opposition of the request. 
(4)  Motion by city commission. 
(5)  Discussion and/or cross examination by city commission. 
(6)  Action by city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-243. - Required city proceedings and action. 
    Under the "fairly debatable rule" as provided in this division, the city's function is to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of the land use, planning or zoning issue-especially whether or not the action is consistent with public health, safety, or welfare. Such acts are generally presumed valid unless they are clearly shown not to have a reasonable relationship to the public health, safety, or welfare or are shown to be unreasonably and arbitrarily applied to property. The test used to determine this is whether the resolution is "fairly debatable." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(B)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-244. - Applicant's responsibilities. 
    On review of a legislative or quasi-legislative procedure in circuit court, as provided in this division, the applicant shall carry the burden of proving that the challenged action of the city was not "fairly debatable." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(B)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-245-90-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - QUASI-JUDICIAL RULINGS AND PROCEEDINGS 

Sec. 90-271. - Scope. 
    Quasi-judicial rulings entail the application of a general public rule or policy to a limited number of specific individuals, interests, or activities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-272. - General procedures for review. 
    A stricter review procedure is required in quasi-judicial action as opposed to legislative action. In quasi-judicial procedure the "fairly debatable rule," applicable in legislative action, is not the standard of review. In quasi-judicial proceedings, the standard of review is "substantial competent evidence." The following procedures will be used during city commission review of quasi-judicial actions: 
(1)  Presentation by applicant. 
(2)  Presentation by staff. 
(3)  Public comment in favor of the request. 
(4)  Public comment in opposition of the request. 
(5)  Motion by city commission. 
(6)  Discussion and/or cross examination by city commission. 
(7)  Action by city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-273. - Required city proceedings and action. 
(a)  In a quasi-judicial action, the city shall bear the burden of carrying out the following proceedings and responsibilities: 
(1)  State the reasons for the action that denies the petition of an applicant; 
(2)  State the substantial competent evidence to substantiate that a ruling accomplishes a legitimate public purpose; 
(3)  State what legitimate public purpose is accomplished; and 
(4)  Maintain a record of its proceedings sufficient for judicial review. 
(b)  If the city determines that a petition is inconsistent with the adopted comprehensive plan and land development regulations as well as other applicable ordinances and laws and does not fulfill a legitimate public purpose, the application should be denied. If the applicant's petition is found consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan and land development regulations as well as other applicable laws and ordinances and fulfills a legitimate purpose, the petition should be approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-274. - Applicant's responsibilities. 
(a)  In a quasi-judicial procedure the initial burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the petition or application for use of privately owned lands (i.e., rezoning, special exception, conditional use permit, variance, site plan approval, or other quasi-judicial procedure): 
(1)  Complies with the reasonable procedural requirements of the land development regulations; and 
(2)  The action sought is consistent with applicable provisions of the adopted comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(b)  Upon such a showing, the applicant is entitled to use the subject property in the manner sought unless the city proves by competent substantial evidence that a specifically stated public purpose requires a more restrictive use. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-275. - Standard of judicial review by certiorari. 
    The city responsibilities stated in this division must be executed and recorded in a manner sufficient for judicial review, including: 
(1)  Legal sufficiency of the evidence to support the findings of fact made; and 
(2)  Legal adequacy under applicable law of the reasons given for the action taken. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.1(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-276-90-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL 

Sec. 90-301. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The chief building official, under the supervision of the city manager, shall administer and enforce the land development regulations. The chief building official may be provided with the assistance of such other city officers and employees as the city manager may direct. 
(b)  The city planner shall have the administrative responsibility to interpret the land development regulations. Such interpretations shall be in writing and accompanied by review and written consent by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.2), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 1, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-302. - Application, purpose and conflict. 
    The chief building official shall apply the provisions of the land development regulations as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, or the general welfare of the public. The land development regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or any lawful easements or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where the land development regulations impose a greater restriction, the land development regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-303. - General procedures for violations. 
    Whenever the chief building official shall find that any of the sections of the land development regulations is being violated, written notification shall be directed to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The chief building official shall: 
(1)  Order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings, or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; 
(2)  Order the removal of illegal buildings or discontinuance of any illegal work to be done; or 
(3)  Take any other action authorized by the land development regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-304. - Complaints regarding violations. 
(a)  Whenever a violation of the land development regulations occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint or a verbal complaint as described in this section. 
(b)  A written complaint shall fully explain the causes and basis of the complaint and shall be filed with the building official. The building official shall properly record such complaint and notify the appropriate city personnel who shall investigate and take action thereon as provided for in article VI of chapter 2 pertaining to code enforcement. 
(c)  A verbal complaint, which reports an alleged violation, may be directed to the administrative official. A verbal report of violation received by the administrative official shall be processed by informing the complainant as to the written procedures described in subsection (b) of this section. When a person does not subsequently submit a written report concerning a violation, the administrative official shall ensure that a field inspection is carried out to verify the oral report concerning the alleged violation. Complaint investigations may also be based upon field inspections performed by the administrative official or other designated personnel. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-305. - Appeals of decisions. 
    Provisions for appeal of decisions, including final orders, issued by the chief building official in administering and enforcing the land development regulations are stated in division 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-306-90-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, VARIANCES, APPEALS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Impact fees, § 54-56 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-331-90-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 90-356. - Building permits required. 
(a)  No building or other structure shall be erected, demolished, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the chief building official. 
(b)  In accordance with F.S. § 380.04, changes in use classification of a building or structure shall also require a development permit issued by the chief building official. 
(c)  All building permits issued shall be in conformity with the provisions of the fire codes, the building codes, and the land development regulations, except after written order in the form of an administrative review or a variance from the board of adjustment as provided for in the land development regulations. No building permit shall be granted unless the developer has submitted all requisite plans and permits required by the city and other entities having jurisdiction. No building permit shall be issued until concurrency management program requirements in chapter 94 are met. 
(d)  Any required supportive written documentation from other essential public facility and service agencies must be submitted and shall demonstrate that sufficient capacity exists to supply the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-357. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  All applications for building permits for any structure shall be accompanied by a development plan, if required pursuant to article II of chapter 108. Where development plan approval is required, the approved development plan, including a construction management plan and schedule as provided in section 108-248, if the construction period is anticipated to exceed one year, and all other required components, shall be submitted with the building permit application. If no development plan is required pursuant to article II of chapter 108, the application for a building permit shall include a scale drawing at one inch to 20 feet, in triplicate, showing the following: 
(1)  A survey prepared and certified by a state-registered land surveyor showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The exact sizes and locations on the lots of buildings already existing, if any. 
(3)  The location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. 
(4)  When applicable, the required parking spaces, loading and unloading spaces, maneuvering space and openings for ingress and egress. 
(5)  When applicable, grading and drainage plans meeting the South Florida Water Management District requirements and showing any and all cuts, fills and provisions for adequately carrying off surface water on premises plus provisions for any surface water which would naturally flow over or through the area. Such plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(6)  All applications shall contain written documentation from the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority and the city, including but not limited to the city engineering department, which states that the respective public facilities have sufficient existing capacity to supply the proposed development or that capacity will exist upon completion of the proposed development. 
(7)  Such other information as required by the city planner, city engineer or chief building official, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Existing or proposed building construction or alteration; 
b.  Existing or proposed uses of the building and land; 
c.  The number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; 
d.  Conditions existing on the lot; and 
e.  Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of the land development regulations. 
(b)  One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the chief building official, after the chief building official shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved as attested to by signature of the chief building official on the copy. The original and one copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-358. - Building permit time limitations. 
(a)  After a building permit has been issued, the permittee must commence construction within 90 days following issuance of the permit. A building permit shall expire if construction activity is dormant for a period of six months. Similarly, a building permit shall expire if the developer fails to call for and achieve approved inspections within planned 120-day intervals as shall be evidenced in the construction schedule. 
(b)  Large scale developments may be phased. However, no single phase of development shall exceed a period of two years. Prior to commencing each phase of a phased development, the permittee shall be required to obtain a new building permit unless the multiphased project has a construction span less than two years. 
(c)  No building permit shall be valid for a period longer than two years. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-359. - Expiration of building permits. 
(a)  A building permit shall be declared null and void if any of the following conditions fail to occur: 
(1)  The construction shall commence within 90 days from the time the building permit was released; 
(2)  The structures accommodating the principal use shall be entirely completed within two years following the release of the building permit or within the period identified in the development plan's construction management plan and schedule; 
(3)  The construction activity shall be continuous, and no period of dormancy shall exist for six months or more; and 
(4)  The developer shall call for and achieve approved inspections within a 120-day interval as required pursuant to the building code or the approved construction management plan and schedule. 
(b)  Barring force majeure, no extension shall be granted once a building permit has expired. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-360. - Notice requirement for expired building permits. 
    If any conditions identified in section 90-359 fail to occur, the chief building official shall cancel the permit and give written notice to the permittee. If construction has commenced, the notice shall also be sent of the contractor. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation and/or the condition causing the permit expiration and shall state that no further work described in the canceled permit shall proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. Notwithstanding, if the development was the subject of a construction management plan which included a city-approved schedule for construction activity beyond a one-year period, the terms of the construction schedule shall be used as the basis for rendering decisions regarding permit expiration. Barring force majeure, no extension shall be granted once a building permit has expired. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-361. - Phased projects. 
    Large scale developments may be phased. However, no single phase of development shall exceed a period of two years. Prior to commencing each phase of a phased development, the permittee shall be required to obtain a new building permit unless the multiphased project has a construction span less than two years. No building permit shall be valid for a period longer than two years. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-362. - Temporary certificates of occupancy. 
    A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the chief building official to accommodate extraordinary conditions for a period not exceeding 90 days during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may require special conditions and safeguards which the city deems necessary to protect the safety of the occupants and the public. Violations of provisions contained in the temporary certificate of occupancy or other related violations occurring on properties operating pursuant to a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of the building code and/or land development regulations, as applicable, and shall be punishable as provided in article VI of chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-363. - Certificate of occupancy-Required. 
    No land or building or part thereof erected or altered in its use or structure after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be used until the chief building official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land, building, or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to be in conformity with the provisions of the land development regulations. Development permits shall also be required as provided in section 90-356. It shall be the duty of the chief building official to make a final inspection of the building or premises and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the land development regulations or, if such certificate is refused, to state such refusal in writing together with the cause. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be deemed a violation of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(H)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 3, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 90-364. - Same-Restrictions and limitations. 
    Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the chief building official shall authorize only the use, arrangements, and construction set forth in approved plans and application. No other use, arrangement or construction shall be allowed unless a new certificate of occupancy is issued and such use complies with all applicable requirements of the land development regulations as well as all adopted building and fire codes, including advisory standards of the National Fire Protection Association Code. Unauthorized use, arrangement, or construction activity shall be deemed a violation of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-365. - Violations and penalties. 
    Proceeding with any type of construction or use without an approved authorization for a building permit or land use shall be a violation of the land development regulations and punishable as provided in section 1-15 and in article VI of chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.3(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-366-90-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 90-391. - Variances. 
    An owner or his authorized agent may request a variance from the land development regulations as provided for in this division. The planning board shall have the quasi-judicial power necessary to grant such variances that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the land development regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of the land development regulations shall not be granted by the planning board unless and until the requirements of this division are met. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 5, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-392. - Application. 
(a)  All applications for variances from the land development regulations shall be in the form required and provided by the city planner. Such application shall be submitted to the city planning office together with the fee established by resolution of the city commission. A completed application shall include the application form, the fee and all required supplemental information necessary to render determinations related to the variance request. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a variance, the planning board shall hold a public hearing upon the application in accordance with the procedures cited in section 90-393 and shall render an order granting or denying such application. In granting such application the planning board must make specific affirmative findings respecting each of the matters specified in section 90-394 and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, including requirements in excess of those otherwise required by these land development regulations, which shall become a part of the terms under which a development order may be issued. When appropriate, as prescribed in section 90-398, the city planner may treat an application for variance as an application for administrative variance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 6, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-18, § 1, 10-16-2013) 
Sec. 90-393. - Notice and hearing procedure. 
    In considering and acting upon applications for a variance from the land development regulations, the following procedures shall be observed: 
(1)  Date of hearing. The hearing shall be held by the planning board at a date and time fixed by the chairperson of the planning board. 
(2)  Notice. Notice shall be provided as required by division 2 of article VIII of this chapter. 
(3)  Appearance and presentation. At any hearing upon any matter subject to this division, the applicant or his authorized representative seeking action by the planning board and any other party desiring to be heard upon the application may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The applicant shall be entitled to make an initial presentation respecting the application and, at the conclusion of presentations or statements by all other parties, shall be entitled to offer a statement in rebuttal to such presentations if the applicant so desires. The chairperson of the planning board may, at the commencement of the hearing upon each application or at any time during such hearing, require that parties desiring to make a presentation identify themselves and may specify the time to be allowed each such party within which to make such presentation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 3, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 08-04, § 7, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-394. - Action. 
    Action by the planning board upon any matter subject to the provisions of this division shall be announced by the chairperson of the board immediately following the vote determining such action and shall thereafter be embodied in a written order prepared by the planning director and executed by the chairperson of the planning board and filed with the city clerk. Such written order shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which such action occurred. The board shall enter its order denying such application, specifying the reasons therefore, or granting such application, in whole or in part, under such terms and conditions as the board shall determine appropriate. 
    The planning board shall not grant a variance to permit a use not permitted by right or as a conditional use in the zoning district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the ordinance in the zoning district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. No variance shall be granted that increases or has the effect of increasing density or intensity of a use beyond that permitted by the comprehensive plan or these LDRs. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-2-2002; Ord. No. 08-04, § 8, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-395. - Standards, findings. 
(a)  Standards for considering variances. Before any variance may be granted, the planning board must find all of the following: 
(1)  Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other land, structures or buildings in the same zoning district. 
(2)  Conditions not created by applicant. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or negligence of the applicant. 
(3)  Special privileges not conferred. That granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied by the land development regulations to other lands, buildings or structures in the same zoning district. 
(4)  Hardship conditions exist. That literal interpretation of the provisions of the land development regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in this same zoning district under the terms of this ordinance and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant. 
(5)  Only minimum variance granted. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(6)  Not injurious to the public welfare. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the land development regulations and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public interest or welfare. 
(7)  Existing nonconforming uses of other property not the basis for approval. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(b)  The planning board shall make factual findings regarding the following: 
(1)  That the standards established in subsection (a) have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
(2)  That the applicant has demonstrated a "good neighbor policy" by contacting or attempting to contact all noticed property owners who have objected to the variance application, and by addressing the objections expressed by these neighbors. 
    An order permitting a variance may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, including visual screening, and may also prescribe a reasonable time limit within which construction or occupancy of the premises for the proposed use shall have begun or have been completed or both. Upon entry of an order granting a variance, the administrative official shall not issue any development order for the subject property unless and until all of the conditions and requirements of the order granting the variance are met. Violation of those conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the land development regulations and shall render the variances revoked. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-2-2002; Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 08-04, § 9, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-396. - Effect and limitation. 
    An order granting a variance from the land development regulations shall be deemed applicable to the parcel for which it is granted and not to the individual applicant, provided that no order granting a variance shall be deemed valid with respect to any use of the premises other than the use specified in the application for a variance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-397. - Reapplication. 
    Reapplication for the same or similar piece of property requesting the same or similar variance from the land development regulations cannot be made within two years from the date the application was originally denied by the board of adjustment or planning board. An applicant may, however, submit a substantially different application or reapply based on changed conditions and/or the advent of new information which have a substantial impact on material issues. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.6(G)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 03-09, § 2, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 08-04, § 10, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-398. - Administrative variances. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish authority, procedures and standards for the granting of administrative variances and waivers from certain requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions contained herein below, the city planner is authorized to grant the following variances and waivers according to the standards contained in subsections (h) and (i) of this section. 
(1)  Reduction in the front, rear yard, and non-shoreline setback requirements in chapter 122, article IV, by no more than ten feet and side yard setback by no more than 20 percent; 
(2)  Reduction in all street and landscaping buffer yard width requirements in chapter 108, article VI by no more than ten percent; 
(3)  Reduction in the total area of landscaping required for off-street parking and loading in chapter 108, article VII, subdivision II by no more than ten percent. 
(c)  An application for an administrative variance or waiver under this section shall be submitted to the city planner on a form approved by the city planner. 
(d)  All applications for administrative variances or waivers shall be considered by the development review committee pursuant to its customary process. 
(e)  The city planner shall complete his or her review of the entire application and render a proposed decision within three (3) weeks of the development review committee meeting. 
(f)  The city planner's proposed decision shall be in writing. 
(g)  Prior to rendering a proposed decision, the city planner shall consult with and obtain concurrence of his or her decision by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. With the exception of the special accessibility setback variance as provided for in subsection (j) of this section, approval of an administrative variance shall only be proposed or granted if all of the standards in subsection (h) and (i) of this section are met. 
(h)  The city planner shall recommend approval or approve an administrative variance under this section if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following standards are met: 
(1)  The applicant shall demonstrate a showing of good and sufficient cause as follows: 
a.  The request deals solely with the physical characteristics of the property, subdivision lot or land parcel under question; and 
b.  The request is not based on the character of the planned construction or substantial improvement, the personal characteristics of the owner or inhabitants; and 
c.  The request is not based on inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, the disapproval of neighbors or homeowners' association restrictions; 
(2)  Failure to grant the administrative variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
(3)  Granting the administrative variance will not result in increased public expenses, create a threat to public health and safety, create a public nuisance, or cause fraud or victimization of the public; 
(4)  The property has unique or peculiar circumstances, which apply to the subject property, but which do not apply to other properties in the same zoning district; 
(5)  Granting the administrative variance will not give the applicant any special privilege denied to other properties in the immediate neighborhood in terms of the provisions of this chapter or established development patterns; 
(6)  Granting the administrative variance is not based on disabilities, handicaps or health of the applicant or members of her/his family; and 
(7)  The administrative variance is the minimum necessary to provide relief to the applicant. 
(i)  The city planner may recommend approval or approve an administrative variance or waiver that modifies the minimum front yard requirements set out in zoning districts in chapter 122, article IV, provided the applicant demonstrates that: 
(1)  The existing setback average, as measured pursuant to the definition of "setbacks" in section 86-9, on the block of the street within the land use district in which the subject property is located is less than the land use district standard, as established in zoning districts in chapter 122, article IV; and 
(2)  The waiver will not result in a setback that is less than the existing front yard setback to the furthermost projection of the main building that is closest to the front lot line on a contiguous lot on either side of the subject property; and 
(3)  The waiver is for an amount not greater than 20 percent of the land use district standard as established in the zoning districts in chapter 122, article IV; and 
(4)  In the event that a contiguous lot on either side of the subject property is vacant, the land use district standard shall apply. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the standards in subsections (h)(1), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of this section, an administrative variance from any yard setback requirement may be granted for an elevator or wheelchair lift or ramp required to allow access to the elevated dwelling unit of a disabled applicant or disabled member of the applicant's household. 
(k)  Public notification of proposed approval. In the event the city planner determines that an application for an administrative variance or a waiver complies with the requirements of this section, the city planning department shall provide written notice of proposed approval and require posting as follows: 
(1)  The planning department shall provide written notice by regular mail to owners of real property located within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed administrative variance or waiver. 
(2)  Planning staff shall post the property which is the subject of the proposed administrative variance or waiver with a waterproof sign of at least four square feet in front surface area, which is lettered so as to be easily visible from all public streets and public ways abutting the property. 
(3)  The notice and posting shall provide a brief description of the proposed administrative variance or waiver; indicate where the public may examine the application; and indicate the 30-working-day period within which to request a public hearing pursuant to subsection (n) below or submit a written response. The cost of providing notice and posting shall be borne by the applicant. 
(l)  In the event a public hearing is not requested within the period provided in subsection (n) below, the city planner shall review all public responses to the application for administrative variance or waiver with respect to whether the proposed administrative variance or waiver complies with the requirements and standards of this section, and, thereafter, the city planner shall issue a written decision approving or denying the administrative variance. 
(m)  In the event the city planner issues a written decision denying a requested administrative variance, the applicant may file a written objection to the denial, which shall be deemed an application for a variance pursuant to section 90-392, which shall be subject to procedures pertaining to variances as contained in sections 90-391 through 90-397 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(n)  Public hearing by the planning board. If requested in writing by an aggrieved or adversely affected party, as defined by section 163.3215(2), Florida Statutes, during the required 30 working days of posting, a public hearing by the planning board shall be scheduled at the next available hearing date. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures pertaining to variances as contained in sections 90-391 through 90-397 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(o)  Reapplication for the same or similar piece of property requesting the same or a similar administrative variance from the land development regulations cannot be made within two years from the date the application was originally denied by the planning board or city planner. An applicant may, however, submit a substantially different application or reapply based on changed conditions and/or the advent of new information which have a substantial impact on material issues. 
(Ord. No. 13-18, § 2, 10-16-2013) 
Secs. 90-399-90-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPEALS 

Sec. 90-426. - Scope. 
    With the exception of variances granted pursuant to this division, the final decisions of the planning board may be appealed to the city commission. Variances granted pursuant to this division may be appealed in the manner provided by law to the county Circuit Court. Final decisions of the historic architectural review commission may be appealed to a special master, as provided by the Charter. Final orders and administrative and enforcement decisions by the city planner and chief building official may be appealed to the city commission. Appeals of permit decisions of the tree commission may only be addressed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 11, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-427. - Final decisions of planning board. 
    Decisions of the planning board shall be considered final in actions regarding minor development plan review as defined in section 108-91, in review of conditional uses proposed as part of a minor development plan approval, and in review of variance requests. Decisions of the planning board regarding major development plan review, including proposed conditional uses that are a part of the major development plan, as well as subdivision of land, change in the land development regulations, change in the comprehensive plan, and/or other decisions of the planning board, shall be advisory to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 12, 5-20-2008) 
Editor's note- Sections 108-162 and 108-163, referenced in § 90-427, were repealed by Ord. No. 05-04, adopted Jan. 19, 2005. The user should now see § 108-91. 
Sec. 90-428. - Final decisions of historic architectural review commission. 
(a)  The historic architectural review commission decisions shall be considered final in actions regarding certificates of appropriateness, certificates of no contributing value, and denials of nominations to the local register of historic places as described in chapter 102. These final decisions of the historic architectural review commission may be appealed to a special master. The historic architectural review commission decisions approving nominations to the local register of historic places shall be advisory to the city commission. The historic architectural review commission decisions regarding nominations to the National Register of Historic Places may be appealed to the state historic preservation officer. 
(b)  An appeal of a decision of historic architectural review commission regarding a certificate of appropriateness may be taken: 
(1)  By the applicant; or 
(2)  When the certification of appropriateness is granted: 
a.  By any person with a legal interest in real property located within 200 feet of the boundary of the lot or parcel on which the work is to be done; or 
b.  By the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-22, § 1, 9-4-2002) 
Sec. 90-429. - Final decisions of tree commission. 
(a)  Decisions of the tree commission regarding a tree permit shall be considered final. An appeal from a permit decision of the tree commission may be taken to the board of adjustment: 
(1)  By the applicant; or 
(2)  When written approval is granted: 
a.  By any aggrieved person who owns real property adjacent to or located within 200 feet of a boundary line of the lot or parcel on which the tree is located; or 
b.  By the city manager. 
(b)  Where the tree commission has heard a case of damage or destruction of a tree under sections 110-288 through 110-295 and has made findings and a recommendation to the special master, the alleged violator's rights of appeal shall be subject to the regulations governing the special master. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 3, 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 90-430. - Final orders and administrative decisions of city planner and chief building official. 
    The intent of the land development regulations is that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the city planner. Such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the city planner. Similarly, appeals to final orders of the chief building official shall be to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 6, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-431. - Procedures for rendering decisions. 
    In considering and acting upon appeals of final decisions of the planning board, the historic architectural review commission, or the tree commission, as well as final orders and questions of interpretation and enforcement of the land development regulations and the building codes by the city planner and the chief building official, the following procedures shall be observed: 
(1)  Procedure and time limitation for appeal. 
a.  An appeal to the city commission or the special magistrate, as the case may be, shall be taken on or before the tenth day, counted consecutively, after the date of the order by the planning board or the historic architectural review commission to which the appeal is directed. 
b.  An appeal to the board of adjustment shall be taken on or before the tenth day, counted consecutively, after the date of the order or the administrative action of the tree commission, chief building official or the city planner. 
c.  When the order or other administrative action has been mailed to the party, the party may add three (3) days to the prescribed time period for appeal. The original and one copy of the notice of appeal, together with all the documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, shall be filed with the city clerk who shall provide copies thereof to the presiding officer of the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special magistrate, as appropriate, and to the city manager and city attorney. Appeals not so filed shall be deemed waived. 
(2)  Date of hearing for appeals. Hearings of appeals by the city commission as well as the board of adjustment or special magistrate shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission, board of adjustment or special magistrate, as the case may be, after the filing of the notice of appeal, unless the parties mutually agree to another date. 
(3)  Notice. Upon notification of the date fixed for hearing on any matter subject to this division, the city clerk shall cause notice to be made pursuant to division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. The city clerk shall also forward by certified mail, return receipt requested, similar notices setting forth the time, place and purpose of the hearing to the following: 
a.  The appellant. 
b.  The owner of the property described in the application, if other than the appellant. 
(4)  Scope of review by city commission, board of adjustment, and special magistrate. In reviewing final orders, requirements, decisions or determinations of boards, commissions, and the chief building official, upon appeal thereof in conformity with this division, the city commission as well as the board of adjustment shall be limited to review of the documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record upon which the action was taken. The city commission and board of adjustment, may, upon appeal, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning board, the tree commission, the chief building official, or other administrative official and may make any necessary further order, requirements, decisions or determinations respecting the subject of the appeal and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the planning board, the tree commission, the chief building official, and/or other administrative official respecting such matter. The concurring vote of no less than four members of the city commission or the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination of the planning board, the tree commission, the chief building official, and/or other administrative official. The special magistrate shall have de novo review of the record in appeals from the historic architectural review commission; provided, however, that the term de novo shall not be interpreted to allow the introduction of new evidence that was not introduced in the initial proceedings of the historic architectural review commission, unless in the discretion of the special magistrate an additional presentation of evidence is equitable, necessary and limited in order to supplement the record. 
(5)  Appearance and argument. At any hearing upon any matter subject to the land development regulations, the appellant seeking review by the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special magistrate, and any other party desiring to be heard may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The appellant shall be entitled to make an initial presentation respecting the appeal and, at the conclusion of presentations or statements by all other parties, shall be entitled to offer a statement in rebuttal to such presentations if the appellant so desires. The presiding officer may, at the commencement of the hearing or at any time during such hearing, require that parties desiring to make a presentation identify themselves and may specify the time to be allowed for each party to make such presentation. 
(6)  Effect of appeal and stay of proceedings. An appeal to the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special magistrate shall, upon filing, stay all work on the premises and all proceedings in furtherance of the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, unless the building official shall certify to the city commission or the board of adjustment, as appropriate, that, because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order granted by the city commission for due cause shown after notice to the party filing the appeal and to the administrative official. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to impair the authority of any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or stay actions of the administrative official, the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 6, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 02-22, § 2, 9-4-2002; Ord. No. 06-14, § 3, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 06-24, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 90-432. - Decision and order. 
    Action by the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special magistrate upon any matter subject to this division shall be announced by the presiding officer immediately following the vote determining such action and shall thereafter be embodied in a written order executed by the presiding officer and the city clerk. Such written order shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which such action occurred. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(F)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-24, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 90-433. - Finality of decision. 
    When the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special master has taken action respecting an appeal of a board, commission, or the chief building official decision, as the case may be, no application for the same relief shall be accepted by the city clerk for consideration by the board, commission, or the chief building official or the city commission for a period of two years from the date of such action. However, after one year an applicant may request that the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special master, as appropriate, waive this section for proper cause based on changed conditions and/or the advent of new information which substantially impacts material issues. If a request for such waiver is submitted by the applicant and is filed, the city commission, the board of adjustment or the special master, as appropriate, shall determine if the changed conditions and/or the new information is sufficient to convene a new hearing on the applicant's appeal. If the city commission determines that a hearing should be held on the applicant's appeal, the city manager shall direct the city clerk to provide due public notice of the scheduled public hearing in the same manner as required for the original appeal as described in section 90-431(3). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-434. - Judicial review of decisions. 
    Any person, jointly or severally, or any officer, department, board, commission or bureau of the governing body aggrieved by any decision of the city commission, the special master, or the board of adjustment respecting an appeal of a decision by a board, commission, or the chief building official may apply, in the manner provided by law, to the county circuit court for judicial relief. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.8(H)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-22, § 3, 9-4-2002) 
Secs. 90-435-90-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-461-90-485. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AMENDMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-486. - Legislative intent. 
    The legislative intent of the land development regulations is to provide the city commission regulatory powers necessary to implement the comprehensive plan consistent with enabling legislation of F.S. § 163.3202. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.9(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-487. - Powers and duties of city commission. 
(a)  Adoption or amendment of land development regulations. The city commission shall adopt land development regulations consistent with F.S. § 163.3202. The city commission may amend or supplement the regulations and districts fixed by the adopted city land development regulations. The city commission shall hold a public hearing on such matters, with due public notice, if any change is to be considered and shall act on the proposed change after such hearing. 
(b)  Establishment of fees and appropriate funds. The city commission shall by resolution establish fees, charges, and expenses imposed by these land development regulations. 
(c)  Consideration and action on development issues as required. The city commission shall consider and act on development and growth management issues pursuant to the land development regulations, F.S. ch. 163, part II, County and Municipal Planning and Land Development Regulation, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(d)  Allocation of funding and staff resources to enforce land development regulations. The city commission shall allocate funding and staff resources necessary to enforce the land development regulations, including carrying out appropriate administrative and legal actions. 
(e)  Appointment and confirmation of members of requisite boards and commissions. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city commission, shall appoint members of the planning board and any other board, commission or committee as may be deemed necessary by the city commission. 
(f)  Designation and appointment of hearing officers. The city commission may designate and appoint hearing officers to make decisions as the city commission may deem appropriate. 
(g)  Taking other actions necessary to implement the land development regulations. The city commission may take such other action not delegated to the planning board, historic architectural review commission, board of adjustment, special master, hearing officer, or other entities as the city commission may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.9(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 90-488-90-515. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Procedure[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041. 

Sec. 90-516. - Purpose and limitations. 
    The purpose of this subdivision is to provide a means for changing the text of the land development regulations or the boundaries of the official zoning map. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person, but only to make necessary adjustments in light of changed conditions. In determining whether to grant a requested amendment, the city commission shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in this subdivision, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-517. - Authority. 
    The city commission may amend the text of the land development regulations or the boundaries of the official zoning map upon compliance with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-518. - Initiation. 
    Amendments to the text of the land development regulations or the boundaries of the official zoning map may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, the city manager or any property owner or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-519. - Submission of application. 
    An application for an amendment to the land development regulations or the official zoning map shall be submitted to the planning director along with a nonrefundable application fee, which shall be established by the city commission from time to time to defray the actual cost of processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-520. - Contents of application. 
    The application for an amendment to the text of the land development regulations or the boundaries of the official zoning map shall be submitted in a form established by the planning director and made available to the public. As many lots or parcels of property as the applicant may desire may be included in any single petition if they are contiguous. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Property description. The application shall describe by legal description and by street address, where possible, the property to be affected by the proposed change. 
(2)  Current and proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation. The current and proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation for the subject property shall be identified. 
(3)  Current and proposed zoning. The current and proposed zoning for the subject property shall be identified. 
(4)  Existing and proposed use. The existing and proposed use of the subject property shall be stated. 
(5)  Disclosure of ownership. The application shall include a verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the property upon which the application for rezoning is sought, except publicly held corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the corporate officers shall be sufficient. 
(6)  Justification. The need and justification for the proposed change shall be stated. The evaluation shall address but shall not be limited to the following issues: 
a.  Comprehensive plan consistency. Identifying impacts of the proposed change in zoning on the comprehensive plan. The zoning must be consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Impact on surrounding properties and infrastructure. The effect of the change, if any, on the particular property and all surrounding properties. Potential land use incompatibility and impacts on infrastructure shall be identified. 
c.  Avoidance of spot zoning. The proposed change shall not constitute a spot zone change. Spot zoning occurs when: 
1.  A small parcel of land is singled out for special and privileged treatment; 
2.  The singling out is not in the public interest but only for the benefit of the landowner; and 
3.  The action is not consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
d.  Undeveloped land with similar zoning. The amount of undeveloped land in the general area and in the city having the same zoning classification as that requested. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-521. - Criteria for approving amendments to official zoning map. 
    In evaluating proposed changes to the official zoning map, the city shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Consistency with plan. Whether the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan, including the adopted infrastructure minimum levels of service standards and the concurrency management program. 
(2)  Conformance with requirements. Whether the proposal is in conformance with all applicable requirements of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Changed conditions. Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development conditions have changed since the effective date of the existing regulations, and whether such changes support or work against the proposed rezoning. 
(4)  Land use compatibility. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved. 
(5)  Adequate public facilities. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in demands on public facilities and services, exceeding the capacity of such facilities and services, existing or programmed, including transportation, water and wastewater services, solid waste disposal, drainage, recreation, education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities and services. Rezoning does not constitute a concurrency determination, and the applicant will be required to obtain a concurrency determination pursuant to chapter 94. 
(6)  Natural environment. Whether, and to the extent to which, the proposal would result in adverse impacts on the natural environment, including consideration of wetlands protection, preservation of groundwater aquifer, wildlife habitats, and vegetative communities. 
(7)  Economic effects. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect the property values in the area or the general welfare. 
(8)  Orderly development. Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and compatible land use pattern. Any negative effects on such pattern shall be identified. 
(9)  Public interest; enabling act. Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and interest of the land development regulations in this subpart B and the enabling legislation. 
(10)  Other matters. Other matters which the planning board and the city commission may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-522. - Planning board review of proposed changes in land development regulations. 
(a)  The planning board, regardless of the source of the proposed change in the land development regulations, shall hold a public hearing thereon with due public notice. The planning board shall consider recommendations of the city planner, city attorney, building official and other information submitted at the scheduled public hearing. The planning board shall transmit a written report and recommendation concerning the proposed change of zoning to the city commission for official action. In its deliberations the planning board shall consider the criteria stated in section 90-521. 
(b)  Whenever the secretary to the planning board has received a written request for a continuance, delay, or postponement of a public hearing from an applicant after the public hearing has been duly advertised, the planning board may grant the applicant's request for continuance, delay, or postponement. However, as a condition to granting the applicant's request, the planning board shall require a fee as may be established by the city commission for purposes of covering all expenses resulting from the continuance, delay, or postponement. The planning board shall reschedule the hearing as soon as practicable, but in any event within the following 180 days. Further request for continuance, delay, or postponement shall result in denial of the application, and the application shall be subject to section 90-523(c)(4). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(G)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 7, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-523. - Review by city commission. 
(a)  Generally. The city commission shall review and act upon all proposed amendments to the land development regulations and the official zoning map. 
(b)  Planning board approval. The actions of the city commission upon approval by the planning board are as follows: 
(1)  If the planning board approves the petition, the city commission shall schedule a public hearing on the petition. The city clerk shall transmit copies of the petition, all comments and the minutes of the planning board meeting to each member of the city commission at least seven days before the city commission shall consider the petition. 
(2)  The city commission shall hold a public hearing on the requested change, petition, or amendment, with due public notice, and shall then act on the proposed change. In its deliberations the city commission shall consider the criteria identified in section 90-521 together with the findings and recommendations of the planning board. Any modifications or revisions to the planning board recommendation which involve a greater area of land to be rezoned or a more intensive zoning classification shall be the subject of an additional public hearing before the city commission with due notice prior to action by the city commission. 
(c)  Planning board denial. The actions of the city commission upon denial by the planning board are as follows: 
(1)  If the planning board denies the requested change or amendment to the land development regulations, this action shall be deemed final unless such action is appealed to the city commission within ten calendar days following the oral decision announced by the planning board at its final hearing on the issue. The applicant shall file such notice of appeal with the city clerk. 
(2)  If an appeal to a decision of the planning board is filed, the city clerk shall transmit copies of the petition, the comments and the minutes of the planning board meeting to each member of the city commission at least seven days before the city commission shall consider the appeal. The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting at which the city commission will hear the appeal. 
(3)  The city commission's consideration of the appeal shall be conducted after a public hearing with due public notice. However, where the planning board's recommendation is adverse to the proposed amendment, the change shall not become effective except by an affirmative vote of a majority of the city commission. 
(4)  When the city commission has taken final action regarding an amendment to the official zoning map or a change in a zoning classification of property, the planning board and city commission shall not reconsider any petition for the rezoning of any part or all of the same property for a period of two years from the date of the final consideration by the city commission. However, after one year, an applicant may request that the city commission waive this subsection for proper cause based on changed conditions and/or the advent of new information which substantially impacts material issues. If a request for such waiver is filed by the applicant, the city commission shall determine if the changed conditions and/or the new information is sufficient to convene a new hearing on the applicant's appeal. The time limit may be waived by the affirmative vote of five members of the city commission when such action is deemed necessary to prevent injustice or to facilitate the proper development of the city. If the city commission determines that a hearing should be held on the applicant's rezoning, the city manager shall direct the planning board to provide due public notice of the scheduled public hearing in the same manner as required for the original requested amendment to the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-524. - Public hearings. 
    Ordinances which rezone specific parcels of land or which substantially change permitted use categories in zoning districts shall be enacted, scheduled and noticed according to division 2 of article VIII of this chapter unless otherwise specified in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.10(I)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 7, 2-1-2000) 
State Law reference- Procedure for adoption, F.S. § 166.041. 
Secs. 90-525-90-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 90-551. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is provide a means for changing the boundaries of the future land use map of the comprehensive plan future land use map (i.e., specific comprehensive plan amendment) consistent with F.S. ch. 163. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person, but only to make necessary adjustments in light of changed conditions. In determining whether to grant a requested amendment, the city commission shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in this division, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-552. - Authority. 
    The city commission may amend the boundaries of the future land use map upon compliance with F.S. ch. 163 and this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 4, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 90-553. - Initiation. 
    Pursuant to this division, site-specific comprehensive plan amendments may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, the city manager or the owner of real property within the city affected by the proposed amendment or the agent of such owner. In addition to site-specific amendments, the city commission, the planning board, or the city manager may initiate general amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 90-554. - Application and fee. 
    The application for a comprehensive plan amendment shall be submitted in a form established by the planning director together with a nonrefundable application fee which from time to time shall be established by resolution of the city commission for purposes of defraying the actual cost of processing the application. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Property description. The application shall describe by legal description and by street address, where possible, the property to be affected by the proposed comprehensive plan amendment. 
(2)  Current and proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation. The current and proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation for the subject property shall be identified. 
(3)  Current and proposed zoning. The current and proposed zoning for the subject property shall be identified. 
(4)  Existing and proposed use. The existing and proposed use of the subject property shall be stated. 
(5)  Disclosure of ownership. The application shall include a verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the property upon which the application for amendment is sought, except publicly held corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the corporate officers shall be sufficient. 
(6)  Justification. The need and justification for the proposed change. The evaluation shall address but shall not be limited to the following issues: 
a.  Comprehensive plan consistency. Identifying impacts of the proposed change in the comprehensive plan future land use map on the overall purpose of the comprehensive plan and consistency with applicable policies within the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Impact on surrounding properties and infrastructure. The effect of the change, if any, on the particular property and all surrounding properties. Identify potential land use incompatibility and impacts on infrastructure. 
c.  Avoidance of special treatment. The proposed change shall not: 
1.  Single out a small piece of land and confer special and privileged treatment not provided to abutting properties with similar characteristics and land use relationships; and 
2.  Provide for land use activities which are not in the overall public interest but only for the benefit of the landowner. 
d.  Undeveloped land with similar comprehensive plan future land use map designation. The amount of undeveloped land in the general area and in the city having the same zoning classification as that requested shall be stated. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-555. - Criteria for approving amendments to comprehensive plan future land use map. 
    In evaluating proposed changes to the comprehensive plan future land use map, the city shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Consistency with plan. Whether the proposal is consistent with the overall purpose of the comprehensive plan and relevant policies within the comprehensive plan, including the adopted infrastructure minimum levels of service standards and the concurrency management program. 
(2)  Conformance with ordinances. Whether the proposal is in conformance with all applicable requirements of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Changed conditions. Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development conditions have changed since the comprehensive plan's effective date and whether such conditions support or work against the proposed change. 
(4)  Land use compatibility. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved. 
(5)  Adequate public facilities. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in demands on public facilities and services, exceeding the capacity of such facilities and services, existing or programmed, including transportation, water and wastewater services, solid waste disposal, drainage, recreation, education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities and services. Approval of a plan amendment does not constitute a concurrency determination, and the applicant will be required to a concurrency determination pursuant to chapter 94. 
(6)  Natural environment. Whether, and to the extent to which, the proposal would result in adverse impacts on the natural environment, including consideration of wetlands protection, preservation of groundwater aquifer, wildlife habitats, and vegetative communities. 
(7)  Economic effects. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect the property values in the area or the general welfare. 
(8)  Orderly development. Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and compatible land use pattern. Any negative effects on such pattern shall be identified. 
(9)  Public interest; enabling act. Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and interest of this subpart B and its enabling legislation. 
(10)  Other matters. Other matters which the planning board and the city commission may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-556. - Planning board review of proposed changes in comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(a)  The planning board, regardless of the source of the proposed change in the comprehensive plan, shall hold a public hearing thereon with due public notice as described in this division. The planning board shall consider recommendations of the city planner, city attorney, building official and other information submitted at the scheduled public hearing. The planning board shall transmit a written report and recommendation concerning the proposed change in the comprehensive plan to the city commission for official action. In its deliberations the planning board shall consider the criteria in section 90-555. 
(b)  Whenever the secretary to the planning board has received a written request for a continuance, delay, or postponement of a public hearing from an applicant after the public hearing has been duly advertised, the planning board may grant the applicant's request for continuance, delay, or postponement. As a condition of the continuance, delay, or postponement, the planning board shall require a fee, as may be established by the city commission, for purposes of covering all expenses resulting from the continuance, delay, or postponement. The planning board shall reschedule the hearing as soon as practicable, but within the following 180 days. Another request for continuance, delay, or postponement shall result in denial of the application, and the application shall be subject to section 90-557(c)(4). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-557. - Review by city commission. 
(a)  Action by city commission. The city commission shall review and act upon all proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Planning board approval. Upon approval by the planning board, action by the city commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the city planning board approves a request to amend the comprehensive plan, the city commission shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The city clerk shall transmit copies of the proposed amendment, all comments and the minutes of the planning board meeting to each member of the city commission at least seven days before the city commission shall consider the amendment. 
(2)  The city commission shall hold a public hearing on the requested change, petition, or amendment, with due public notice, and shall then act on the proposed change. In its deliberations the city commission shall consider the criteria identified in section 90-555 together with the findings and recommendations of the planning board. Any modifications or revisions to the planning board recommendation which impact a greater land area than impacted by the planning board recommendation or which include a more intensive future land use map designation shall be the subject of an additional public hearing before the city commission with due notice prior to action by the city commission. 
(c)  Planning board denial. City commission actions upon planning board denial shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the planning board denies the requested change or amendment to the comprehensive plan, this action shall be deemed final unless such action is appealed to the city commission within ten calendar days following the oral decision announced by the planning board at its final hearing on the issue. The applicant shall file such notice of appeal with the city clerk. 
(2)  If an appeal to a decision of the planning board is filed, the city clerk shall transmit copies of the petition, the comments and the minutes of the planning board meeting to each member of the city commission at least seven days before the commission shall consider the appeal. The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting at which the commission will hear the appeal. 
(3)  The city commission's consideration of the appeal shall be conducted after a public hearing with due public notice. However, where the planning board's recommendation is adverse to the proposed amendment, the change shall not become effective except by an affirmative vote of a majority of the city commission. 
(4)  When the city commission has taken final action regarding an amendment to the comprehensive plan future land use map, the planning board and city commission shall not reconsider any petition for the same amendment or any part or all of the same property affected for a period of two years from the date of the final consideration by the city commission. However, after one year, an applicant may request that the city commission waive this subsection for proper cause based on changed conditions and/or the advent of new information which substantially impacts material issues. If a request for such waiver is filed by the applicant, the city commission shall determine if the changed conditions and/or the new information is sufficient to convene a new hearing on the applicant's appeal. The time limit may be waived by the affirmative vote of five members of the city commission when such action is deemed necessary to prevent injustice or to facilitate the proper development of the city. If the city commission determines that a hearing should be held on the applicant's proposed change in the comprehensive plan future land use map, the city manager shall direct the planning board to provide due public notice of the scheduled public hearing in the same manner as required for the original requested amendment to the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-558. - Public hearings on amendments to comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(a)  Generally. Ordinances which amend land use classification on specific parcels of land on the comprehensive plan future land use map shall be enacted, scheduled and noticed according to division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90 unless otherwise specified in state statutes. 
(b)  Use plan amendments. The planning board shall hold one public hearing and recommend action to the city commission. Upon receipt of the planning board recommendations the city commission shall hold two public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.12(I)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 8, 2-1-2000) 
Secs. 90-559-90-585. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VACATION OF EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 90-586. - Proposals to vacate. 
    A proposal to vacate a public easement or right-of-way may be initiated by a vote of the city commission or upon the filing of an application, as specified in this article, by one or more owners of property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.13(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-587. - Application and review by development review committee. 
(a)  Generally. The development review committee (DRC), established pursuant to section 108-61, shall review all applications for vacation of public easements and rights-of-way. Any proposal for vacation of public easements or rights-of-way shall be submitted as an application to the city planning director. The city planning director, as chair of the development review committee, shall prescribe the form and content of the application for vacation of public easements and rights-of-way. 
(b)  Information required on application. The application, at a minimum, shall identify the following information: 
(1)  The specific location and legal description of the easement or right-of-way; 
(2)  The current use of the easement or right-of-way; 
(3)  The projected future use or reuse of the easement or right-of-way; 
(4)  The projected impacts of the proposed vacation on public services now and in the future; and 
(5)  The impact on adjacent properties as well as major areas or land uses currently benefitting from a public service or system that uses the subject easement or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.13(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-588. - Findings of no public purpose. 
    In considering applications for vacating public easements or rights-of-way, the development review committee shall review whether any public purpose is served by the subject easement or right-of-way. This evaluation shall consider all relevant public purpose options associated with drainage systems; water service; sanitary sewer services; roadways, pedestrian and/or bicycle ways, and alleys; public safety, including emergency service access and egress; communication systems; power and/or fuel networks; or other public or semipublic services essential to the public welfare and safety. Consideration shall include present and future needs for the easement or right-of-way for purposes of accommodating or improving delivery of public services and/or ensuring convenient access for service and/or maintenance or other public benefit now or in the future. In order to affirmatively recommend vacation of easements and/or rights-of-way, the development review committee shall render a finding that no current or future public purpose can be identified for the subject easement or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.13(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-589. - Public hearing, notice and final determination by city commission. 
(a)  Generally. The city commission shall render the final determination regarding a vacation of a public easement or right-of-way after convening a public hearing with due notice and considering the development review committee's findings. 
(b)  Notice. Upon notification by the city manager of the date fixed for a public hearing on any matter subject to this division, the city clerk shall cause notice pursuant to division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. The city clerk shall also forward by certified mail, return receipt requested, similar notice setting forth the time, place and purpose of the hearing to the following: 
(1)  The applicant and/or property owner. 
(2)  All providers of public or semipublic services such as those identified in section 90-588. 
(c)  Findings and final action. The city commission shall cite specific findings in support of a final decision to vacate a public easement or right-of-way, including an absence of public purpose for the subject easement or right-of-way. Similarly the city commission shall identify specific findings in support of any decision to retain the public easement or right-of-way. Any decision to vacate a public easement or right-of-way shall be by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-2.13(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 9, 2-1-2000) 
Secs. 90-590-90-615. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC HEARINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-616-90-640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOTICE 

Sec. 90-641. - Scope. 
    Except as required by F.S. §§ 163.3181(3)(a), 163.3225(2), and 166.041(3)(a), (c), the city shall provide notice for public hearings on variances, board of adjustment actions, planning board actions, appeals, vacation of public easements or rights-of-way, conditional uses, development plans, subdivision plans, planned redevelopment and development plans, as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14), 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 08-04, § 14, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 90-642. - Newspaper notice. 
    In accordance with the requirements of sections 90-645 and 90-646, the city shall be required to publish an advertisement of the public hearing in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the city and of general interest and readership in the city, not one of limited subject matter. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14(A)), 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-643. - Mail notice. 
    In accordance with the requirements of sections 90-645 and 90-646, the city shall mail a notice of the public hearing to each property owner located within 300 feet of the outer boundaries of the land which is the subject of the request, based upon the list of property owners maintained by the planning department and periodically updated with ad valorem tax records. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14(B)), 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-644. - Posted notice. 
    In accordance with the requirements of sections 90-645 and 90-646, the city shall post a notice of the public hearing on the subject property that is legible from the adjacent public street. The notice shall contain block lettering on a high contrast background color with the words "public notice" in letters three inches or more in height. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14(C)), 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-645. - Content of notice. 
    The notice required by this division shall contain the date, time and place of the public hearing and a common description of the location of the subject site and the nature of the project. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14(D)), 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 90-646. - Timing of notice. 
(a)  The notice required by this division shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the public hearing at which the application is first considered. A copy of the notice shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours of the city clerk. 
(b)  The first two postponements of an item shall not require a new notice, provided that the postponement is to a date and location certain. In the event of a third postponement, then a new notice shall be given as provided herein. If at least two of the three postponements were at the applicant's request or due to the applicant's actions, then the applicant shall bear the cost of the re-notice; otherwise the cost shall be borne by the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10(1-2.14(E)), 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-6-2004) 
Secs. 90-647-90-675. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and development, ch. 108. 

Sec. 90-676. - Authorization to enter into agreements. 
(a)  The city commission, in its sole and exclusive discretion, may enter into development agreements with the legal and equitable owners of real property within or to be annexed to the city limits as is authorized in F.S. § 163.3220 and as is further set forth under the terms of this article. 
(b)  The state legislature has found that: 
(1)  The lack of certainty in the approval of development can result in a waste of economic and land resources, discourage sound capital improvement planning and financing, escalate the cost of housing and development, and discourage commitment to comprehensive planning. 
(2)  Assurance to a developer that, upon receipt of a development permit, the applicant may proceed in accordance with existing laws and policies, subject to the conditions of a development agreement, strengthens the public planning process, encourages sound capital improvement planning and financing, assists in ensuring there are adequate capital facilities for the development, encourages private participation in comprehensive planning and reduces the economic costs of development. 
(3)  The comprehensive planning process should be furthered by authorizing local governments to enter into development agreements with developers. The intent is to encourage a stronger commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure the provision of adequate public facilities for development, encourage the efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-677. - Applicability. 
(a)  The city may, by ordinance, establish procedures and requirements, as provided in F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, to consider and enter into a development agreement with any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property located within its jurisdiction. 
(b)  The entry into a development agreement by the city shall in no way whatsoever limit or modify any legislative power of the city to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations or to make executive or legislative decisions of any kind which it had the power to make prior to the entry into such development agreement, except to the degree that the development agreement, by its express terms and not by implication, gives vested rights to the property owner as to certain development permissions, required improvements and similar matters. No development agreement shall, by its express terms or by implication, limit the right of the city commission to adopt ordinances or regulations or to adopt policies that are of general application in the city, except as is expressly provided by F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-678. - Initiation of process by applicant. 
    A property owner desiring to enter into a development agreement with the city shall make a written request for such development agreement to the city administrative official and pay the fee as is established by resolution of the city commission. Such written request shall identify the lands which are desired to be subject to the development agreement and shall identify all legal and equitable owners having any interest in such property. Such ownership interest shall be certified by a title company or an attorney at law licensed to practice law in the state. If any partnership, joint venture or other entity, other than an individual, owns a legal or equitable interest in the subject property, all principals and other persons with interest in such partnership or joint venture shall be revealed. If any corporation owns a legal or equitable interest in the subject property, the officers and directors and any shareholder owning more than ten percent of the interest in the corporation shall be revealed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-679. - Preliminary actions by city commission. 
    Upon receipt of a request to enter into a development agreement with the city, the city administrative official shall place the matter on the agenda of the city commission. The city commission, after considering staff comments, shall, in its sole and absolute discretion, determine whether or not to enter into a development agreement and to pursue negotiations with the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-680. - Required information for application. 
    An applicant for a development agreement shall meet the requirements for development plan review set forth in article II of chapter 108. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-681. - Review and negotiations. 
    An applicant for a development agreement shall meet the requirements for development plan review set forth in article II of chapter 108. If approved or approved with conditions under either the minor or the major development plan review process, the applicant may request a development agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-682. - Content. 
(a)  Any development agreement approved under this article shall contain not less than the following requirements as provided in F.S. § 163.3227: 
(1)  A legal description of the land subject to the development agreement and the identification of all persons having legal or equitable ownership therein. 
(2)  The duration of the development agreement, which duration shall not exceed five years, but which may be extended by mutual consent of the city and the developer. Any request for an extension shall be subject to the public hearing process necessary for the initial approval of the development agreement. 
(3)  The development uses permitted on the land, including population densities, building intensities and building heights. 
(4)  All documents required to comply with criteria cited in the land development regulations applicable to the subject project. 
(5)  A description of the public facilities that will service the development, including designation of the entity that will be providing such facilities. Additionally, if new facilities are needed to serve the project, the date by which such facilities will be constructed shall be provided. A schedule to ensure that public facilities shall be available concurrent with the impacts of the development shall also be provided. Such schedule, relating the provision of public facilities or services to events or thresholds in the development, may be substituted for the certain dates required under this subsection. 
(6)  The applicant may be required to provide for a performance bond, letter of credit, or similar instrument, to be deposited with the city, to secure the construction of any new facilities that are required to be constructed as part of the proposed development agreement. Alternatively, such construction may be a condition precedent to the issuance of any building permits or other development permissions. If the new public facilities are in place and operating at the time development permits are requested, no such performance bond or letter of credit shall be necessary unless such facilities are not adequate for the project. 
(7)  A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. The development agreement shall provide specifically how all impact fees and other funding requirements for the project are to be met. 
(8)  If land is to be conveyed to the city in discharge of the obligation of any impact fee or other similar obligation, the development agreement shall provide that such conveyance will be by warranty deed and will be accompanied by an environmental audit and a title insurance policy which shall be in an amount not less than the assessed value of the land. The applicant shall bear the cost of these requirements. 
(9)  A description of all development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the land, which description shall specifically include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Any required comprehensive plan amendments or rezonings. 
b.  Any required submissions to or approvals from the county; the South Florida Regional Planning Council; the state departments of community affairs (DCA), environmental protection (DEP), transportation (DOT), health and rehabilitative services (DHRS); the United State Army Corps of Engineers; the South Florida Water Management District; the United States Environmental Protection Agency; or any other departments with competent jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed development. 
c.  If development requirements are not satisfied, action in reliance on the development agreement or expenditures in pursuance of its terms shall not vest any development rights to the applicant/property owner. Failure to perform as specified in the development agreement shall not constitute partial performance and shall not entitle the applicant or property owner to a continuation of the development agreement. 
(10)  A specific finding in the development agreement that the development permitted or proposed is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and with the land development regulations. However, if amendments are required to the comprehensive plan or land development regulations, such amendments shall be specifically identified in the development agreement, and the agreement shall be contingent upon those amendments being made and approved by the appropriate governmental agencies. 
(11)  The city commission may provide for any conditions, terms, restrictions or other requirements determined to be reasonably necessary for the public health, safety or welfare of city residents and property owners. 
(12)  A statement indicating that failure of the development agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term or restriction shall not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing the permitting requirements, conditions, terms or restrictions. 
(13)  At the city commission's discretion, the development agreement may provide that the entire development, or any phase thereof, be commenced or completed within a specific period of time. 
(b)  At such time as the city administrative official has reduced the terms of the proposed development agreement to written contractual form, the administrative official shall transmit such development agreement to the planning board and the city commission with a written recommendation from the development review committee. 
(c)  Prior to the first public hearing, the proposed development agreement shall have been reviewed by the planning board, and its recommendation along with the development review committee's recommendation shall be provided to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-683. - Public hearings and notice. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3225, before entering into, amending, or revoking a development agreement, the city shall conduct at least two public hearings. One of the public hearings shall be held by the planning board. The following procedures shall be applied in advertising for the public hearings: 
(1)  Each public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and such advertisement shall be placed approximately seven days before each public hearing pursuant to requirements of F.S. ch. 163. 
(2)  Notice of intent to consider the development agreement shall also be mailed to all property owners abutting the subject land and/or owners of property lying within 500 feet of the subject land. The applicant for the development agreement shall furnish the city administrative official with an updated listing of the complete names and addresses of the affected owners. 
(3)  The day, time and place at which the second public hearing will be held shall be announced at the first public hearing. 
(4)  All notices of public hearings shall specify the location of the land subject to the proposed development agreement; the development uses proposed on the property; the proposed population densities, building intensities and heights; and shall further specify where a copy of the proposed development agreement can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-684. - Duration. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3229, the duration of a development agreement shall not exceed ten years. It may be extended by mutual consent of the city commission and the developer, subject to a public hearing in accordance with F.S. § 163.3225. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-685. - Consistency with comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3231, a development agreement and authorized development shall be consistent with the city comprehensive plan and land development regulations. The city comprehensive plan, land development regulations, and other city laws and policies governing the development of the land at the time of the execution of the development agreement shall govern the development of the land for the duration of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.10), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-686. - Execution. 
    All development agreements shall be executed by all persons having legal or equitable interest in the subject land. However, the city administrative official may approve the execution of the development agreement without the necessity of such joinder or subordination upon a determination that the substantial interests of the city will not be adversely affected. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.11), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-687. - Effect of subsequently adopted laws and ordinances. 
(a)  Local laws and ordinances. The city may apply subsequently adopted laws and policies to a development that is subject to a development agreement only if the city commission has held a public hearing and determined that such new or amended laws and policies are, as provided in F.S. § 163.3233: 
(1)  Not in conflict with laws and policies governing the development agreement and do not prevent development of land uses, intensities or densities allowed under the terms of the development agreement. 
(2)  Essential to the public health, safety and welfare and expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement. 
(3)  Specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement. 
The city must further demonstrate that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of the approval of the development agreement, or that the development agreement is based on substantially inaccurate information supplied by the developer. Consistent with F.S. § 163.3233(2), the intent is that all development agreements shall specifically provide that subsequently adopted laws and policies having general application throughout the city shall be applicable to the lands subject to the development agreement so long as conditions identified in this subsection are not abridged. The applicant must abide by such laws of general application which are adopted after the development agreement is executed. Such laws and policies shall apply equally to the subject property as to other properties developed prior to the adoption of such new laws or policies. This section does not abrogate any rights that may vest pursuant to common law. 
(b)  State or federal laws. If state or federal laws are enacted after the execution of a development agreement, which laws are applicable to and preclude either party's compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement, the agreement shall be modified or terminated as is necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws (refer to F.S. § 163.3241). For each annual review conducted during years six through ten of a development agreement, the review shall be incorporated into a written report which shall be submitted to the parties to the agreement and the state land planning agency. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.12), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-688. - Periodic review. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3235, the city shall review land subject to a development agreement at least once every 12 months. Such review shall determine if there has been demonstrated good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. The city administrative official shall present the city commission with a report on the status of all activities and achievements pursuant to the development agreement. 
(b)  Prior to the city's review of the status of a development agreement, the developer or property owner shall, within 14 days of the city commission's review of the development agreement, submit to the city a progress report indicating all activities and achievements since the execution of the development agreement and, if applicable, since the previous periodic report. 
(c)  If the city no longer has a record of the present property owner and/or developer, any requests or notices required by this subpart B shall be made to the property owner of record as shown on the records of the county property appraiser. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.13), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-689. - Modification or revocation. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3235, if the city commission finds, on the basis of substantial competent evidence, that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the agreement may be revoked or modified by the city commission. In addition, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3237, a development agreement may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by their successors in interest. Prior to modifying, revoking or terminating a development agreement, the city commission shall hold public hearings pursuant to 90-683 and give notice as required for the adoption of a development agreement as provided in F.S. § 163.3225. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.14), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-690. - Recording and transmittal. 
    Not later than 14 days after the execution of a development agreement, the city clerk shall record the agreement with the clerk of the circuit court in the county. A copy of the recorded development agreement shall be submitted to the state land planning agency within 14 days after the agreement is recorded as provided in F.S. § 163.3239. A development agreement shall not be effective until it is properly recorded in the public records of the county and until 30 days after having been received by the state land planning agency pursuant to F.S. § 163.3239. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.15), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-691. - Effect on successors. 
    The burdens of the development agreement shall be binding upon and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement as provided in F.S. § 163.3239. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.16), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 90-692. - Enforcement. 
    Such persons as are defined by state law shall have standing to enforce the development agreement as provided in F.S. § 163.3243. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(1-3.17), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 94 - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Impact fees, § 54-56 et seq.; administration of land development regulations, ch. 90; concurrency facilities and other utilities or services, § 108-233. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Concurrency is a finding that public facilities and services necessary to support a proposed development are available, or will be made available, concurrent with the impacts of the development. This chapter is intended to provide a systematic process for the review and evaluation of all proposed development for its impact on concurrency facilities and services, as required by the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulations Act, F.S. ch. 163, part II, and F.A.C. 9J-5.0055. 
(b)  Facilities in the city that are subject to this chapter include the following: 
(1)  Potable water. 
(2)  Recreation. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer. 
(4)  Solid waste. 
(5)  Drainage. 
(6)  Roads. 
(c)  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that development orders and permits are conditioned on the availability of concurrency facilities and services which meet adopted level of service requirements identified in this chapter. This chapter is also intended to describe the requirements and procedures for determining consistency of proposed development with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-2. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    All development applications shall demonstrate compliance with the city comprehensive plan as well as with all applicable sections of the land development regulations. Further, development applications shall demonstrate that specified concurrency facilities shall be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development of those facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of an administrative interpretation of any section of this chapter, or a review of a decision made by any administrative official or board or commission. 
    Building permit means a permit which authorizes the construction of a new building or the expansion of floor area or the increase in the number of dwelling units contained in an existing building or change in use. 
    Capacity refers to the availability of a public service or facility to accommodate users, expressed in an appropriate unit of measure, such as gallons per day or average daily trips. 
    Capacity, available, means capacity which can be reserved or committed to future users for a specific public facility. 
    Capacity, committed, means the amount of capacity which has been committed to accommodate existing developments, developments which have been issued a final development order, committed development, and vested developments. 
    Capacity, reserved, means capacity which has been removed from the available capacity pool and allocated to a particular property for a set period of time. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances. 
    Concurrency facilities means public facilities and services for which a level of service must be met concurrent with the impacts of development or an acceptable deadline, as mandated in the comprehensive plan pursuant to F.S. ch. 163 and F.A.C. 9J-5.0055, and shall include: 
(1)  Potable water. 
(2)  Recreation. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer. 
(4)  Solid waste. 
(5)  Drainage. 
(6)  Roads. 
    Concurrency management monitoring system means the data collection, processing and analysis performed by the city planning department to determine available capacity for concurrency facilities. Data utilized shall be the most current reliable information available to the city. 
    Concurrency management system means the procedure and process that the city uses to ensure that no development order or building permit is issued by the city unless the necessary concurrency facilities are available or are ensured to be available consistent with the city comprehensive plan. The procedure and process is also intended to ensure that sufficient capacity for concurrency facilities is available to meet and maintain adopted levels of service. As part of the concurrency management system, the city shall operate and maintain a concurrency management monitoring system. 
    Concurrency review means evaluation by the city planner based on adopted level of service standards to ensure that public facilities and services needed to support development are available concurrent with the impacts of such development as defined in this chapter and, if such facilities are not available, that the developer of a proposed development bears a cost of providing public services and facilities at a level of service defined by the comprehensive plan and concurrent with the impacts of a proposed development. 
    Concurrency status report means a status report prepared by the city identifying available concurrency facility capacity. The status report shall be produced, modified and adjusted from time to time as a result of the reservation of capacity or other act which alters the availability of concurrency facility capacity. 
    Design capacity means the potential or suitability for holding, storing or accommodating the demands upon a concurrency facility. 
    Developer's agreement means an agreement between the city and another party associated with the development of land, including agreements associated with development orders issued pursuant to F.S. § 380.01. 
    Development order means any order or permit granting, denying or granting with conditions an application for a preliminary development order, a final development order, a development permit or any other official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Development order, final, means last discretionary act of the city before development can commence. The last discretionary act shall occur through an act of official authorization and with recorded documentation from the city thereby approving the final development plans for a proposed development project. The issuance of a final development order after the effective date of the ordinance adopting the comprehensive plan shall only occur if the final development plan complies with the goals, objectives, and policies established in the comprehensive plan. Final development orders shall include the city's final approval of the following development procedures: 
(1)  Final subdivision plat approved subsequent to the adoption of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Building permit; and 
(3)  Development of regional impact (DRI) approval. 
    Level of service means an indicator of the operational efficiency of service provided by a concurrency facility. 
    Level of service standard means the adopted volume of demand required for each concurrency facility in order to achieve acceptable operational efficiency. 
    Pool, available capacity, means the total unused capacity of concurrency facilities existing at any point in time. 
    Proceeding in good faith means tangible and continuing actions taken by an applicant of an approved final development order to perform actual project construction and implementation leading to completion of a final development plan within a reasonable period of time. Moreover, a certificate of completion for the development of infrastructure must be received within three years of the date from which the construction was authorized in order to satisfy the definition of the term. This can be modified only through a development agreement approved by the city commission. 
    Vested rights means a development order which shall be deemed "vested" and not subject to requirements of concurrency management if development circumstances meet criteria for common law or statutory vesting, as defined in this section. All nonvested development or development orders are subject to all requirements of this chapter. 
    Vested rights, common law, means a right not created by statute or the provisions of the city comprehensive plan which would authorize the development of real property or the continued development of real property notwithstanding the provisions of the city comprehensive plan. The city may find such vesting to exist whenever the applicant proves by a preponderance of evidence that the real property owner, acting in good faith upon some act or omission of the city, has made a substantial change in the position or has incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the right to develop or to continue the development of the real property. The assignment of the particular zoning classification or the assignment of a particular land use designation to parcel of real property does not guarantee or vest any specific development rights to any person or entity as to the real property. 
    Vested rights, statutory, means a statutory right to develop or to continue the development of real property pursuant to F.S. § 163.3187(8) or its successor provisions. Such vesting may be found to exist if a valid and unexpired final development order was issued by the city prior to January 12, 1994 (the effective date of the city's comprehensive plan adoption), if construction has commenced on the subject development and the development is in the process of being completed or further development is continuing in good faith as of and subsequent to January 12, 1994; or if the development has obtained a determination of vested rights through the city's vested rights procedure and the validity of such determination has been upheld on appeal or the time for appeal has expired. Statutory vesting does not occur unless all material requirements, conditions, limitations and regulations of the development order have been met and are being maintained. The land development regulations shall not apply to developments which have commenced duly approved construction prior to the effective date of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.3), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-4. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  Generally. All applications for final development orders shall be subject to concurrency review unless specifically exempted in this section. However, in no case shall a development order be issued for any development which would have an impact on a concurrency facility for which a moratorium or deferral on development has been placed. 
(b)  Projects below minimum threshold. The following development shall be exempt from concurrency review: 
(1)  Consistent with F.S. § 163.3180, residential projects which would result in the creation of one single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling, as well as projects that entail structural alterations, including room additions to single-family structures, which do not change the land use. 
(2)  Construction of residential or nonresidential accessory buildings and structures which do not create additional public facility demand. 
(3)  Actions administered through development orders and other developments which do not increase demand on concurrency facilities, such as grading or land excavation or structural alterations which do not include a change of use and satisfy subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(c)  Vested projects. Projects which have valid final development orders or building permits prior to January 12, 1994 (the effective date of the comprehensive plan) shall be considered to be vested and therefore exempt from concurrency management. This shall include the following: 
(1)  Any project for which a valid building permit has been issued and has not expired; 
(2)  All vacant lots in single-family detached, single-family attached and two-family subdivisions which were lawfully platted in accordance with the city land development regulations and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives; 
(3)  Approved developments of regional impact with a development order that has not expired and with a development agreement that has not expired; and 
(4)  Any project which has obtained a determination of vested rights by the hearing officer and through the city's vested rights procedure. 
(d)  Redevelopment projects. Proposed redevelopment shall be credited for the existing demand on available capacity. If a redevelopment project generates demand in excess of the existing demand which it is replacing, a concurrency review shall be required; however, the concurrency review shall only address the amount by which the proposed demand generated exceeds the demand of existing development. The development plan for redevelopment must be submitted no more than one year after the prior use is discontinued in order to qualify for a concurrency credit. If the proposed redevelopment generates equal or less demand than the existing project, the applicant shall be given a concurrency credit enabling the applicant to reserve the unused capacity. The concurrency credit will expire within five years of the change or discontinuance of the use. The applicant's submission of an application for a demolition permit shall also initiate a concurrency review for the express purpose of issuing credits for redevelopment. 
(e)  Public facilities. Public facilities necessary to ensure the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, including public schools (prekindergarten through 12th grade), shall be exempt from concurrency review. This shall include all public facility construction projects included in the city's capital improvements program required to meet any adopted level of service standard. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.4), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 5, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 94-5. - Criteria for concurrency and final development orders. 
    A final development order shall not be granted for a proposed development unless the city finds that adequate capacity for concurrency facilities exists at or above the adopted level of service in order to accommodate the impacts of the proposed development, or that improvements necessary to bring concurrency facilities up to their adopted level of service will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the development. The city shall find that at least one of the following criteria have been met in order for a proposed development to be found in compliance with concurrency management requirements: 
(1)  The necessary concurrency facilities and services are in place at the time a development permit is issued, or a development permit is issued, subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services will be in place by a specified date when the impacts of the development are anticipated to occur; 
(2)  The necessary facilities and services have been included in the capital improvements program and are programmed for construction prior to or concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development; 
(3)  For road facilities, the necessary improvements are committed in the first three years of the applicable adopted state department of transportation five-year work program, or the county five-year transportation plan; or 
(4)  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include but is not limited to development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380 or any other development agreement entered into between the city and a development. The agreement must guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place prior to or concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.5), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 94-6-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 94-31. - Responsibilities of city planner. 
    The city planner shall be responsible for concurrency reviews as required by this chapter. The city planner, in conjunction with the development review committee (DRC) and other city staff, shall determine whether adequate capacities for concurrency facilities are available to satisfy the demands of each proposed development. Refer to section 94-39 containing the concurrency management flow chart for a graphic summary of the administrative process. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-32. - Application for concurrency review. 
    Concurrency review shall be initiated upon submission and acceptance of an application for a development plan approval, preliminary subdivision plat, or a building permit, whichever first occurs. At the request of the applicant and pursuant to payment of a concurrency review fee as may be established by resolution of the city commission, the city planner in concert with the development review committee may render concurrency findings. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-33. - Project impact assessment. 
    The city planner shall use the best available information to establish and evaluate existing capacities for concurrency facilities. The applicant shall be responsible for supplying the anticipated land uses, densities and/or intensities of a proposed development and the anticipated date of completion of proposed development. The city planner shall assess the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on concurrency facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-34. - Project phasing/timing of improvements. 
    Concurrency facilities associated with a phased development may also be phased. However, all concurrency facilities necessary to accommodate the impacts of each phase must be available or a schedule for the acquired improvements must be approved prior to the issuance of a final development order. The schedule of facility improvements shall ensure that all facility improvements necessary to accommodate the impacts of the development or portion thereof for which a certificate of occupancy has been applied shall be in place prior to the issuance of the certificate. Under no circumstances shall the final certificate of occupancy be issued for a project unless all required facility improvements required by the development order or development agreement have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-35. - Development agreements. 
    If the minimum requirements for concurrency cannot be met, concurrency may be achieved by guaranteeing necessary facility improvements in an enforceable development agreement. The development agreement may include guarantees to construct required facility improvements or to provide funds equivalent to the cost of providing such facility improvements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-36. - Concurrency review determination. 
    Upon the conclusion of the concurrency review, the city planner shall prepare a written determination concerning the proposed development. This determination shall address but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The anticipated public facility impacts of the proposed development; 
(2)  The ability of existing facilities to accommodate the proposed development at the adopted level of service standards; 
(3)  Any existing facility deficiencies that will need to be corrected prior to the completion of the proposed development; 
(4)  The facility improvements or additions necessary to accommodate the impact of the proposed development at the adopted level of service standards and the entities responsible for the design and installation of all required facility improvements or additions; and 
(5)  The date such facility improvements or additions will need to be completed to be concurrent with the impacts on such facilities created by the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-37. - Concurrency denials. 
    If the city's concurrency review reveals that the proposed development would generate public facility impacts beyond that which can be absorbed by available capacity, the city shall determine whether there is a financial or other legally binding commitment to ensure that public facilities necessary to correct the anticipated deficiency will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development. If the city and/or a developer are unable to provide such assurances, the project shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-38. - Concurrency resolution. 
(a)  If the city planner determines that an application for concurrency review cannot be supported by sufficient concurrency facility capacity, the applicant may file an application for concurrency resolution and pay the requisite filing fee as shall be established by resolution of the city commission. The purpose for the concurrency resolution process shall be to enable an applicant to negotiate a development agreement which identifies terms for resolving the capacity deficiency. The development agreement shall be consistent with F.S. § 163.3220 and applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  If the applicant successfully resolves capacity deficiencies, the applicant may reserve capacity pursuant to the terms of the development agreement. If the issues cannot be resolved, the application shall be deemed to be denied and, at any time, the applicant may resubmit the concurrency review application to the city planner. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.6(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-39. - Flowchart. 

Flowchart 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-40. - Capacity reservation. 
(a)  Reservation of capacity. Following receipt of an approved final development order, the capacity demand of the approved development shall be considered to be reserved. The timeframe of the concurrency reservation shall be based on the timeframe of the building permit or development agreement. If the timeframe of the final development order and/or the development agreement lapses, the available capacity assigned to the development order shall be returned to the available capacity pool. 
(b)  First come, first served. Capacity shall be reserved on a first come, first served basis by the city planner. Such reservation shall be valid only for the specific final development order and for the specified land uses, densities, intensities, construction and improvement schedules contained in the approved final development order. Reservation of capacity runs with the land and is transferable to a successor in ownership. Reservation of capacity for concurrency shall expire if the underlying final development order or development agreement expires or is revoked. The final development order shall state the terms of the concurrency reservation, including the allocation of available capacity, the timeframe for the allocation, and other appropriate legal assurances. 
(c)  Project deferrals/development moratoriums. If at any time the city's inventory of the capacity of concurrency facilities indicates that concurrency facilities have dropped below its adopted level of service standard, the city shall cease to issue development orders for projects which would impact the deficient facilities or the area impacted by the deficient concurrency facilities, as defined within this subpart B. Such a suspension or moratorium on the issuance of development orders shall continue until such time as the adopted level of service standard is reestablished, the comprehensive plan is amended to reflect an acceptable level of service standard for the facilities in question, or alternative arrangements are made to ensure capacity will be available, consistent with section 94-5(1) through (4). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.7), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 94-41-94-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEVEL OF SERVICE 

Sec. 94-66. - Scope. 
    Level of service standards for those public facilities for which concurrency is required are set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-67. - Sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Level of service standards for sanitary sewer are as follows: 
Sanitary Sewer Concurrency Facility Adopted Level of Service Standard Residential uses 100 gallons per capita per day for permanent residents and 90 gallons per capita per day for seasonal residents Nonresidential uses 660 gallons per acre per day  
(b)  The effluent concentrations for the city's Fleming Key wastewater treatment facility shall comply with F.A.C. 17-6.180(1)(b)1, as follows: 
(1)  The arithmetic mean of the BOD or TSS values for the effluent samples collected, whether grab or composite technique is used, during an annual period, shall not exceed 20 mg/l. 
(2)  The arithmetic mean of the BOD or TSS values for a minimum of four effluent samples each collected, whether grab or composite technique is used, on a separate day during a period of 30 consecutive days (monthly) shall not exceed 30 mg/l. 
(3)  The arithmetic mean of the BOD or TSS values for a minimum of two effluent samples each collected, whether grab or composite technique is used, on a separate day during a period of seven consecutive days (weekly) shall not exceed 45 mg/l. 
(4)  Maximum permissible concentrations of BOD or TSS values in any effluent grab sample at any time shall not exceed 60 mg/l. 
(c)  For the basic disinfection levels, F.A.C. 17-6.180(1)(b)4, the operational criteria shall comply with F.A.C. 17-6.180(1)(b)4, using either MF or equivalent MPN methods as follows: 
(1)  The arithmetic mean of the monthly fecal coliform values, computed as per subsection (c)(2) of this section, collected during an annual period, shall not exceed 200 per 100 ml of effluent sample. 
(2)  The geometric mean of the fecal coliform values for a minimum of ten effluent samples each collected on a separate day during a period of 30 consecutive days (monthly) shall not exceed 200 per 100 ml of sample. 
(3)  No more than ten percent of the samples collected during a period of 30 consecutive days shall exceed 400 fecal coliform values per 100 ml of sample. 
(4)  Any one sample shall not exceed 800 fecal coliform values per 100 ml of sample. 
(d)  The city's Fleming Key wastewater treatment facility shall meet all water quality requirements of F.A.C. ch. 17-3, including the chlorine residual standard. Dechlorination may be necessary if the chlorine residual in the effluent exceeds the maximum limits at the end of the discharge pipe which would cause a violation of F.A.C. ch. 17-3 standards. The wastewater treatment facility contains dechlorination facilities. To help minimize the eutrophication of ocean waters by ocean outfall which contains nutrients, the wastewater treatment plant effluent shall not exceed the following nutrient levels on an average annual basis: 
(1)  Total nitrogen concentration: six mg/l; and 
(2)  Total phosphorus concentration: four mg/l. 
(e)  Private sewage treatment facilities shall provide no less than tertiary level of treatment defined as nutrient stripping meeting a standard of no more than 1.5 parts per million of total phosphorus as the average over two consecutive quarters and no more than five parts per million of total nitrogen content. The permit holder shall monitor and test effluent and submit reports to the city commission documenting that these nutrient stripping standards are being met. If these treatment standards are not met for two consecutive quarters, the subject permit shall come before the city commission for review and possible revocation. Monitoring and testing standards shall be conducted as required by F.A.C. 17-601.100-17-601.900. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Sanitary sewer system, § 74-26 et seq. 
Sec. 94-68. - Potable water. 
    Level of service standards for potable water shall be as follows: 
Residential Nonresidential 1990-1995 95 gal/capita/day 660 gal/acre/day 1996-2010 93 gal/capita/day 650 gal/acre/day  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-69. - Drainage facilities. 
    The drainage level of service standard in this section will be applicable to all types of development. Where two or more standards impact a specific development, the most restrictive standard shall apply: 
(1)  Postdevelopment runoff shall not exceed the predevelopment runoff rate for a 25-year storm event, up to and including an event with a 24-hour duration. 
(2)  Stormwater treatment and disposal facilities shall be designed to meet the design and performance standards established in F.A.C. 17-25.025, with treatment of the runoff from the first one inch of rainfall on site to meet the water quality standards required by F.A.C. 17-302.500. Stormwater facilities which directly discharge into outstanding Florida waters (OFW) shall provide an additional treatment pursuant to F.A.C. 17-25.025(9). 
(3)  Stormwater facilities must be designed so as to not degrade the receiving water body below the minimum conditions necessary to ensure the suitability of water for the designated use of its classification as established in F.A.C. ch. 17-302. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74. 
_____
Sec. 94-70. - Recreation. 
(a)  Level of service standards for recreation sites. Level of service standards for recreation sites shall be as follows: 
Park Classification per Population Acreage of Recreation Areas Neighborhood park 2.5 per 1,000 Community park 2.5 per 1,000  
(b)  Level of service standards for recreation facilities. Level of service standards for recreation facilities shall be as follows: 
Facility Number of Facilities per Population Baseball/softball diamond 1 per 4,500 Tennis courts 1 per 7,500 Basketball courts 1 per 5,000 Racquetball/handball courts 1 per 10,000 Bocci courts 1 per 9,500 Football/soccer field 1 per 11,000 Golf course, 18-hole 1 per 50,000 Community pool 1 per 45,000 Boatramps 1 per 9,500  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-71. - Solid waste. 
(a)  Level of service standards for solid waste shall be as follows: 
Level of Service (lb/capita/day) Land Use Total Waste 
Generation WTE Facility 
Capacity Residential 2.66 2.05 Nonresidential 6.37 4.90  
(b)  The city shall not approve development applications unless the city demonstrates that sufficient capacity is available to accommodate projected solid waste disposal needs for all existing and approved development for a period of three years. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58. 
Sec. 94-72. - Roads. 
    Pursuant to comprehensive plan policy 2-1.1, the city shall use the following peak hour roadway level of service standards based on functional classification (for U.S. 1, the level of service shall be assessed based on a peak direction analysis of the highest 15-minute period of the 100th highest hourly volume of the year, or K100): 
Roadway Facilities Segment Min. LOS Standard Peak Hour State urban principal arterials C* U.S. 1 N. Roosevelt Blvd. C* Truman Ave. Physically constrained* Whitehead St. Physically constrained* County urban minor arterials D County urban collectors D City urban collectors D  
*Due to physical constraints that would make U.S. 1 improvements cost-prohibitive, the segments from Eisenhower Drive to Whitehead Street and from Truman Avenue to Fleming Street are designated as constrained. These segments have an existing operating condition below the LOS C standard. Constrained facilities level of service shall be C plus five percent. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Sec. 94-73. - Review to ensure consistency with standards. 
    Prior to issuing a development order the city shall review all proposed development to ensure consistency with adopted level of service standards. No development shall be approved that is projected to generate a traffic volume which would decrease the existing level of service below the adopted standard, or degrade the operating condition on the constrained segments of U.S. 1 below the five-percent threshold established in comprehensive plan policy 2-1.1.2, unless those impacts are mitigated by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.8), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 94-74-94-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRITERIA AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 94-101. - Roads. 
(a)  Generally. In determining demand for available capacity for roads, the criteria in this section shall be used. 
(b)  Residential development. For proposed residential development, except within planned developments, the following trip generation rates shall be used to calculate the impact of the proposed development: 
Land Use Type Trips Per Day Per Unit Single-family 10 Multiple-family 8  
(c)  Nonresidential development and mixed use planned redevelopment and development (PRD). For all other development categories allowed within the future land use element, the impacts of development shall be measured by utilizing the average peak trip generation rate associated with the land use designation in which the proposed development shall occur, using the most recent published edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Manual. Internal capture rates may be considered in determining traffic volumes for mixed use developments; however, the applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating any internal capture rates of the total nonresidential trips. 
(d)  Other methods and procedures. Other methods and procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the preliminary level of service information indicates a deficiency in capacity based on adopted level of service standards (reference section 94-72 for adopted level of service standards for roads), the developer may, at his option, prepare a more detailed alternative highway capacity analysis as described in the Highway Capacity Manual (Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 1985) or conduct a travel time and delay study following professional standards and procedures contained in the state department of transportation traffic engineering office in its Manual for Uniform Traffic Studies. 
(2)  For all new developments which are required to follow the development plan review process, the applicant/developer shall be required to submit a traffic analysis which identifies the development's impact on the city's transportation system. 
(3)  The city planner may also require the submission of a traffic analysis for developments if the site location, anticipated total trip generation, circulation patterns or other such factors warrant a more extensive review of traffic impacts. 
(4)  The impact area for the traffic analysis shall include adjacent and connected roadway segments as determined by the city administrative official. The applicant may apply alternative trip allocations together with a statement of trip allocation methodology consistent with professional standards established in one or more of the following documents: 
a.  Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 1985. 
b.  Florida Highway System Plan, Traffic Analysis Procedures, state department of transportation, bureau of multimodal systems planning, 1987. 
c.  Florida Highway System Plan, Level of Service Standards and Guidelines Manual, state department of transportation, 1988. 
d.  Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers, latest edition. 
e.  Transportation and Land Development, Stover, Virgil G., Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1988. 
(5)  The traffic analysis shall include the following: 
a.  Total projected average weekday trips for the proposed development: 
1.  Pass-by capture rate (commercial land uses only); 
2.  Internal capture rate (planned development only); 
3.  Peak external trips based on ITE Trip Generation Manual, fifth or most recent edition; and 
4.  Peak hour directional projected vehicle trips on all segments of the arterial and collector street system which are adjacent to the development project or as determined necessary by the planner. 
b.  Design capacity of the accessed road. 
c.  Analysis of traffic distribution on the road network including all links impacted by more than ten percent of project traffic. The trip distribution shall be consistent with the presets contained in the approved trip generation model. The city administrative official shall determine the approved trip generation model. 
d.  Necessary operational improvements to the city-, county-, or state-maintained transportation system in order to maintain the adopted level of service for the roadway. 
e.  Other related information as required by the city. 
f.  Justification, including appropriate references, for the use of any trip generation rates, adjustments factors or traffic assignment methods not previously approved by the city. 
g.  The latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual shall be used to calculate these estimates. Adjustments to these estimates may be made, based on special trip generation information supplied by the applicant. 
(6)  If the alternative methodology, after review and acceptance by the city administrative official, indicates no deficiency in the capacity based on the adopted level of service standard, notwithstanding that the comprehensive plan indicates a deficiency in capacity based on the adopted level of service standard, the results of the alternative methodology will be used. However, the city shall, at its discretion, reserve the option to have the methodology reviewed by a professional transportation engineer or transportation planner prior to accepting the methodology. The cost for such review shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.9(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-102. - Other facilities. 
    The level of service standards for all concurrency facilities are listed in article III of this chapter. The applicant shall provide the city administrative official with the information required to apply the adopted level of service standard as cited in this section. The demand on concurrency facilities generated by the applicant's development shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Solid waste. The demand for solid waste collection and disposal capacity shall be determined by applying the following standard: 
Land Use Solid Waste Residential 2.66 pounds per capita per day (i.e., multiply the total number of persons served times 2.66 pounds) Nonresidential 6.37 pounds per equivalent units of population (i.e., multiply 6.37 pounds times the total equivalent units of population served)  
(2)  Potable water. The demand for potable water shall be determined by applying the following standard: 
Land Use Potable Water Residential Prior to 1996: 95 gallons per capita per day (i.e., multiply the total number of persons served times 95 gallons) Beginning 1996-2010: 93 gallons per capita per day (i.e., multiply the total number of persons served times 93 gallons) Nonresidential Prior to 1996: 660 gallons per acres in use (i.e., multiply 660 gallons times the total acres in use) Beginning 1996-2010: 650 gallons per acres in use (i.e., multiply 650 gallons times the total acres in use)  
(3)  Sanitary sewer. The demand for sanitary sewer capacity shall be determined by applying the following standard: 
Land Use Sanitary Sewer Residential Permanent residents: 100 gallons per capita per day for permanent residents (i.e., multiply the total number of permanent residents served times 100 gallons) Seasonal residents: 90 gallons per capita per day for seasonal residents (i.e., multiply the total number of seasonal residents served times 90 gallons) Nonresidential 660 gallons per acres in use (i.e., multiply 660 gallons times the total acres in use)  
In addition to the quantitative level of service standards for wastewater disposal, the level of service treatment standards stated in section 94-67 must be met. 
(4)  Drainage. The applicant shall provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed project shall meet the criteria established in section 94-69 for drainage facilities. 
(5)  Recreation area. The demand for recreation area shall be determined by multiplying the city's recreation area level of service standard (i.e., 5.0 acres per 1,000 population or 0.005 acre multiplied by each person served by the development). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.9(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 94-103. - Determination of available capacity. 
(a)  Generally. For purposes of the land development regulations, the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by adding the cumulative total supply for each public facility component as cited in step 1 and subtracting cumulative total demand for each infrastructure component as cited in step 2. 
(b)  Step 1. Add the indicators of available facility capacity: 
(1)  Capacity of existing facility. The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
(2)  Capacity of committed potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage. The total capacity of committed new facilities, if any, that will become available on or before the date a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development. The capacity of concurrency facilities may be counted and deemed concurrent only if the following standards are met: 
a.  For potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage, the following standards of F.A.C. 9J-5.0055(2)(a) shall be met: 
1.  The necessary facilities and services are in place at the time the development order is issued; 
2.  The development order is issued subject to the condition that the certificate of occupancy will be issued only if the necessary facilities and services will be in place when the impacts of development occur; 
3.  The necessary facilities are under construction at the time a permit is issued; or 
4.  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement that includes the provisions of subparagraphs 1(a)-(c) of objective 9-1.6 of the comprehensive plan. An enforceable development agreement may include but is not limited to development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. The agreement must guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place when the impacts of the development occur. 
b.  For parks and recreation facilities, the following standards of F.S. § 163.3180(2)(b) and F.A.C. 9J- 5.0055(2)(b) shall be met by complying with subparagraphs 1(a)-(d) of this objective 9-1.6 of the comprehensive plan or by ensuring that the following standards of F.A.C. 9J-5.0055(2)(b) shall be met: 
1.  At the time the development permit is issued, the necessary facilities and services are the subject of a binding executed contract which provides that parks and recreation facilities to serve new development shall be in place or under actual construction no later than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, the acreage for such facilities shall be dedicated or be acquired by the city prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or funds in the amount of the developer's fair share shall be committed prior to issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy. 
2.  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement which requires the commencement of the actual construction of the facilities or the provision of services within one year of the issuance of the applicable development permit. An enforceable development agreement may include but is not limited to development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. 
c.  For roads, the following standards of F.S. § 163.3180(2)(c) and F.A.C. 9J-5.0055(2)(c) shall be met by complying with subparagraph 1(a)-(d) or 2(a)-(b) of objective 9-6.1 of the comprehensive plan or by ensuring that the following standards of F.S. § 163.3180(2)(c) and F.A.C. 9J-5.0055(2)(c) shall be met: 
1.  At the time the development permit is issued, transportation facilities needed to serve new development shall be in place or under actual construction no more than three years after issuance by the local government of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. 
2.  In addition, in areas in which the city commits to provide the necessary public facilities and services in accordance with its five-year schedule of capital improvements, the concurrency requirement for roads may be met by the adoption and implementation of a concurrency management system based upon an adequate capital improvements program and schedule and adequate implementing regulations which, at a minimum, include the following: 
i.  A capital improvements element and a five-year schedule of capital improvements which, in addition to meeting all of the other statutory and rule requirements, must be financially feasible. The capital improvements element and schedule of capital improvements may recognize and include transportation projects included in the first three years of the applicable adopted state department of transportation five-year work program. 
ii.  A five-year schedule of capital improvements which must include both necessary facilities to maintain the adopted level of service standards to serve the new development proposed to be permitted and the necessary facilities required to eliminate those portions of existing deficiencies which are a priority to be eliminated during the five-year period under the local government plan's schedule of capital improvements pursuant to F.A.C. 9J-5.016(4)(a)1. 
iii.  A realistic, financially feasible funding system based on currently available revenue sources which must be adequate to fund the public facilities required to serve the development authorized by the development order and development permit and which public facilities are included in the five-year schedule of capital improvements. 
iv.  A five-year schedule of capital improvements which must include the estimated date of commencement of actual construction and the estimated date of project completion. 
v.  A five-year schedule of capital improvements which must demonstrate that the actual construction of the road and the provision of services are scheduled to commence in or before the third year of the five-year schedule of capital improvements. 
vi.  A provision that a plan amendment would be required to eliminate, defer or delay construction of any road which is needed to maintain the adopted level of service standard and which is listed in the five-year schedule of improvements. 
vii.  A requirement that the local government must adopt local development regulations which, in conjunction with the capital improvements element, ensure that development orders and permits are issued in a manner that will ensure that the necessary public facilities and services will be available to accommodate the impact of that development. 
viii.  A provision that a monitoring system shall be adopted which enables the local government to determine whether it is adhering to the adopted level of service standards and its schedule of capital improvements and that the local government has a demonstrated capability of monitoring the availability of public facilities and services. 
ix.  A clear designation within the adopted comprehensive plan of those areas within which facilities and services will be provided by the local government with public funds in accordance with the five-year capital improvements schedule. 
In determining the availability of services or facilities, a developer may propose and the city may approve developments in stages or phases so that facilities and services needed for each phase will be available in accordance with the standards required by F.S. § 163.3180 and F.A.C. 9J-5.0055(2). 
(c)  Step 2. Subtract the committed capacity: 
(1)  Existing demand based on existing development. The demand for services or facilities created by existing development as provided by the city. 
(2)  Demand to be generated by vested development, valid capacity reservation certificates, and valid certificates of concurrency. The demand for the service or facility created by the anticipated completion of other vested and/or approved developments. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-9.10), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 102 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; planning and development, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 74; planning and development, ch. 108; regulations on signs in historic districts, § 114-101 et seq.; zoning, ch. 122; historic preservation districts, § 122-566 et seq.; historic medium density residential district (HMDR), § 122-596 et seq.; historic high density residential district (HHDR), § 122-626 et seq.; historic residential commercial core districts (HRCC-1 to 3), § 122-656 et seq.; historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2), § 122-836 et seq.; historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3), § 122-866 et seq.; historic commercial tourist district (HCT), § 122-896 et seq.; historic residential/office district (HRO), § 122-926 et seq.; historic public and semipublic services district (HPS), § 122-956 et seq.; historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD), § 122-986 et seq.; retail sales in historic districts, § 122-1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means any change affecting the exterior appearance of an existing structure or improvement by additions, remodeling, maintenance or structural changes involving changes in form, texture, materials, or color or any such changes in appearance in a specially designated historic site or historic interior. 
    Applicant means the record owner of the property and/or improvements located thereon or the record owner's duly designated representative. 
    Appurtenance means that structure which is accessory to another structure, including but not limited to walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, outbuildings, paving, sidewalks, shutters, and signs. 
    Architecturally similar means having substantially the same facade design and appearance and like characteristics in terms of height, scale, building footprint, structural configuration and materials, facade materials, location or setbacks on lot, and exterior appearance. 
    Building means any structure having a roof and which is entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a written document issued by the historic architectural review commission (HARC) upon its approval of specified alterations, demolition, expansion, construction or other work to a designated historic site or for a building or structure within the historic zoning districts. 
    Contributing means a building that contributes to the character of the historic district by sharing the same period of significance, architectural qualities, or historical or cultural attributes. 
    Demolition means the act or process of wrecking, destroying, moving or removing any building or structure, or any exterior or structural part thereof. 
    Exterior means the outside surfaces of any building or structure. 
    Facade means the exterior vertical surfaces of a building, including without limitation the shape, appearance, and material of the sides, front, and rear of any building. 
    Historic building means any building or structure which, in whole or in any structural part, was built 50 or more years prior to the current date, and which is located in the historic zoning districts of the city or has been designated as a historic building and/or structure. 
    Landscape means any improvement or vegetation, including but not limited to outbuildings, walls, courtyards, fences, shrubbery, trees, sidewalks, planters, plantings, gates, street furniture, and exterior lighting and site improvements, including but not limited to subsurface alterations, site regrading, fill deposition, and paving. 
    Local register of historic places means a listing and a means by which to identify, classify and recognize various archaeological sites, building, structures, improvements, districts, and appurtenances as historically and/or architecturally significant. 
    National Register of Historic Places means a federal listing, maintained by the United States Department of the Interior, of buildings, structures and districts that have attained a quality of significance as determined by the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended from time to time. 
    Noncontributing building or structure means a building that contributes less or not at all to the character of the historic district because it is too recently built, too highly altered, or it is irrevocably compromised by extreme deterioration. 
    Ordinary maintenance means work done to repair ordinary damage or to prevent ordinary deterioration or decay of a building or structure or any part thereof as nearly as possible to its condition prior to such damage, deterioration, or decay, and which does not involve or cause a change in the design, the material, or the exterior appearance of the building. 
    Public place means any property owned by or leased to any entity of government, including without limitation public streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way, and any spaces, including without limitation state and federal waters, and sites accessible to public use. The term also includes any private real property normally accessible to the public, during the hours of such access. 
    Structure means anything constructed of tangible interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization, by human work, and affixed to real property or used as though affixed, and having its highest point more than 30 inches above surrounding grade level. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(A)(a)-(r)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 4, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 10-04, § 2, 1-5-2010) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-2. - Protection of historic resources. 
    Within any historic preservation district or other designated historic site or resource, prior to obtaining a building permit, an applicant for development shall comply with the city's historic architectural review commission's Design Guidelines in Key West's Historic District, as well as the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation pursuant to procedures stipulated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-3. - Appeals; Variances. 
(a)  Appeals from historic architectural review commission. Appeal from final rulings of the historic architectural review commission shall be made pursuant to division 4 of article V of chapter 90. 
(b)  Variance. A variance from the term "architecturally similar" as defined in section 102-1, which requires that an architecturally similar building shall have like characteristics in terms of location or setbacks on a lot, can be granted by the planning board after notice and hearing as for other zoning variances and after the board's consideration of the recommendation of the historic architectural review commission favoring or opposing the variance as provided in division 3 of article V of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(H)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 15, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 102-4. - Other permits as required. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person from permit requirements otherwise made applicable by subpart A and this subpart B of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-5. - Remedies; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the code enforcement special master. However, apparent violations certified by the special master or by the city manager as not being susceptible to effective resolution by the special master, whether due to the emergency nature of the violation or whether due to limitations inherent in the statutory processes and enforcement capabilities of the special master, shall be referred to the state attorney for prosecution and penalty or shall be referred to a code enforcement officer for citation for civil infraction and penalty, as provided by division 3 of article VI of chapter 2. Each day upon which work is performed in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who knowingly causes any major alteration of a historic building, which major alteration is in violation of the terms of this chapter, may be subject to suspension or revocation of his contractor's license after a hearing of the city contractors examining board. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any civil rights the city may have to seek from any court of competent jurisdiction injunctive relief requiring full compliance with the terms of this chapter. The city may maintain an action for injunctive relief to cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration or reconstruction of any historic buildings altered in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-6. - Other regulations applicable to all development proposed. 
    Development activities shall include precautions necessary to prevent the following adverse impacts to historic or archaeological sites of significance: 
(1)  Destruction or alteration of all or part of such site; 
(2)  Isolation from or significant alteration to its surrounding environment; 
(3)  Introduction of visible, audible, or atmospheric elements that are out of character with the property or significantly alter its setting; 
(4)  Transfer or sale of a site of significance without adequate conditions or restrictions regarding preservation, maintenance, or use; and 
(5)  Other forms of neglect resulting in its deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-7. - Mitigation plan required. 
    Development impacting a historic or archaeological site or structure shall include a site plan that mitigates any potential adverse impacts. The site plan shall address the following: 
(1)  Destruction or alteration of all or part of such site; 
(2)  Isolation from or alteration of the surrounding environment; 
(3)  Introduction of visual, audible, or atmospheric elements that are out of character with a property or alter its setting; 
(4)  Transfer or sale of the site of significance without adequate conditions or restrictions regarding preservation, maintenance, use or reuse; 
(5)  Vegetation removal shall not be permitted on a historic or archaeological site unless the vegetation to be removed is a part of a duly authorized scientific excavation or is a part of an approved development plan; and 
(6)  Other forms of neglect resulting in resource deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-8-102-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 102-36-102-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL REGISTRATION 

Sec. 102-61. - Designation criteria for historic site, historic district or historic interior. 
(a)  Qualifying factors. To qualify as a historic site, historic district or historic interior, individual properties, structures, sites, or buildings must have significant character, interest, or value as part of the historical, cultural, aesthetic and architectural heritage of the city, state or nation. To qualify as a historic site or historic district, the property must fulfill one or more of the criteria set forth in subsections (b) or (c) of this section; however, to qualify as a historic interior the interior must fulfill one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section as well as meet the criteria set forth in subsections (c)(1) and (4) of this section. 
(b)  Historical or cultural significance criteria. A building, structure, site, interior or district will be deemed to have historical or cultural significance if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is associated in a significant way with the life or activities of a major person important in city, state, or national history (for example, the homestead of a local founding family); 
(2)  Is the site of a historic event with significant effect upon the city, state, or nation; 
(3)  Is associated in a significant way with a major historic event, whether cultural, economic, social, military, or political; 
(4)  Exemplifies the historical, political, cultural, economic, or social trends of the community in history; or 
(5)  Is associated in a significant way with a past or continuing institution which has contributed substantially to the life of the city. 
(c)  Architectural or aesthetic significance criteria. A building, structure, site, or district is deemed to have architectural or aesthetic significance if it fulfills one or more of the following criteria, except that to qualify as a historic interior it must meet the criteria contained within subsections (c)(1) and (4) of this section: 
(1)  Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by one or more distinctive architectural styles; 
(2)  Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, period, or method of construction; 
(3)  Is a historic or outstanding work of a prominent architect, designer, landscape architect, or builder; or 
(4)  Contains elements of design, detail, material or craftsmanship of outstanding quality or which represented, in its time, a significant innovation or adaptation to the South Florida environment. 
(d)  Other criteria. A building, structure, site, interior, or district will be deemed to have historic significance if, in addition to or in the place of the criteria in this section, the building, structure, site, or zone meets historic development standards as defined by and listed in the regulations of and criteria for the National Register of Historic Places as prepared by the United States Department of the Interior under the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. Such regulations, as amended from time to time, are made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-62. - Classification of structures and buildings. 
    All historic buildings, structures, archaeological sites, districts, neighborhoods, and the like will be classified and designated on the city historic preservation survey, which will be approved by the city commission and shall be made an overlay to the city zoning map and land use plan. Such buildings, structures, districts, neighborhoods, and the like will be divided into two classes as follows: 
(1)  Contributing. Those buildings, structures, archaeological sites, or districts classified as historic shall possess identified historical or architectural merit of a degree warranting their preservation. All buildings, structures, archeological sites, and the like, listed in the city historic preservation survey, as adopted and approved by the city commission, will be considered worthy of preservation and may be designated as a historic site or a historic district. 
(2)  Noncontributing. Noncontributing classes are those buildings and structures within a historic district not listed in the city historic preservation survey and those buildings and structures determined by the historic architectural review commission to be of no contributing value pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(3)  If due to the passage of time, a noncontributing building or structure would become contributing, then the historic architectural review commission shall determine its contributing status and forward the property to the city commission for inclusion in the historic resources inventory. The historic architectural review commission's determination shall be made at a public hearing upon at least ten days' written notice to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(B)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 5, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 102-63. - Review of buildings, structures, archaeological sites, interiors or district nominations. 
(a)  Generally. All buildings, structures, archaeological sites, interiors, or districts which meet the criteria of this division may be designated as historic sites, interiors, or districts and may be listed on the local register of historic places. 
(b)  Nomination source. Nominations for building, structure, archaeological site, interior, or district designation shall be made to the historic architectural review commission on an application form developed and approved by the historic architectural review commission and made available to the nominating person. Nominations are initiated as follows: 
(1)  Nominations for historic site or interior status may be initiated by the historic architectural review commission, the city commission, or the property owner. 
(2)  Nominations for historic district status may be initiated by the historic architectural review commission, the city commission, or a neighborhood association. 
(3)  Any city resident may make a recommendation only, and submit the recommendation to the historic architectural review commission that any building, structure, archaeological site, or district should be designated as a historic site or district. 
(c)  Nomination application. A property owner, the historic architectural review commission or the city commission, making a nomination for historic site designation, is responsible for completing the application form and submitting it along with any nomination fee or charges to the historic architectural review commission. The historic architectural review commission may require the property owner who initiates a nomination application form to provide any documentation or supporting evidence it deems necessary. 
(d)  Historic architectural review commission review of application. The historic architectural review commission will first conduct a preliminary evaluation of the information provided on each nomination application form to make sure it generally conforms with historic status criteria defined in this division. The historic architectural review commission will then prepare a designation report which will contain the following information: 
(1)  Proposed legal boundaries of the historic building, archaeological site, structure, or district; 
(2)  Any proposed conditional zoning regulation designed to replace or complement existing zoning regulations with regard to but not limited to use, floor area, density, height, setbacks, parking minimum, lot size, and the like or create any additional conditions provide for in this subsection; 
(3)  Analysis of the historic significance and character of the nominated property; and 
(4)  Analysis of optional historic interiors for those buildings and structures with interior features of exceptional architectural, aesthetic, artistic or historic significance. 
(e)  Moratorium. Following the setting of a date for a public hearing before the historic architectural review commission for the consideration of a nomination for designation for status as a historic site or historic district, no permits will be issued by the city for any new construction, alteration, relocation, or demolition of the real property included in the nomination. This delay in the issuance of permits will remain in effect until one of the following takes place: 
(1)  The historic architectural review commission denies the nomination for historic site designation, and no appeal is filed with the city commission within 30 days of the historic architectural review commission's denial; or 
(2)  The city commission formally approves or denies the nomination for historic site or district status. 
(f)  Public hearings. After the historic architectural review commission prepares its designation report, it will set and hold the public hearing on each proposed designation with notification as follows: 
(1)  Owner notification. The historic architectural review commission will mail by certified mail a copy of the designation report and a notice of public hearing to the property owner of record as of the date of nomination. This notice will serve as notification of the intent of the historic architectural review commission to consider designation and must be mailed at least ten days prior to a public hearing. 
(2)  Public hearing notification. For each site or district nominated for designation, a public hearing will be held within 30 days from the date a formal application is submitted to the historic architectural review commission. All property owners within a 300-foot radius of the nominated site or district will be notified of the public hearing by mail to the last known address of the party being served. However, failure to receive such notice will not invalidate the notice or hearing. Such notice shall also be provided by publishing a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. All interested persons will be given an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. 
(g)  Actions by historic architectural review commission. After a public hearing, if the historic architectural review commission finds that the nomination fulfills the proper designation criteria and all procedures have been followed correctly, it will vote on the designation. If a majority of the entire historic architectural review commission present and voting agrees, it will transmit the nomination and its findings and recommendation for final approval of the designation to the city commission. If the historic architectural review commission finds that the nominated site or district does not fulfill the criteria, no further action will be required unless the actual property owner of record as of the date of nomination or a subsequent bona fide purchaser of the site or district appeals the historic architectural review commission's action to the city commission. 
(h)  Action by city commission. The city commission may, upon recommendation by the historic architectural review commission, designate historic sites and districts. Such designations will appear upon city zoning maps as provided by city ordinance. The procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Public hearing. Within 30 days of a positive recommendation for historic status by the historic architectural review commission, the city commission will hold a public hearing concerning the recommendation in accordance with the city commission's established procedures for public hearings. 
(2)  Approval. Within a reasonable time after its public hearing, the city commission will vote on the historic architectural review commission's recommendation for nomination. A designation of historic status will be deemed to be approved by a majority vote of the entire city commission (at least three affirmative votes); however, if a directly affected property owner has objected to such historic designation, the city commission approval will require a super majority vote of the entire city commission (at least four affirmative votes). 
(i)  Appeals. Appeals of historic architectural review commission denial of a nomination must be presented to the special master in writing and on forms developed by the historic architectural review commission, within ten days of the historic architectural review commission's denial. The special master will then hold a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days of filing of an appeal and will approve or deny the appeal after the public hearing. Only the actual property owner of record or a subsequent bona fide purchaser of the property as of the date of nomination will have the right to appeal a denial by the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(B)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 6, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 102-64. - Listings and maintenance. 
(a)  If the city commission approves the nomination of a property for designation as a historic site or group of properties for designation as a historic district, such property or group of properties will be listed on the city local register of historic places. The local historic register will be maintained by the city and shall be kept current; copies shall be provided to the state historic preservation officer. 
(b)  Upon placement of a property on the local register, the historic architectural review commission will cause this designation to be recorded in the official records of the county. 
(c)  The historic architectural review commission will issue a certificate of historic significance to the owner of the property listed individually on the local historic register or judged as contributing to the character of a historic district listed on the local historic register. The city manager is authorized to issue and place official signs denoting the geographic boundaries of each historic district listed in the local historical register. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(B)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-65-102-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NATIONAL REGISTRATION 

Sec. 102-91. - Nomination review. 
(a)  Generally. The historic architectural review commission shall review proposed nominations to the National Register of Historic Places submitted by the state historic preservation officer or other sponsor qualified pursuant to United States Department of the Interior regulations. 
(b)  Historic architectural review commission's review. The historic architectural review commission will develop or receive the documentation necessary to nominate properties to the National Register of Historic Places. The historic architectural review commission shall evaluate nomination proposals received for completeness in a timely manner. If a nomination proposal is not technically complete, the historic architectural review commission shall notify the proposal's sponsor, identifying the technical deficiencies in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the nomination proposal. If the nomination proposal is technically complete, the historic architectural review commission shall place the item on its agenda for the earliest possible regular meeting after notification procedures are complete. 
(c)  Notification. In all cases, such notification shall occur at least 30 days but not more than 75 days prior to the historic architectural review commission meeting at which the nomination proposal will be considered. The historic architectural review commission shall notify the following of its intention to consider a nomination proposal: 
(1)  Property owners of record, as obtained from official tax records. Where there is more than one owner on the list, each separate owner shall be notified; 
(2)  The mayor of the city and the mayor of the county, who shall have 30 days from receipt of notice within which to submit to the historic architectural review commission a written recommendation supporting or opposing the nomination; and 
(3)  The state historic preservation officer. 
(d)  Outside expertise. When the historic architectural review commission considers a nomination proposal that will impact properties which are normally evaluated by a professional in a specific discipline, and that discipline is not represented on the historic architectural review commission, the historic architectural review commission shall seek professional expertise in this area before rendering a decision, but failure to obtain such advice shall not invalidate its determination on the proposal. 
(e)  Review criteria. In reviewing National Register of Historic Places nomination proposals, the historic architectural review commission shall follow the regulations found in 36 CFR 60, and as amended, promulgated by the National Park Service, Department of the Interior under the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-92. - Public meeting. 
(a)  Generally. Proposals for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places shall be considered by the historic architectural review commission at a public meeting, and all votes on nomination proposals shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent record of the historic architectural review commission meeting. All nomination proposals shall be forwarded, with a record of official action taken by the historic architectural review commission and the recommendation of the appropriate local official, to the state historic preservation officer within 30 days of the historic architectural review commission meeting at which they were considered. 
(b)  Public input. Any person supporting or opposing the nomination of a property to the National Register shall be afforded the opportunity to make his views known in writing. Such comments shall be notarized where they contain factual assertions. All such correspondence regarding a nomination proposal shall become part of the permanent record concerning that proposal and shall be forwarded with approved proposals to the state historic preservation officer. For disapproved nomination proposals, letters of support or comment shall be made a part of the permanent record concerning that proposal, and a list of such letters shall accompany the official copy of the disapproved nomination proposal when it is forwarded to the state historic preservation officer. 
(c)  Availability of nomination proposals for public inspection. Nomination proposals to be considered by the historic architectural review commission shall be on file at city offices for at least 30 days but not more than 75 days prior to the meeting at which they will be considered. A copy shall be made available by mail when requested by the public and shall be made available at a location of reasonable local public access, such as the library, courthouse, or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-93. - Appeals. 
    Any person may appeal the decision of the historic architectural review commission regarding a proposed nomination made under this division to the state historic preservation officer in writing within 30 days of the historic architectural review commission decision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-94. - Alteration prohibited. 
    No person shall cause alteration of any historic building unless such work has been authorized pursuant to the terms of article IV of this chapter. This prohibition shall apply notwithstanding any other section of the Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to this chapter. At its discretion, the historic architectural review commission may consult with the historic preservation planner regarding findings required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-95-102-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CERTIFICATE OF NO CONTRIBUTING VALUE 

Sec. 102-121. - Applicability. 
    Section 102-94 and article IV of this chapter shall have no application to historic buildings for which a certificate of no contributing value has been issued by the historic architectural review commission according to the process in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-122. - Application and fee. 
    Written application for the certificate of no contributing value, together with an application fee as determined by city commission resolution, shall be submitted by the owner of the subject building or by his agent. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(F)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-123. - Required information for application. 
    The application for the certificate of no contributing value shall include, except when not reasonably attainable, the following: 
(1)  A map showing the location of the building or structure on its property with reference to neighboring properties; 
(2)  Photographs of all street facade elevations; 
(3)  A description of the building or structure, including a description of its age, architectural style, historical associations and importance; 
(4)  The reason and explanation for the application; and 
(5)  A brief description of the present and/or proposed use of the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(F)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-124. - Public meetings. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall hold two regular historic architectural review commission meetings regarding the application for the certificate of no contributing value, which hearings shall be at least 14 days apart and which shall each be advertised at least five days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(F)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-125. - Historic architectural review commission findings precedent to issuance. 
    Upon conclusion of the hearings and the historic architectural review commission's deliberations, the historic architectural review commission shall issue the certificate of no contributing value only if it finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the building or structure, by virtue of its design, workmanship, materials, setting, and/or history does not meet any of the nine criteria set forth below. The building or structure: 
(1)  Embodies no distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction of aesthetic or historic significance in the city and is not a significant and distinguishable building entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
(2)  Is not specifically associated with events that have made a significant contribution to local, state, or national history; 
(3)  Has no significant character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation, and is not associated with the life of a person significant in the past; 
(4)  Is not the site of a historic event with a significant effect upon society; 
(5)  Does not exemplify the cultural, political, economic, social, or historic heritage of the city; 
(6)  Does not portray the environment in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style; 
(7)  If a part of or related to a square, park, or other distinctive area, nevertheless should not be developed or preserved according to a plan based on the area's historic, cultural, natural, or architectural motif; 
(8)  Does not have a unique location or singular physical characteristic which represents an established and familiar visual feature of its neighborhood or of the city, and does not exemplify the best remaining architectural type in a neighborhood; and 
(9)  Has not yielded, and is not likely to yield, information important in history. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(F)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 7, 8-1-2006) 
Secs. 102-126-102-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-151. - Scope. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall be required as stipulated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-152. - Requirements for permits. 
(a)  No person shall cause any of the activity in this section to occur without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for such work and all other permits required by the Code of Ordinances, including the land development regulations. A certificate of appropriateness is required for the erection of any new structure, building, fence, deck or sign or the painting, repainting, repair, alteration, remodeling, landscaping or demolition of the exterior of any existing building, structure, fence, deck, sign, landscape, or lot located in any of the following areas: 
(1)  In the historic preservation districts of the city; 
(2)  In tidal waters contiguous to and within 600 feet of the historic preservation districts; 
(3)  In a location so as to directly affect any building, structure or property listed in the city historic sites survey as may be amended from time to time and the National Register of Historic Places; or 
(4)  Within a building, structure, archaeological site or district classified as "contributing" on the city historic preservation survey. 
(b)  A certificate of appropriateness may only be granted by a vote of the historic architectural review commission, attested by signature of its presiding member. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(a)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 15, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 102-153. - Issuance of certificates of compliance. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure within the historic districts of the city for work which directly affects any building, structure, and property listed in the local register of historic places and the National Register of Historic Places or in a district classified as "contributing" on the city historic preservation survey unless a certificate of compliance with the historic architectural review commission regulations is issued by the historic architectural review commission inspector or preservation planner following inspection of the finished work. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(b)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-154. - Compliance with certain federal standards. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall not approve any proposed work which would be in conflict with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (revised 1992). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(c)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-155. - Formulation and publication of regulatory criteria for accomplishing delegated responsibilities. 
(a)  The historic architectural review commission shall formulate and publish such regulations as it deems reasonably necessary and appropriate to: 
(1)  Designate the subject matter and format of information to be provided in the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Govern the historic architectural review commission evaluation of, and ruling upon, the application. The regulations shall include but are not limited to terms providing for historic architectural review commission assessment of the design, scale, massing, materials, color, texture, appearance, and location of the subject property and of the proposed work thereon. 
(3)  Designate those specific items that are subject to final staff approval without further application to the historic architectural review commission. 
(b)  The regulations shall be submitted to the city manager for presentation to the city commission. Upon approval or amendment by the city commission or upon the expiration of 45 days without final city commission action thereon, the regulations shall govern the form, content and evaluations of applications to the historic architectural review commission, subject at all times to amendment by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(d)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-156. - Contents of permits. 
    All permits issued by the city pursuant to this article shall show the nature and extent of the intended work in detail sufficient to demonstrate that the project is consistent with all laws and regulations of the city and of the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(e)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-157. - Acknowledgment of compliance. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit as provided in this article, the applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the completed work must be in full compliance with all laws and regulations of the city and of the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(f)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-158. - Stop work order and penalty. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized and directed to post a signed and dated notice to stop work on any site on which work is being performed in violation of the laws and regulations of the city or of the historic architectural review commission. Any person who engages in the following activities shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-15: 
(1)  Performing work with actual or constructive knowledge that the work site has been posted by such notice, which notice has not been withdrawn by dated, signed order of the city manager; or 
(2)  Removing, defacing, concealing or altering such notice to stop work without dated, signed authorization of the city manager. 
(b)  Where such offenses are of a continuing nature, no two separate offenses shall be charged against that same person for the same property within any one-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(h)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-159. - Expiration. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall expire two years from the date of its approval if the work has not commenced under a duly issued building permit. Upon application of the property owner, the historic architectural review commission, or its designee, may extend a certificate of appropriateness for a specified period of time not to exceed two years upon a finding of no substantially changed circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, § 8, 8-1-2006) 
Secs. 102-160-102-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ECONOMIC HARDSHIP 

Sec. 102-186. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Undue economic hardship means: 
(1)  For applicants seeking approval of demolitions under division 3 of this article, an exceptional financial burden that would amount to the taking of property without just compensation or, for properties producing income at the time of application for a certificate of appropriateness, failure to achieve a reasonable economic return as measured against commercial properties of similar nature and location and as expected by market conditions. The evidence and testimony needed to establish an undue economic hardship is specified in sections 102-187 through 102-189. 
(2)  For applicants seeking approval of substitution of alternative building materials for historic or traditional materials under section 102-190: 
a.  For an individual, either the current receipt of assistance through the mayor's revolving loan fund, rental rehabilitation program, or other program which is income-indexed and which provides for physical improvements to the subject property; or the current receipt of fixed income benefits such as social security, AFDC, or private pension benefits, and the applicant's total income is below 80 percent of the median income for the city, all as evidenced by income tax return or affidavit; or 
b.  For a corporation, current tax-exempt status as a nonprofit corporation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(A)(s)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-187. - Avoidance. 
    If a decision of the historic architectural review commission shall result in undue economic hardship for the property owner, as provided in this article, the historic architectural review commission shall have authority to determine the existence of such hardship in accordance with the definition of undue economic hardship found in section 102-186. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(d)(i)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-188. - Filing affidavit. 
    When there is a claim of undue economic hardship under this article, the owner shall submit an affidavit affirmed by a notary public to the historic architectural review commission at least 15 days prior to the public hearing, which certifies that the applicant meets one of the following criteria for undue economic hardship: 
(1)  Currently receives fixed income benefits such as social security, aid to families with dependent children, or private pension benefits and that the total household income is below 80 percent of the median income for the city; 
(2)  Currently receives assistance through the mayor's revolving loan fund, rental rehabilitation program, or other program which is income-indexed and which provides for physical improvements to the subject property; or 
(3)  The applicant corporation currently has tax-exempt status as a nonprofit corporation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(d)(ii)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-189. - Additional information. 
    The historic architectural review commission may require that an applicant furnish such additional information as the historic architectural review commission believes is relevant to its determination of undue economic hardship and may provide, in appropriate instances, that such additional information be furnished under seal. If any of the required information is not reasonably available to the applicant and cannot be obtained by the applicant, the applicant shall file with his affidavit a statement of the information which cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(d)(ii)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-190. - Use of substitute material. 
    In cases of undue economic hardship of the applicant, as defined in section 102-186, the historic architectural review commission may allow the substitution of alternative construction materials for historic or traditional materials where the substitute materials are sufficiently similar in character to such historic or traditional materials so as not to detract from the original character of the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(g)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-191-102-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEMOLITIONS 

Sec. 102-216. - Submission of application to historic architectural review commission. 
    Application for a certificate of appropriateness for any demolition of a building or structure located within a designated historic zoning district, and contributing buildings or structures that are located outside of the historic district shall be submitted by the property owner to the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(a)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 9, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 102-217. - Required public meetings and staff approval. 
(1)  The historic preservation planner shall have the authority to staff approve the demolition of a non-historic, non-contributing building or structure in the historic district that is part of a bona fide code compliance case after written consent from the city planner and the city attorney. If the required written approvals herein are not obtained, then subsection (2) below shall be applicable. 
(2)  Subject to the criteria contained in section 102-218, the historic preservation planner shall have the authority to staff approve the demolition of the following non-historic, non-contributing buildings or structures in the historic district, as long as there is no build back of any structure on the site, with the exclusion of a swimming pool: 
(a)  Awnings 
(b)  Carports 
(c)  Detached covered porches located on the rear of a property 
(d)  Gazebos 
(e)  Gatehouses 
(f)  Pavilions 
(g)  Pergolas 
(h)  Sheds 
(i)  Swimming pools and hot tubs 
(j)  Trellis and arbors 
(k)  Walls 
The historic preservation planner shall have the authority to staff approve the demolition and, if necessary, reconstruction of non-historic, non-contributing staircases, decks 30 inches or taller, and fences that do not qualify as unsafe structures, pursuant to section 102-221, and that are in need to be demolished due to deterioration or building code requirements. 
(3)  The historic architectural review commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition of a non-historic or non-contributing building or structure located in a designated historic zoning district, with the exception of qualified buildings and structures under section 102-217 (2), after conclusion of one regular historic architectural review commission meeting. 
(4)  The historic architectural review commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition of a historic or contributing building or structure located in a designated historic zoning district, or that is a contributing building or structure that is outside of the historic district except after conclusion of two regular historic architectural review commission meetings regarding the application, which shall be at least 14 days apart, and which meetings shall be advertised at least five days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. Notice of the meetings shall be published as for a regular meeting, pursuant to section 90-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(b)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 10, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 11-11, § 5, 8-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 16-24, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 102-218. - Criteria for demolitions. 
(a)  The historic architectural review commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for an application for demolition: 
(1)  If the subject of the application is a contributing or historic building or structure, then it should not be demolished unless its condition is irrevocably compromised by extreme deterioration or it does not meet any of the criteria of section 102-125(1) through (9). 
(2)  For a contributing historic or noncontributing building or structure, a complete construction plan for the site is approved by the historic architectural review commission. 
(b)  The historic architectural review commission shall not issue permits that would result in: 
(1)  Removing buildings or structures that are important in defining the overall historic character of a district or neighborhood so that the character is diminished; 
(2)  Removing historic buildings or structures and thus destroying the historic relationship between buildings or structures and open space; and 
(3)  Removing an historic building or structure in a complex; or removing a building facade; or removing a significant later addition that is important in defining the historic character of a site or the surrounding district or neighborhood. 
(4)  Removing buildings or structures that would otherwise qualify as contributing, as set forth in section 102-62(3). 
(c)  Nothing in this section is intended to alter the authority of the Building Official to condemn for demolition dangerous buildings, as provided in chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(c)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 12, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 102-219. - Denial of certificate of appropriateness. 
    The historic architectural review commission's refusal to grant a certificate of appropriateness requested by a property owner for the purpose of demolition will be supported by a written statement describing the public interest that the historic architectural review commission seeks to preserve. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(e)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-220. - Approval of certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Generally. The historic architectural review commission may grant a certificate of appropriateness as requested by a property owner for demolition which may provide for a delayed effective date. The effective date of the certificate will be determined by the historic architectural review commission based on the relative significance of the structure and the probable time required to arrange a possible alternative to demolition. 
(b)  Delay of demolition. The historic architectural review commission may delay the demolition of designated historic sites and contributing buildings within historic districts for up to six months, while demolition of noncontributing buildings within the historic district may be delayed for up to three months. 
(c)  Historic architectural review commission actions during delay period. During the demolition delay period, the historic architectural review commission may take such steps as its deems necessary to preserve the structure concerned and ensure that the structure is secure and stabilized. Such steps may include but are not limited to consultation with community groups, public agencies, and interested citizens; recommendations for acquisition of property by public or private bodies or agencies; and exploration of the possibility of moving one or more structures or other features. 
(d)  Special historic architectural review commission requests precedent to demolition. The historic architectural review commission may, with the consent of the property owner, request that the owner, at the owner's expense, salvage and preserve specified classes of building materials, architectural details and ornaments, fixtures and the like for reuse in the restoration of other historic properties. The historic architectural review commission may, with the consent of the property owner, request that the Historic Florida Keys Foundation or the owner, at the owner's expense, record the architectural details for archival purposes prior to demolition. The recording may include but shall not be limited to photographs, videotaping, documents, and scaled architectural drawings. At the historic architectural review commission's option, and with the property owner's consent, the historic architectural review commission or the Historic Florida Keys Foundation may salvage and preserve building materials, architectural details, and ornaments, textures, and the like at its expense, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(f)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-14, § 12, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 102-221. - Unsafe structures. 
    If the chief building official determines that any structure within a designated historic site or designated historic district is unsafe pursuant to the applicable sections of the Code of Ordinances, the chief building official will immediately notify the historic architectural review commission of the findings. The unsafe condition shall include structures deemed by the chief building official to be undergoing demolition by the property owner's neglect of maintenance responsibilities. Where appropriate and in accordance with applicable ordinances, the chief building official will attempt to have the owner or other appropriate party repair the structure rather than order it to be demolished and will take into consideration any comments and recommendations by the historic architectural review commission. However, the provisions contained within sections 102-187 through 102-190 and this division 3 shall not apply to the chief building official's declaration that a building is unsafe, nor will the chief building official be precluded from taking such steps as may be required by applicable ordinances to protect the public health and safety of the community. The historic architectural review commission may also endeavor to negotiate with the owner and interested parties, provided such actions do not interfere with procedures in the applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(g)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-222-102-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING RELOCATION 

Sec. 102-251. - Application and fee. 
    Application for a certificate of appropriateness for relocating a historic building or structure in the historic districts shall be submitted to the historic architectural review commission, together with an application fee as determined by resolution by the city commission. Applications for relocating a historic building or structure shall be reviewed by the historic architectural review commission during a regular meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be published as for a regular meeting, pursuant to section 90-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(3)(a)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 11-11, § 6, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 102-252. - Requirements precedent to relocation. 
    The National Register of Historic Places discourages the moving of historic structures because the significance of properties is embodied in their sites and settings as well as in the structures themselves. Any National Register building that is removed from its original foundation is removed from the National Register. After reconsideration, it may be placed back on the National Register if specific criteria are followed, but the building's National Register designation is not guaranteed. The historic architectural review commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness for relocating a historic building or structure unless the historic architectural review commission renders a finding that the applicant has submitted a relocation plan demonstrating that the proposed relocation satisfies the following criteria: 
(1)  The built environment for the new site should be similar to the old one in terms of context, the age of the surrounding buildings, their height, materials, setback, and architectural details. 
(2)  The historic relationship between buildings and streetscape and landscaped features must be maintained. 
(3)  When a building may be moved, documentation of the building and the relocation must be provided. 
(4)  The relocated building must be placed so that the orientation of its principal facade and front and side setbacks are compatible with surrounding buildings. 
(5)  The new foundation's design, height, and facing materials must be comparable with the original historical foundation. 
(6)  Relocating a contributing building outside of the historic district is prohibited. 
(7)  Relocating a building to a site where the surrounding buildings date from a different period or are architecturally incompatible due to their height, materials, setback, and detailing is prohibited. 
(8)  Destruction or alteration of significant features, structures, or archeological sites at the new location is prohibited. 
(9)  Improperly locating a building on its new site so that its orientation and front and side setbacks are incompatible with surrounding buildings is prohibited. 
(10)  Placing the building on a new foundation whose design and materials are incompatible with the original is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(E)(3)(b)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 102-253-102-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-281. - Guidelines for rehabilitation or relocation of designated historic structure; mitigation plan for relocation, demolition or rehabilitation of historic structure. 
    Any proposed rehabilitation or relocation of a designated historic structure shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. In addition, an applicant requesting the relocation, demolition, or rehabilitation of a historic structure shall provide a mitigation plan which includes narrative and graphic information adequately identifying techniques for reinforcing the historic significance of the structure. The mitigation plan shall also address the following considerations: 
(1)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure, or object contributes to its present setting. 
(2)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant and irreversible damage to its physical integrity. 
(4)  Whether the building, structure, or object represents the last remaining example of its kind in the neighborhood or city. 
(5)  Whether definite plans exist to reuse the subject property if a proposed demolition is carried out, and the effect of those plans on the character of the surroundings. 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, or object to a level safe from occupation. 
(7)  Whether the building, structure, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(8)  Section 106 of the National Historical Preservation Act of 1966 which requires that projects involving the federal government and historic resources be reviewed by the federal agency involved and the appropriate state historic preservation officer. The involved parties must jointly develop and sign a memorandum of agreement that specifies necessary actions which must be taken with respect to historic resources. All such agreements must be considered by the historic architectural review commission prior to rendering actions authorized in this chapter. 
The memorandum of agreement for Truman Annex requires that: "All new construction near or adjacent to contributing buildings in the U.S. Naval Station Historic District or the Key West Historic District should be compatible with the scale, massing, color, and materials of the surrounding historic properties and should be responsive to the recommended approaches for new construction set forth in the Secretary's Standards. It is recognized that portions of the redevelopment will require higher density development than presently exists. In designing components of the project which will be of substantially higher density and/or which will be inconsistent in scale with the historic character of the District, suitable transition design elements, screening, set backs, and other design criteria shall be employed to minimize the effect of the new construction on individual historic buildings and the existing streetscape (view from the Public Way). Prior to initiation of construction, plans and specifications for new construction will be provided to the Florida State Historic Preservation Officer for review and comment." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(L)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-282. - Outdoor display of goods. 
    Vending booths, carts, and other merchandise displays are discouraged in the front yard or side yard of any structure adjoining a public street (i.e., between the front or side facade and the public sidewalk). The preferred location for vending carts or booths is on parking lots, where vending will not displace required parking, or otherwise vacant properties. Merchandising may not be mounted or displayed on the exterior surface of the front facade. Where vending booths or carts are otherwise appropriate, they are to be set back at least five feet from the front property line and may not exceed 64 square feet, including overhang. The proportion of the total frontage occupied by vending booths or carts shall not exceed 15 percent. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Outdoor displays and distributions, § 106-26 et seq. 
Sec. 102-283. - Handicapped accessibility-Generally. 
    The Americans with Disabilities Act recognizes the national interest in preserving significant historic properties by establishing alternative minimum requirements for qualified historic properties that cannot be made physically accessible without threatening or destroying their significance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(M)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-284. - Same-Alternative minimum handicapped requirements. 
    In reviewing handicapped accessibility requirements on specific historic properties, the historic architectural review commission shall apply the following alternative minimum requirements where the historic architectural review commission determines that adherence to full accessibility requirements would threaten or destroy the significance of a building or facility under review: 
(1)  One accessible route must be provided from a site access point to an accessible entrance. Using a ramp with a 1:6 slope is permissible for a run of up to two feet. 
(2)  One accessible entrance must be provided. If it is not possible to make the public entrance accessible, an alternative, unlocked entrance is acceptable. Directional signage at the primary entrance and a notification system at the accessible entrance must be provided. 
(3)  If toilets are provided, only one must be accessible, and it will be unisex. 
(4)  Public spaces on the level of the accessible entrance must be accessible, and other public levels should be accessible whenever practical. 
(5)  Displays and written information should be located where they can be seen by a seated person. Horizontal signage should be no higher than 44 inches above the floor. 
(6)  In limited instances, if it is determined in consultation with the state historical preservation officer that compliance with the alternative minimum requirements would also threaten or destroy the significance of a historic building, alternative methods of access may be used. The alternative methods of accessibility that may be used to make a building's program and activities accessible include the following: 
a.  Using audiovisual materials and devices to show inaccessible areas of a historic property. 
b.  Assigning persons to guide individuals with disabilities into or through inaccessible areas of a historic property. 
c.  Adopting other innovative methods. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(M)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 102-285. - Same-Procedures for review of handicapped accessibility requirements. 
    In evaluating plans for meeting handicapped accessibility standards and in applying the criteria in section 102-284, the historic architectural review commission shall: 
(1)  Review the historical significance of a property and identify character-defining features. 
(2)  Assess the property's existing and required level of accessibility. 
(3)  Comply with barrier-free access requirements in such a manner that character-defining spaces, features, and finishes are preserved. 
(4)  Work with local disability groups, access specialists, and historic preservation specialists to determine the most appropriate solution to access problems. 
(5)  Provide barrier-free access that promotes independence for the disabled person to the highest degree practicable, while preserving significant historic features. 
(6)  Design new or additional means of access that are compatible with the historic property and its setting. 
(7)  If providing barrier-free access threatens the integrity of a historic property, consult the state historic preservation officer about using the alternative minimum requirements. 
(8)  Avoid the following: 
a.  Undertaking code-required alterations before identifying those spaces, features or finishes which are character-defining and must therefore be preserved. 
b.  Altering, damaging, or destroying character-defining spaces, features, and finishes while making modifications to a building or site to comply with barrier-free access. 
c.  Making changes to buildings without first seeking expert advice from access specialists and historic preservationists to determine solutions. 
d.  Installing permanent ramps that damage or diminish character-defining spaces. 
e.  Providing access modifications that do not provide a reasonable balance between independent, safe access and preservation of historic features. 
f.  Designing new or additional means of access without considering the impact on the historic property and its setting. 
g.  Providing barrier-free access which destroys significant features of a historic property without first consulting the state historic preservation officer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.3(M)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 106 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; planning and development, ch. 54; resources protection, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR DISPLAYS AND DISTRIBUTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Outdoor display of goods, § 102-282. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 106-26-106-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR DISPLAYS 

Sec. 106-51. - Prohibited. 
    The outdoor display of merchandise in the historic zoning districts of the city is prohibited unless an exception is granted by the planning board, as provided in section 106-52. Merchandise shall mean any good or product or sample or likeness of any good or product offered for sale by a business. Outdoor display shall mean the placement of merchandise on the exterior of a business structure, including a wall, roof, overhang, entranceway or window, or within a required setback area. For a cart, booth or arcade, outdoor display shall mean the placement of merchandise, either freestanding or by draping it, on the exterior or beyond the vertical plane of the cart, booth or arcade. In no event shall outdoor display be permitted in the public right-of-way. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to automotive, bicycle and moped rentals and sales and to plant sales and shall not apply to art festivals or other special events duly permitted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(C)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 16, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 106-52. - Exceptions. 
    Exceptions to section 106-51 may be granted by the planning board as follows: 
(1)  Factors favoring the exception are as follows: 
a.  The location of the proposed exception, while outdoors, is an interior courtyard of a building or buildings, or is a space specifically designed and permitted for use by outdoor merchants. 
b.  The exception (for either the type of merchandise or the type of display) is compatible or in visual harmony with the character of the neighborhood. 
c.  The exception's visual incongruity with the historic character of the neighborhood is reduced by substantial setback from public places and rights-of-way. 
(2)  Factors disfavoring the exception are as follows: 
a.  Architecture contributing to the historical fabric or visual character of the neighborhood is obscured by the exception. 
b.  The location of the proposed exception abuts, with minimal setback, a street of the historic district, thus the exception is visible from heavily used public places and rights-of-way. 
c.  The exception presents a hazard to public safety. 
(3)  Exceptions to section 106-51 granted by the planning board shall be for a term of no more than 60 consecutive months and may be granted subject to terms and conditions specified by the board in order to protect the architectural heritage and visual character of the district. Applications for exceptions shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 to cover the costs to the city of processing the application and investigating the applicant. 
(4)  Exceptions to section 106-51 may be revoked by the planning board after notice and hearing on grounds that: 
a.  The applicant has failed to comply with terms and conditions specified pursuant to the grant of an exception in this section; 
b.  The exception was granted pursuant to mistaken or misleading information; or 
c.  The exception is not compatible, or in visual harmony, with development of the neighborhood occurring subsequent to grant of the exception. 
(5)  The city manager or the planning board, upon written petition by any city resident, may cause issuance of a notice of hearing on revocation of an exception, which notice shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(C)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-09, § 1, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 08-04, § 17, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 106-53. - Mobile vendors excepted. 
    Sections 106-51 through 106-53 shall have no application to businesses duly licensed and operating pursuant to article VI of chapter 18 pertaining to mobile vendors or to persons granted exemptions pursuant to section 18-319(b). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-54. - Enforcement. 
    Sections 106-51 through 106-53 shall be enforced by the code enforcement provisions of article VI of chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-55. - Advertising causing obstruction of streets or sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any advertising or publicity business or activities pertaining thereto in a manner so as to produce an assemblage of spectators and listeners and thereby obstruct or cause the obstruction of any city street or sidewalk. This restriction shall not apply to parades or advertising under the authority of a duly issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-56. - Use of streets and sidewalks for advertising or display purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any portion of a street or sidewalk in the city for advertising or display purposes except as may otherwise be provided for by this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 106-57-106-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 106-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law; any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statutes or regulations; and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public and means and includes any other copyrighted material. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-87. - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
    This division shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-88. - Inhabited private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. However, for inhabited private premises that are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-89. - Prohibited where properly posted. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-90. - Depositing on uninhabited, vacant premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-91. - Placing on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
Sec. 106-92. - Restricted in public places. 
    Subject to article VIII of chapter 18, it shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place, except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the handbill. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.5(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
Secs. 106-93-106-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-121. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of performance standards for nuisance abatement is to: 
(1)  Control the impacts of any use, including commercial and industrial uses; 
(2)  Permit potential nuisances to be measured factually and objectively; 
(3)  Ensure that all industries will institute methods to protect the city from hazards and nuisances which can be prevented; and 
(4)  Protect industries from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based upon the nuisance production by any particular type of industry. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-122. - Application of standards. 
    As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives: 
(1)  Any use established or changed and any buildings, structures or land developed, constructed or used for any permitted, conditional, or other permissible principal or accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards set forth in this chapter and chapter 94; chapter 102; articles I, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX of chapter 108; chapter 110; and chapter 114 for the district involved. 
(2)  If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged, structurally altered or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, structurally altered or reconstructed building or other structure or portion thereof. 
(3)  Within 24 months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, all existing uses, buildings or other structures shall comply with the performance standards set forth for the district involved. However, if the city commission finds that, because of the nature of the corrective action required, the 24-month period is inadequate, it may, as a special exception, grant not more than one extension for a period of not more than 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.2), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 106-123-106-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 106-151. - Purpose of procedures. 
    The purpose of the procedures for enforcing nuisance abatement standards is to ensure that an objective determination is made when there may be uncertainty as to whether an individual land use or group of land uses complies with the performance standards of this chapter and chapter 94; chapter 102; articles I, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX of chapter 108; chapter 110; and chapter 114 and to formulate practical ways for the alleviation of such noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-152. - Procedures. 
    Alleged violations of the performance standards, as provided in this division, shall be investigated by the administrative official and/or other designated staff pursuant to article IV of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-153. - Required data. 
(a)  Following the initiation of an investigation as provided in this division, the administrative official and/or other designated staff may require the owner or operator of any proposed use to submit such data and evidence as is needed to make any objective determination. The evidence may include but is not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development. 
(2)  A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes and products. 
(3)  Measurements of the amount and rate of emission of such dangerous or objectionable elements. 
(4)  Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to be used in restricting the possible emission of any of the dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in this division. 
(b)  Failure to submit data required by the city shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of an occupancy permit, whichever is appropriate, to meet the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-154. - Evaluation of proposed land uses. 
    Subsequent to a review of proposed land uses or development plans, the city administrative official and/or other designated staff may determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed use may violate the performance standards cited in this chapter and chapter 94; chapter 102; articles I, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX of chapter 108; chapter 110; and chapter 114. In such cases where substantial uncertainty exists as to whether a proposed new land use will comply with the performance standards, the administrative official may, at the applicant's expense, request a statement of a professional engineer registered in the state which certifies that the planned land is designed to satisfy the performance standards. Findings of the engineer shall be presented to the planning board for review and evaluation concurrent with site plan review. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(B)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-155. - Evaluation of existing development. 
    When the city ascertains a probable noncompliance by an existing land use, the administrative official, with the consent of the administrative official and/or other designated staff, shall investigate as follows: 
(1)  Where determination can be made by the city staff, using equipment normally available to the city or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be made before notice of violation is issued. 
(2)  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes an investigation utilizing city personnel and/or equipment unreasonable, the city commission may retain an expert consultant to determine if a land use activity is in compliance with performance standards. Such consultant shall be fully qualified to give the required information and shall be a person mutually agreeable to the city and to the owner or operator of the use in question. If there is inability to select a mutually agreeable consultant, the city and the owner or operator may select independent consultants, in which event each party shall bear its own costs irrespective of the final determination of compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards in question. If one consultant is mutually agreed upon, the cost of the consultant's services shall be borne by the owner or operator of the use, if the use is found to be in violation of the performance standards. However, if the use is found by the final authority to be in compliance with the regulations, the city shall bear the cost of the consultant's services. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(B)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 106-156. - Action by city. 
    Within 30 days following the receipt of the required evidence as provided in this division, the administrative official and/or other designated staff shall make a determination as to compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards. If noncompliance occurs, the administrative official may require modifications or alterations in the existing construction of the operational procedures to ensure that compliance with the performance standards will be maintained. The operator shall be given a reasonable length of time to effect any changes prescribed by the administrative official for the purpose of securing compliance with the performance standards. If, after the conclusion of the time granted for compliance with the performance standards, the administrative official and/or other designated staff finds the violation is still in existence, the matter shall be referred for code enforcement procedures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-17.3(B)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 107 - PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and development, ch. 54; planning and development, ch. 108. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all planned redevelopment and development, except the Truman Annex and Fuel Tank Island properties as provided in section 107-9. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The PRD planned redevelopment and development district is established to implement planned redevelopment and development (PRD) provisions of the city comprehensive plan, both within Old Town (HPRD) and outside Old Town (PRD). Wherever the PRD is mentioned in this article, the HPRD district is also intended to be stipulated unless specifically stated to the contrary. The PRD district provides a voluntary management framework for coordinating objectives of the development community which may be inconsistent with conventional zoning district provisions. The PRD district incorporates a more flexible management structure for negotiating private sector development objectives which reinforce and further public sector goals, objectives and policies for the city's development and resource conservation. 
(b)  The PRD district is intended to encourage the accomplishment of a more complete living environment through the application of enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning and shelter design. This alternative permits the introduction of a variety of architectural solutions; provides for historic preservation, as well as the preservation of natural futures in scenic areas; reduces land consumption by roads; separates vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems; fosters original approaches to meaningful integration of open space and recreation areas within the development; establishes neighborhood identity and focus; and ideally provides for the compatible coexistence of man with his environment. 
(c)  Regulations for the planned redevelopment and development are intended to accomplish the purposes of zoning, subdivision regulations and other applicable city and county regulations to the same degree as when such city and county regulations are intended to control development on a lot-by-lot basis rather than on a unified development approach. In view of the substantial public advantages of planned redevelopment and development, it is the intent of this chapter to promote and encourage development in this form. The uses and structures proposed are to be planned and developed as unified and coordinated developments. 
(d)  The PRD district purpose is to: 
(1)  Achieve high standards in the quality of urban design amenities within residential and nonresidential developments; 
(2)  Promote efficient use of land by facilitating more cost effective and environmentally sensitive site planning; 
(3)  Stimulate opportunities for varied housing types; 
(4)  Conserve and protect the natural environment including wetlands, natural habitat, drainage corridors, floodprone lands, and other environmentally sensitive lands; and 
(5)  Provide for more useable and suitably located open space and recreation facilities and other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures. 
(e)  Although the PRD provides opportunities for unique concepts, a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) district shall comply with the community character as promoted by the city commission and shall be designed to limit impacts of the development internally within the confines of the PRD through compliance with the regulations established in the comprehensive plan and as stipulated in the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-3. - Unified control. 
    All properties within a proposed planned redevelopment and development (PRD) district shall be under unified ownership or control as evidenced by legal instruments submitted by the applicant. These legal instruments shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-4. - Minimum size. 
    A planned redevelopment and development (PRD) district shall have a minimum of 50 contiguous acres under unified control as defined in section 107-3. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-5. - Conformance with comprehensive plan and zoning. 
    Each planned redevelopment and development (PRD) submitted shall conform to all provisions of the comprehensive plan and all applicable sections of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-6. - Compliance with subdivision regulations. 
    All applications for planned redevelopment and development shall be reviewed pursuant to this chapter. In addition, PRD applications shall comply with chapter 118 pertaining to subdivisions and specifically the major subdivision procedures. Planned redevelopment and development plans submitted under this chapter must be in a form which will satisfy the requirements of chapter 118 for preliminary and final plats. Review time for plats shall conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 118. 
Sec. 107-7. - Ownership of open space and landscaped areas. 
(a)  All open space required by article II of chapter 108, chapter 118 and this chapter shall be either private, reserved for common use, or dedicated to the public. All required open space shall be reserved as such through appropriate deed restrictions which cannot be removed without the consent of the city commission. 
(b)  Private open space shall be owned in fee simple title as part of a lot or parcel in private ownership. The use of private open space shall be reserved and limited through appropriate deed restrictions. The deed restriction shall require the property owner to maintain the private open space in perpetuity. 
(c)  All open space reserved for common use shall ultimately be owned in fee simple by an organization of property owners within the PRD plat. The organization shall be established by the applicant, and all organizational documents, including but not limited to articles of incorporation, bylaws and restrictive deed covenants, shall be submitted to the city attorney for approval prior to recording in the public records of the county and filing with the secretary of state. The organization shall be responsible for the maintenance of all common open spaces. The organization shall be empowered to assess reasonable maintenance fees upon the owners of real property within the PRD plat for the maintenance of the common open space. 
(1)  All open space reserved for common use shall be conveyed to the organization prior to or at the time when two-thirds of all the dwelling units of the PRD plat under development have been sold. Conveyance shall be by a general warranty deed in fee simple absolute, acceptable to the city attorney. The deed shall include a deed restriction providing for the perpetual maintenance of the common open space by the organization. 
(2)  The organization may offer to convey the common open space to the city at no cost. If the city accepts the offer, the conveyance shall be of general warranty deed in fee simple absolute, acceptable to the city attorney. Upon acceptance, the open space shall be available for use by the general public. The city shall not accept a conveyance of common open space unless arrangements acceptable to it are made for the continued maintenance of the open space, which arrangements may include maintenance by the city. 
(3)  Open space dedicated to the public shall be open to the general public. 
(4)  All landscaped yards shall be owned in fee simple as part of an approved lot or parcel, and the landscaped yards shall be reserved and limited through appropriate deed restriction. The deed restrictions shall require the property owner to maintain the landscaping in perpetuity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-8. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    For noncompliance with this chapter, the city commission shall have the authority to suspend construction activity and revoke any building permit issued under this chapter and to take all actions necessary to halt construction until such time as there is compliance with this chapter. If legal action is necessary and costs are incurred by the city in forcing compliance, these expenses shall be borne by the developer or parties violating the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-9. - Truman Annex and Fuel Tank Island. 
    The planned redevelopment and development (PRD) ordinance existing at the time of the Truman Annex development agreement and the development agreement approving Truman Annex and Fuel Tank Island development executed by Resolution No. 86-267, dated December 8, 1986, and as amended shall govern proposed changes, additions and continuing maintenance activities associated with the Truman Annex and Fuel Tank Island as defined in the cited development agreement which is filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.8), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-10-107-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 107-26. - Urban design amenities and improvements generally. 
    For the purposes stated in section 107-169, development plans for the PRD planned redevelopment and development district shall incorporate the urban design amenities and improvements included in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-27. - Drainage system approved by city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall consider the relative advantages and disadvantages of curb and gutters, French drains, retention/detention, swales and other similar drainage system components in the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district. The city engineer shall approve the system or combination of systems most appropriate for surface water management. The following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  Natural environmental conditions of the site; 
(2)  Existing and proposed future hydrological conditions of the site, including existing and proposed site elevations, amounts and rates of water runoff, water quality, and other related factors; 
(3)  Available drainage improvements on and off site; 
(4)  Intensity of the proposed use, potential barriers to movement, and impacts of the drainage system alternatives on pedestrian and traffic circulation, aesthetics of the project and impacts on the surrounding area; and 
(5)  Potential contaminants or pollutants generated by land uses, motor vehicles, or other sources of pollutants and contaminants. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-28. - Sidewalks and improvements to enhance pedestrian movement. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, sidewalks shall be planned and installed. The sidewalks shall link vehicle use areas including parking areas with all principal buildings. The pedestrian circulation system shall include marked pedestrian crossings in order to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
Sec. 107-29. - Traffic circulation improvements. 
    Traffic circulation improvements, including all needed intersection improvements along internal and perimeter streets required to service projected traffic volumes, including turning lanes, acceleration, deceleration and turning lanes, as well as traffic control devices and signage, shall be included in the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district. All such improvements shall conform to city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-30. - Lighting and signage. 
    Street lighting and signage which is harmonious with the urban design theme of the project, promotes aesthetics and reinforces good principles and practices of streetscape design shall be included in the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district. Street lighting shall be installed on all internal and perimeter streets, within parking areas, and along pedestrian walkways. Signage shall incorporate a unified design. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-31. - Open space and landscape furniture. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, open space and landscape furniture, including open plazas, walkways, possible use of functional and aesthetic paving material, street benches, waste disposal receptacles, and sidewalk plantings which promote the project's urban design and aesthetics shall be incorporated. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-32. - Other subdivision improvements. 
    All other subdivision improvements and project amenities in the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district shall be consistent with a unified urban design. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-33. - Loading docks. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, loading docks are prohibited on interior streets. They shall be located at the rear of all principal structures. Parking for trucks and all other company-owned or company-controlled vehicles shall be located at the rear of all principal structures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-34. - Shipping and receiving. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, no shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 100 feet of any residentially zoned property or within 40 feet of any property line adjacent to any zoning district other than residential. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-35. - Storage areas. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, all storage areas shall be fully enclosed and located at the rear of all structures. No motor vehicle which is inoperative shall be stored or used for storage on any lot or parcel of land in any PRD unless it is within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(9)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-36. - Shaded light. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, shaded light sources shall be used to illuminate signs, facades, buildings, parking and loading areas and shall be so arranged as to eliminate glare from roadways and streets and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the district. Shaded light sources are lighting elements shielded with opaque shade to direct the light. No neon lights, intermittent, or flashing lights or such lighted signs shall be allowed in the PRD district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(10)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-37. - Utility lines. 
    In the development plans for urban design amenities and improvements in the PRD planned redevelopment and development district, all utility lines shall be placed underground. All telephone lines shall be placed underground. Service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual installations shall be placed underground. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed underground or on concrete poles, provided that the poles are within the street right-of-way and have provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and shall be contained in pad mounts, enclosures, or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the construction and design shall be compatible with the primary building design. Landscaping with shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen pad-mounted transformers. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)(11)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-38-107-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 107-66. - General procedures for submittal and approval. 
    Petitions for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning shall be submitted and processed as zoning amendments generally and in accordance with the procedures in sections 107-67 through 107-74. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-67. - Preapplication conference. 
    Prior to submitting a formal application for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning, the petitioner is required to confer with the city and other county, state or regional agencies having jurisdiction or permitting responsibilities impacting the proposed development. The petitioner shall also submit a tentative land use sketch plan for review at the conference and to obtain information on any projected plans, programs or other matters that may affect the proposed planned community. This preapplication conference should address but not be limited to such matters as the following: 
(1)  The proposed relationship between the anticipated project and surrounding uses, and the effect of the proposed development on the city comprehensive plan goals, objectives, and policies as well as other stated planning and development objectives of the city. Prior to receiving any PRD zoning district classification, the applicant must apply for and receive a planned redevelopment and development or historic PRD comprehensive plan future land use map designation for the subject property. 
(2)  The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, utilities, and other public facilities to serve the development. The applicant shall be required to submit narrative and graphic information which addresses concurrency management issues pursuant to chapter 94. 
(3)  The nature, design, and appropriateness of the proposed land use arrangement for the size and configuration of property involved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-68. - Initial filing. 
    Before a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be approved, an application for such approval shall be filed together with the requisite fee at the city planning office. Such applications shall contain the following materials or data in sufficient quantities for necessary referrals and records: 
(1)  Evidence that the subject property has been designated as "PRD" on the city comprehensive future land use map. The applicant may seek such comprehensive plan future land use map amendment concurrently with a request for a PRD zoning amendment. However, no action shall be binding on the PRD zoning petition until the necessary amendment to the comprehensive plan future land use map is duly approved by the city and the state. The application requirements for a PRD amendment to the comprehensive plan future land use map shall include submission of a conceptual development plan. The requirements defining the form and content of a conceptual development plan are cited in section 107-75. 
(2)  The evidence of unified control of the proposed planned development and the associated agreements required in this article. 
(3)  A proposed conceptual development plan as prescribed in section 107-75. 
(4)  Such other materials as the petitioner may feel is applicable to and in support of the PRD zoning. 
(5)  Any additional information as may be required by the planning board or the city commission at the time of any public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-69. - Fee for zoning review. 
    The minimum fee for filing the application required in section 107-68 shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-70. - Ownership requirements for application. 
(a)  A planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning application shall be filed in the name of the record owner of the property included in the PRD. However, the application may be filed by an applicant with an equitable interest in the property or by an attorney or agent for the owner. All applications shall include a verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal equitable and/or beneficial ownership interest in the property upon which the application for site plan approval is sought, except corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the corporation and principal executive officers will be sufficient. 
(b)  All land included for the purpose of development within a PRD district shall be owned or under the control of the petitioner for such zoning designation, whether that petitioner be an individual, partnership or corporation, or a group of individuals, partnerships or corporations. The petitioner shall present firm evidence of the unified control of the entire area within the proposed planned redevelopment and development and shall stipulate that, if he proceeds with the proposed development, he: 
(1)  Will do so in accord with the officially approved final PRD plan for the development, and such other conditions or modifications as may be attached to the special exceptions. 
(2)  Shall provide, at the time of final development review, agreements, covenants, contracts, deed restrictions, or sureties acceptable to the city commission for completion of the undertaking in accordance with the adopted final PRD plan, as well as for the continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions, and facilities as are not to be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
(3)  Will bind his development successors in title to any commitments made under subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-71. - Review procedures-Generally. 
    Each applicant for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning shall submit a conceptual development plan for review by the city commission. The review process shall be carried out pursuant to this article. If the conceptual development plan and PRD zoning are approved, the applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan for review by city officials. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-72. - Same-Staff review. 
    Ten copies of the conceptual development plan required in this division shall be submitted to the city planning office and shall be reviewed by the city staff, including such other professional consultants as the city commission deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(5)(a)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-73. - Same-Criteria for review. 
    The city staff, after review of the conceptual development plan for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning, shall present its findings in a written report to the planning board. Staff review shall be accomplished expeditiously in order to prevent undue delay or inconvenience, but shall not be limited to the timeframe in chapter 118 for review of plats. The staff review shall address the following criteria: 
(1)  Compliance with city comprehensive plan. Whether PRD zoning and conceptual development plan is consistent with the PRD land use designation denoted on the future land use map and shall be consistent with the policies contained therein. 
(2)  Conformance with applicable ordinances. Whether the PRD zoning and conceptual development plan complies with the requirements of all applicable city regulations and ordinances. 
(3)  Land use compatibility. Whether the proposal would result in any incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved. 
(4)  Adequate public facilities. Whether the proposal would result in demands on public facilities and services, exceeding the capacity of such facilities and services, existing or programmed, including transportation, utilities, drainage, recreation, education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities and services. 
(5)  Natural environment. Whether the proposal would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
(6)  Economic effects. Whether the proposal would adversely affect the property values in the area or the general welfare. 
(7)  Orderly development. Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and logical development pattern, specifically identifying any negative effects on such pattern. 
(8)  Public interest; enabling act. Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, and is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this subpart B and its enabling legislation. 
(9)  Other matters. Any other matters which the city may deem appropriate or that would be of particular relevance to the planning board and/or the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(5)(b)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-74. - Same-Review by planning board and city commission. 
(a)  Generally. The procedures of the planning board and the city commission in amending the land development regulations for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning, including the official zoning map and/or the comprehensive plan future land use map, are stipulated in subdivision II of division 2 of article VI of chapter 90, in division 3 of article VI of chapter 90 and in division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
(b)  Considerations by planning board. The planning board shall consider all aspects of the conceptual development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of this article and the comprehensive plan. The planning board shall also consider the recommendations and comments of the staff. The planning board shall evaluate the conceptual development plan as defined in section 107-75. The planning board shall recommend to the city commission based on whether the conceptual development plan is consistent with comprehensive plan and whether the conceptual development plan generally complies with development plan review considerations and performance criteria of article II of chapter 108. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the development is consistent with the comprehensive plan. Furthermore, through the conceptual development plan the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development can and shall comply with all sections of the land development regulations. The applicant/developer is not required to satisfy all regulations governing site plan approval at this stage of the review process. However, the applicant/developer must demonstrate through the conceptual development plan that the proposed development can reasonably be anticipated to satisfy site plan review requirements, including all performance criteria within the timeframes mutually agreed upon. 
(c)  Action by planning board. The planning board shall recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or shall deny approval of the conceptual development plan. Such decisions shall be endorsed on the face of each copy of the conceptual development plan by the chairperson of the planning board. If the planning board recommends approval with or without modifications, such recommendation and reasons for the planning board shall be reduced to writing and forwarded to the city commission. If the planning board denies approval, the city commission will not review the conceptual development plan unless the decision of the planning board is appealed as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Effect of planning board denial. If the planning board denies approval of the conceptual development plan, the plan shall not be considered by the city commission unless the applicant shall appeal the decision of the planning board to the city commission. Such notice of appeal must be filed in writing by the applicant to the city clerk within ten days following action by the planning board. If the decision is not appealed, no new PRD zoning application may be filed by the applicant until the passage of six months from the date of the planning board's action. 
(e)  Consideration by city commission. The city commission shall consider the recommendations and comments of the planning board and staff. The city commission may make such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to ensure conformity with the intent and requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Action by city commission. The city commission shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the conceptual development plan or may refer the plan to the planning board for further consideration. In making its decision, the city commission shall consider all aspects of the conceptual development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(g)  Conditions. In approving a conceptual development plan, the city commission may establish such conditions and may require such modifications as shall ensure compliance with the PRD district standards and regulations, and, further, the city commission may waive or modify subdivision, site plan or other zoning requirements otherwise applicable to the development when such waiver or conflict is not in conflict with the city's comprehensive plan or the intent and purpose of the land development regulations. 
(h)  Application for rezoning. If a conceptual development plan shall be disapproved by the city commission, the application for rezoning shall thereby be deemed to be denied. If the city commission shall approve or approve with modifications or conditions a conceptual development plan, the city commission shall thereupon grant with conditions the rezoning application accompanying such plan. 
(i)  Requests for additional information. Prior to or in addition to approval of a conceptual development plan and upon a determination that additional information is necessary for proper review of a planned redevelopment and development project, the city commission may require the submission of additional information by the applicant. The review of such additional information shall follow the procedures applicable to the review of the conceptual development plan. 
(j)  Amendments of conceptual development plans. Once a conceptual development plan has been approved and there is cause for amendment of the plan or any portion thereof, such amendment shall be processed in a like manner as the original submission. However, there shall be no requirement to file an amended rezoning application unless the proposed amendment would so dictate. 
(k)  Prescribed time limit for development. Any city commission approval of a planned redevelopment and development application shall be subject to a prescribed time limit of not more than 18 months for the submission and approval of a preliminary development plan. If the developer cannot meet this requirement, the developer shall request a public hearing for purposes of demonstrating why the planned redevelopment and development project should not be terminated. If the developer does not appear before the city commission to preserve the PRD project or if the developer fails to demonstrate why an extension should be granted, the city commission may initiate rezoning of the property to an appropriate zoning classification, pursuant to the procedures outlined in the applicable sections of chapter 90. The prescribed time limit for the submission approval of a preliminary development plan may be extended by the city commission, for good cause, if the developer presents evidence within the 11/2-year period which demonstrates that the developer has progressed in good faith toward implementing the conceptual development plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(A)(5)(c)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 24, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 107-75. - Required form and content. 
    An official application for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) zoning shall be accompanied by a conceptual development plan which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map drawn to scale which clearly shows the site in relationship to its surroundings; if the project exceeds 100 acres in area, an aerial photograph made within the last two years at a scale of at least one inch equals 500 feet showing all property within 1,000 feet of the project boundaries is required. 
(2)  Property boundaries. A certified survey delineating the location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the development and of any contiguous lands, including those separated only by a street, canal, or similar feature, in which the developer or property owner presently has any legal interest. 
(3)  Existing conditions. The approximate location, nature, and extent of all existing easements, streets, buildings, land uses, historic sites, zoning, tree groupings, environmentally sensitive areas, wetlands, watercourses, and general U.S. coast and geodetic sheet topographic contours on the site; the location of areas within the V zone as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the city; the location of any property seaward of the coastal construction control line (CCCL); the names of the property owners of record and existing zoning and land uses for all property within 500 feet of the perimeter of the PRD; and the approximate location and width of all existing or platted streets, drainageways, utilities, exceptional land characteristics, and similar features contiguous to the site. 
(4)  Development plan. The development plan including the following: 
a.  Legal description. A legal description of the land comprising the PRD project. 
b.  Proof of ownership. Legal instruments acceptable to the city attorney which clearly indicate persons with a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the subject property. Where ownership resides with a publicly held corporation whose stock is traded on a nationally recognized stock exchange, the names and addresses of the corporation and all of its principal executive officers will be sufficient. The documentation shall also include an affirmation that no other persons have claims or interests, known to the applicant, developer, or owner, which might affect their right to develop the entire PRD project as proposed. 
c.  Land use. The total project acreage, approximate location of each land use and proposed intensity, acreage by each proposed land use, dwelling unit types, general types of nonresidential uses, open spaces, recreational facilities, and other proposed uses. The quantitative land use data shall be illustrated in a table which clearly depicts the total number of acres allocated to each active land use, conservation uses, waterbodies, recreation areas, and other similar allocation. The table shall also depict total acres. The percent of land area allocated to each category of land shall equal 100 percent. 
d.  Circulation. Circulation facilities plan showing approximate locations and types of all access points and major streets. 
e.  Conceptual drainage plan. A conceptual drainage plan approved by the city engineer. 
f.  Location and densities of proposed residential activities. General location and proposed densities for each dwelling unit type and approximate number of dwelling units by type. 
g.  Location and square footage of proposed nonresidential activities. Approximate location and square footage of each nonresidential land use by general type, e.g., offices, neighborhood commercial, industrial, etc., together with description of general characteristics of proposed building and/or facility improvements. 
(5)  Written material. Written material as follows: 
a.  Planning objectives. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PRD through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant. The statement shall include a proviso that provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations shall be satisfied. 
b.  Development schedule. A proposed development schedule indicating the approximate starting and completion dates for the entire project and any phases thereof, together with appropriate identification and conceptual description of such phases. 
c.  Environmental impact statement. A statement explaining the positive and negative environmental impacts of the proposed development on the following: 
1.  Environmentally fragile lands including any lands designated "conservation" on the official zoning map, as well as any other wetlands, native habitats, floodplain, and any other significant natural features; 
2.  Natural vegetation, including general tree removal estimates; 
3.  Impact of proposed grading plan and drainage system improvements; and 
4.  Other significant natural features of site. 
d.  Public facility impact statement. A statement identifying the estimated impact of the proposed development on public facilities, including the following: 
1.  Quantity of wastewater generated; 
2.  Quantity of potable water required; 
3.  Description of recreation facilities proposed; 
4.  Estimated number of school age children expected within the development; 
5.  Estimated property tax and/or sales tax revenue generated by the project by phase; and 
6.  Any other positive or negative significant public facility impact. 
e.  Additional information. Any other additional material and information as the city staff, planning board or city commission may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-76-107-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW 

Sec. 107-101. - Scope. 
    The granting of a rezoning to a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) and the approval of its accompanying conceptual development plan by the city commission shall constitute authority for the applicant to submit a preliminary development plan. The preliminary development plan shall be filed, processed and reviewed pursuant to this division. The preliminary PRD plan shall include a PRD site plan and a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-102. - Filing preliminary development plan. 
    No preliminary development plan for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) rezoning shall be filed unless it has been prepared on the basis of a duly approved conceptual development plan. The preliminary development plan shall be submitted within the requisite time limit, as established at conceptual development plan approval or as may be extended by city commission action. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-103. - Fee for preliminary development plan review. 
    The minimum fee for filing the application for the preliminary development plan for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-104. - Ownership requirements for application. 
    The ownership requirements for filing a preliminary development plan pursuant to this division shall be the same as for filing the conceptual development plan as set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-105. - Review procedures for preliminary development plan. 
(a)  Generally. Each applicant for a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall submit a preliminary development plan for review by city officials. The review process shall be carried out pursuant to this chapter. Public notice of planning board and city commission meetings shall be provided as specified in division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. If the preliminary development plan is approved, the applicant shall submit a final plat for review by city officials. 
(b)  Staff review. Ten copies of the preliminary development plan, including a preliminary plat thereof, shall be submitted to the city planning office and shall be reviewed by the city's staff, including such other professional consultants as the city commission deems appropriate. 
(c)  Criteria for review. The city staff shall present its findings in written report to the planning board. Staff review shall be accomplished expeditiously in order to prevent undue delay or inconvenience, but shall not be limited to the time frame in chapter 118 for review of plats. The staff review shall address the following criteria: 
(1)  Compliance with subdivision regulations. The preliminary development plan shall comply with the preliminary plat requirements of chapter 118. 
(2)  Compliance with zoning regulations. The preliminary development plan shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements, including development plan review procedures and performance criteria of chapter 94; chapters 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114. 
(d)  Review by planning board and city commission. The planning board shall hold a meeting to review the preliminary development plan. If approved by the planning board, the city commission shall also review the plan and approve such plan prior to the submission of any final development plan. 
(1)  Considerations by planning board. The planning board shall consider all aspects of the preliminary development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. The planning board shall also consider the recommendations and comments of the staff. The planning board shall recommend to the city commission whether the development plan and preliminary plat comply with the conceptual development plan, the comprehensive plan, and the land development regulations, especially the procedures, standards, and criteria for development plan review in article II of chapter 108, pertaining to development plan review procedures, as well as performance criteria of chapter 94; chapter 102, chapter 106, articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; chapter 110 and chapter 114. The burden of proof shall reside with the applicant/developer to demonstrate compliance. 
(2)  Action by planning board. The planning board shall recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval. Such recommendation shall be endorsed on the face of each copy of the preliminary development plan by the chairperson of the planning board. The recommendation and reasons for the planning board action shall be reduced to writing and forwarded to the city commission. 
(3)  Effect of planning board denial. If the planning board denies the preliminary development plan, the plan shall not be considered by the city commission unless the applicant shall appeal the decision of the planning board to the city commission. Such notice of appeal must be filed in writing by the applicant to the city clerk within ten days following action by the planning board. If the decision is not appealed, no new PRD application may be filed by the applicant until the passage of 90 days from the date of the commission's action. 
(4)  Consideration by city commission. The city commission shall consider the recommendations and comments of the planning board and staff. The city commission may make such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to ensure conformity with the intent and requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Action by city commission. The city commission shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the preliminary development plan or may refer the plat to the planning board for further consideration. In making its decision, the city commission shall consider all aspects of the preliminary development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Conditions. In approving a preliminary development plan, the city commission may establish such conditions and may require such modifications as shall ensure compliance with the planned redevelopment and development standards and regulations, and, further, the city commission may waive or modify subdivision, site plan or other zoning requirements otherwise applicable to the development when such waiver or modification is not in conflict with the city's comprehensive plan or the intent and purpose of the land development regulations. 
(7)  Requests for additional information. Prior to or in addition to approval of a preliminary development plan and upon a determination that additional information is necessary for proper review of a planned redevelopment and development project, the city commission may require the submission of additional information by the applicant. The review of such additional information shall follow the procedures applicable to the review of the preliminary development plan. 
(8)  Amendments of preliminary development plans. Once a preliminary development plan has been approved and there is cause for amendment of the plan or any portion thereof, such amendment shall be processed in a like manner as the original submission. However, there shall be no requirement to file an amended rezoning application and conceptual development plan, unless the proposed amendment would so dictate. 
(9)  Prescribed time limit for development. The city commission shall approve a planned redevelopment and development application subject to a prescribed time limit of not more than 18 months for the submission and approval of a final PRD plan. If the developer cannot meet this requirement, the developer shall request a public hearing for purposes of demonstrating why the PRD zoning should not be terminated. If the developer does not appear before the city commission to preserve the planned redevelopment and development or if the developer fails to demonstrate why an extension should be granted, the city commission may initiate the rezoning of the property to an appropriate zoning classification pursuant to the procedures outlined in the applicable sections of chapter 90. The prescribed time limit for the submission and approval of the final PRD plan may be extended by the city commission for good cause if the developer presents evidence within the 18-month period which demonstrates that the developer has progressed in good faith toward implementing the preliminary development plan. 
(10)  Changes in preliminary development plan. If a final PRD plan is submitted which includes changes from the approved preliminary development plan, the city planning staff shall review the plan to determine the effect of the PRD and consistency with applicable ordinances. The planning board shall determine whether any changes are of such significance that the preliminary development plan should be resubmitted to the planning board. In any case of doubt, the revised preliminary development plan shall be resubmitted for approval by the planning board and the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(A)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 25, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 107-106. - Required form and content. 
    A preliminary development plan for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be submitted along with all of the material included in the approved conceptual development plan. No permit for construction of subdivision improvements shall be issued until the preliminary plat and site plan have been duly approved and a surety has been submitted and accepted by the city commission. The preliminary development plan shall include the conceptual plan together with the following: 
(1)  Written material. Written material as follows: 
a.  Construction and maintenance bond. In order to protect the city, the owner (developer) shall supply and maintain at his expense property construction and maintenance bonds for one year after completion on all roads, sewage lines and treatment plants and water lines to points of connection to the main supply, as well as 70 percent open land devoted to recreation within the area of the subject PRD district. 
b.  Development schedule. A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the PRD or stages of the PRD can be expected to begin and be completed. 
c.  Quantitative data. Quantitative data as follows: 
1.  Total number of dwelling units by type. 
2.  Total parcel size. 
3.  Proposed lot or building site coverage by buildings and structures. 
4.  Proposed lot or building coverage by impervious surfaces, other than buildings and structures. 
5.  Gross and net residential density. 
6.  Proposed amount of open space. 
7.  Proposed amount of public lands including all dedicated rights-of-way, easements, and other lands dedicated for public facilities and services. 
d.  Updated environmental impact statement and environmental survey. A statement explaining any additional information that may have been gathered or calculated since the approval of the conceptual development plan concerning any positive or negative environmental impacts that may be associated with the development. This statement shall include all environmental information that may be submitted as part of the development of regional impact (DRI) review process, as applicable. The updated environmental impact statement shall also include an environmental survey showing the existing and proposed site conditions, including contours at two-foot intervals; watercourses; areas within the coastal high hazard area; floodplains; wetlands; or environmentally sensitive wetlands; waters of the state, survey of wetlands, and/or transitional wetlands under the jurisdiction of the state or federal government; native habitats; other unique natural features; areas of environmental concern; historic features; and trees and vegetative cover shown in a tree survey. The environmental survey shall identify trees on the site, drainage, and the various aesthetic characteristics of the subject site and of adjacent areas and shall identify those portions of the area deemed to be of critical environmental sensitivity. The planning board may grant a waiver to the tree survey requirement upon recommendation by the city planner or other person designated by the city commission. In such case, an aerial photograph denoting the tree canopy at a scale acceptable to the city shall be submitted in lieu of the tree survey. 
e.  Updated public facility impact statement, including a concurrency management plan. A statement identifying any additional data or information that may have gathered or calculated since the approval of the conceptual development plan, concerning impacts of the development on public facilities including strategy for meeting chapter 94 concurrency management system requirements for each of the following: 
1.  Method and design for accommodating anticipated wastewater to be generated by the development; 
2.  Planned recreation and open space improvements; 
3.  Method and design improvements required to supply anticipated potable water needs; 
4.  System design for stormwater management projected improvements; 
5.  Traffic generation and traffic assignments together with proposed improvements to accommodate projected trips while maintaining adopted level of service standards; 
6.  Planned methods for accommodating projected solid waste generation; 
7.  Estimated number of school age children expected within the development and plans for accommodating their educational needs; 
8.  Estimated property tax and/or sales tax revenue generated by the project by phase; and 
9.  Any other positive or negative public facility impact. 
The statement shall also include all public facilities impact information that may be submitted as part of a development of regional impact (DRI) review process, as may be applicable. 
f.  Development of regional impact information. If any planned redevelopment and development qualifies as a development of regional impact (DRI), as defined in F.S. ch. 380, such projects shall include all data submitted as part of the required application for development approval (ADA). If the applicant is within 80 percent of the state's established DRI threshold or if land ownership patterns in the vicinity of the site indicate DRI potential, the city shall require that the applicant obtain a binding letter from the state department of community affairs. In such case the city shall not grant a development order or site plan approval until the applicant has demonstrated through a binding letter that the project is not a DRI. 
g.  Archeological and historic resource information. The location and nature of archeological sites and historic buildings that are located within the proposed PRD, and the intended use of each shall be included graphically on the preliminary plat. Certification from the historic architectural review commission that all significant structures have been identified shall be included. 
h.  Additional information. Any other additional information or material, including a traffic impact analysis, which the city staff, planning board or city commission may reasonably require. 
(2)  Graphic element of development plan. The graphic element of the development plan shall include the following: 
a.  Plat and development plan. A preliminary plat, prepared by a state-registered engineer, and site plan shall be submitted. The preliminary plat shall be submitted in accordance with the subdivision regulations in chapter 118. The surface water management plan meeting criteria of article VIII of chapter 108, as well as other infrastructure components, including roadway improvements, water and wastewater facilities, and other scheduled infrastructure improvements shall be prepared by a state-registered engineer. The site plan shall include maps, data and written statements necessary to show at least the following: 
1.  Proposed name of the PRD, title of map, name of city, and description of section, township and range. 
2.  Names and addresses of record owners, the applicant, and the person preparing the preliminary development plan. 
3.  The locations and names of abutting subdivisions and the names of owners of record of adjacent acreage. 
4.  Date, north arrow and graphic scale acceptable to the city. 
5.  Legal description and survey of the proposed PRD boundaries made and certified by the state-registered land surveyor. 
6.  Proposed lot or building site lines with dimensions, setbacks, and landscaped yards. Location and floor area size of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements. Designation of all dwelling unit types and number of units. Net residential density calculations. Plans for nonresidential uses shall include the square footage allocated to each respective use. 
7.  Any desired changes from the underlying zoning regulations, and the boundaries of underlying zoning districts. 
8.  Location, name and dimensions of all existing and proposed dedicated public lands and the conditions of such dedication. 
9.  The width and location of any street or right-of-way shown upon the comprehensive plan within the PRD and the proposed width, location and grade of all streets, public or private, proposed on or off site by the applicant. Where private streets and roadways are proposed or where common areas are proposed, legal instruments running with the land shall be provided which ensure perpetual maintenance. Include projected trips, trip assignments to roadway network, existing and projected levels of service on impacted linkages, and proposed traffic improvements, including new facilities, additional lanes, signalization improvements, acceleration/deceleration lanes, and related system enhancements. The support material must comply with concurrency management provisions of chapter 94. 
10.  Location of closest available public water supply system and proposed preliminary design for water service improvements, including existing and proposed level of service, general location of facility improvements, and schematic drawings as required by the city engineer. The final construction drawing shall not be required prior to preliminary plan approval, but shall be required prior to commencement of the installation of such improvements. The support material must comply with concurrency management provisions of chapter 94. 
11.  Area in square feet of each lot or building site, to be indicated in a rectangle within each lot or building site. 
12.  Typical cross sections of proposed streets, sidewalks, canals and ditches and other proposed improvements. 
13.  Location of proposed wastewater collection system and proposed preliminary design of wastewater collection improvements, including proposed location of improvements, existing and proposed level of service, and schematic drawings as required by the city engineer. Final construction drawings shall not be required prior to preliminary development plan approval, but shall be required prior to commencing the installation of such facilities. The support material must comply with concurrency management provisions of chapter 94. 
14.  Location of proposed improvements for collecting and discharging surface drainage and the preliminary design of such facilities, including the existing and proposed level of service, and schematic drawings as required by the city engineer. Final construction drawings shall not be required prior to preliminary development plan approval, but shall be submitted prior to commencing the installation of such facilities. The drainage plans shall comply with all provisions of article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management as well as chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. 
15.  Location and preliminary design of proposed bridges or culverts which may be required, including the type of facility and general level of service as well as schematic drawings as required by the city engineer. Final construction drawings shall not be required prior to preliminary development plan approval, but shall be required prior to commencing the installation of such improvements. 
16.  Proposed locations and preliminary designs for sidewalks, curbs, storm drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, and flow facilities. 
17.  Location and width of proposed permanent utility easements. The easements shall provide satisfactory access to existing rights-of-way or other open space shown upon the tentative PRD plat. Permanent drainage easements shall also be shown. 
18.  Where the tentative PRD plat covers only a part of contiguous rear property owned by the applicant, a master phasing plan shall also be required unless the application certifies that the remaining real property shall be developed independently of the proposed PRD plat. 
19.  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PRD plat, including material and techniques used, such as landscape, fences and walls for screening and buffering. 
20.  Location of wetlands and/or environmentally sensitive areas located within the site. Discuss any endangered wildlife habitats or vegetative communities, wellfields, aquifer recharge areas, or wetlands which will be impacted by construction of stormwater runoff. 
b.  General appearance. Graphic presentation of the general features of proposed structures, excluding single-family detached dwellings, including the following (Note: Notwithstanding, all structures within the HPRD shall be required to comply with the historic architectural review commission guidelines, including the historic architectural review commission review procedures): 
1.  Floor plans and square footage of all multifamily and nonresidential buildings or structures. 
2.  Elevations, sections and/or perspectives as necessary to indicate the basic architectural intent, the height of buildings and structures, and the general window and door arrangements. 
c.  Dedication or reservations of land for public use. The location and size, in acres or square feet, of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public uses. The narrative shall demonstrate compliance with concurrency management requirements of chapter 94. 
d.  Vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation and parking. The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector, and local streets including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way, including major points of ingress and egress to the development. Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, shall be included where appropriate. The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation system, including its interrelationship with the vehicular circulation system indicating proposed treatments of points of conflict shall also be shown. 
e.  Open space and landscape plan. A general landscape and grading plan indicating the proposed modifications in the topography and ground cover together with a plan for design of open space systems and landscaping. The landscape plan shall comply with open space, landscape and tree preservation requirements of this chapter and other applicable sections of this subpart B, especially article VI of chapter 108 and article VI of chapter 110. 
f.  Information concerning adjacent lands. Information on adjacent areas sufficient to indicate the relations between the proposed development and the adjoining areas, including the following: 
1.  Land ownership within 500 feet of the exterior boundary of the property. Where lands in the vicinity include substantial acreage under unified control, the applicant may be required to submit land ownership data, including principal officers/owners of corporately owned property. 
2.  Existing land use and designation on the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
3.  Zoning classification. 
4.  Circulation system. 
5.  Density. 
6.  Public facilities. 
7.  Unique natural features. 
g.  Additional information. Any additional graphic information required by the planning board which is necessary to evaluate the character and impact of the proposed PRD. 
(3)  Development plan review standards. All of the site plan review procedures and development standards cited in the land development regulations, including performance criteria in chapter 94; chapter 102, chapter 106, articles I and III through IX of chapter 108, chapter 110 and chapter 114, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-107-107-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT REVIEW 

Sec. 107-136. - Scope. 
(a)  Approval of the site plan and preliminary plat of planned redevelopment and development (PRD) by the city commission shall constitute authority for the applicant to submit a final development plan which shall consist of a final site plan and a final plat. The final site plan shall include the approved preliminary site plan together with any approved changes made pursuant to article VII of chapter 108. The final plat shall be compliant with subdivision III of division 3 of article III of chapter 118 and shall contain all the required information listed in the table in section 118-136 containing required supplementary submission documents. The final development plan must be prepared in accordance with the approved preliminary development plan and shall not be considered approved by the city commission and shall not be recorded in the records of the county until it has been approved in a manner prescribed pursuant to subdivision III of division 3 of article III of chapter 118. 
(b)  A final plat may be prepared and submitted for the entire planned unit development at one time or for the approved development stages on an individual basis. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-137. - Review of final development plan. 
    The review procedures for the final development plan of the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be the same as the review procedures established for a final plan in subdivision III of division 3 of article III of chapter 118. If the final site plan includes any proposed changes, the final site plan shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures established for site plan review in article II of chapter 108. Public notice of planning board and city commission meetings shall be provided as specified in division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.4(A)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 26, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 107-138. - Substantial conformity with preliminary development plan required. 
(a)  The final development plan of the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be in substantial conformity with the approved preliminary development plan and plat. In achieving substantial conformity, no change authorized by this division may cause any of the following: 
(1)  A change in the use or character of the planned unit development; 
(2)  An increase in overall coverage of structures; 
(3)  An increase in the intensity of use, or the density; 
(4)  An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities; 
(5)  A reduction in approved open space; 
(6)  A reduction in required pavement widths; or 
(7)  A violation of a specific requirement or condition of the land development regulations. 
(b)  Changes, erasures, modifications, additions or revisions shall not be made to a final plat after city commission approval has been given, unless the final plat is resubmitted for approval, except as required by law for clarification. 
(c)  All changes in use, rearrangement of lots and blocks, changes in the provision of common open spaces, and other changes except those listed in subsection (b) of this section may be allowed at the discretion of the city commission. Such amendments may be made only if they are shown to be required by: 
(1)  Changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plat was approved; or 
(2)  Changes in adopted city policy. 
Any changes which are approved in the final plat or the site plan must be recorded as amendments in accordance with the procedure established for the recording of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.4(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-139. - Failure to comply with approved final development plan. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of the approved final development plan for a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) or any conditions imposed in its final approval, including time conditions, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Upon finding by the city commission that the developer has failed to comply with the conditions of any staging plans or prescribed time limits, the approval of the final development plan and site plan shall be automatically terminated. Prior to continuing with the planned unit development, the developer shall reapply to the city commission for approval to continue. The city commission may authorize the petitioner to continue under the terms of the final development plan and site plan approval or may require the developer to resubmit the application in conformance with any step outlined in the procedure for preliminary development plan or final plat approval. No subsequent plan or reapproval shall effect an increase in the overall project density, intensity or change in use as established in the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.4(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-140. - Occupancy and use of premises. 
    Prior to the use or occupancy of any portion of the planned unit development project, the developer must satisfy all the provisions of the approved final plat as stipulated in this chapter and shall obtain all necessary permits. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.4(A)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-141-107-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 107-166. - Perimeter transition setback. 
(a)  Where perimeter landscape regulations within this chapter and chapter 122 are found to be more restrictive than other sections within the land development regulations, this chapter shall be the controlling regulation. The perimeter boundary setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the right-of-way. Adjacent or abutting property shall include property separated from the PRD by a right-of-way or easement. The HPRD or PRD perimeter setback regulations may be modified by the city commission when the applicant demonstrates that the modification protects the stability of adjacent developments outside of the HPRD. Prior to rendering such decision, the city commission shall consider recommendations of staff and the planning board. The burden of proof for demonstrating a need for the modification shall reside with the applicant. 
(b)  Along a perimeter boundary of a PRD or HPRD district, a minimum building setback of 100 feet shall be required when the subject PRD development incorporates land uses or structure types which differ from the character of development immediately adjacent to the PRD perimeter boundary. 
(c)  The city commission may modify the 100-foot setback requirement if the PRD includes along the interior of the perimeter boundary: 
(1)  Lot sizes equal to or greater than minimum lot sizes permitted on abutting residential zoned lands; 
(2)  Structure types compatible and consistent with structure types permitted on adjacent lands; and/or 
(3)  The PRD incorporates a type A opaque screen and buffer as required in section 107-167 that clearly mitigates any potential adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-167. - Screening and bufferyard requirements. 
    Screening and bufferyard requirements shall comply with sections 108-347 through 108-352 pertaining to required screening of residential and nonresidential uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-168. - Signs. 
    Signs within a planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be permitted only in accordance with the sign regulations within this subpart B, including chapter 114. The applicant shall submit proper documentation of a unified plan for signage with established deed restrictions or covenants governing the type, height, number, size, design and location of all signs in the development. The intent of the plan is to minimize sign proliferation, maximize the architectural integrity, and provide an overall plan ensuring harmony in the color theme, and design of all signage. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-169. - Subdivision improvements and urban design amenities. 
    In addition to requirements of chapter 118 pertaining to subdivision, all urban design amenities such as signage, open space systems, pedestrian walkways, and street furniture in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall reflect accepted principles and practices of urban design, including streetscape amenities which promote a harmonious and aesthetic environment for pedestrians and other user groups within the proposed development. This requirement shall be enforced in order to implement the purpose and intent of the PRD. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-170. - Requirements continuing. 
(a)  The requirements of article III of chapter 106 pertaining to nuisance abatement shall be continuing and enforceable against any planned redevelopment and development (PRD) approved pursuant to this chapter. The requirements shall run with the land and shall be enforceable regardless of transition in ownership. 
(b)  The respective uses shall be allowed only after a finding that the use complies with the appropriate conditional use criteria and all other applicable sections of this subpart B. The city commission shall determine if such conditions and provisions are satisfied after first considering the recommendations of the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 107-171-107-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIZE AND DIMENSION 

Sec. 107-196. - Generally. 
(a)  Within all planned redevelopment and development districts, the location, size, dimensions, and design of yards, building setbacks, points of vehicular access, parking areas, building characteristics, and all other planned site improvements shall provide for the following: 
(1)  Safe and convenient internal vehicular circulation, including access and sufficient area for effective delivery of emergency services such as fire protection; 
(2)  Buildings with safe entry and exit from the front and the rear of respective buildings; and 
(3)  Convenient, well-landscaped, and designed pedestrian ways and open space systems. 
(b)  The size and dimension standards in sections 107-197 through 107-204 shall be applicable throughout the PRD district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-197. - Maximum density/intensity. 
(a)  The density and intensity of development within the HPRD and PRD districts shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the table in section 122-1151. The density and intensity expressed in the table in section 122-1151 is the maximum density/intensity which can be achieved. However, the maximum density/intensity is not guaranteed by right. 
(b)  Maximum gross residential densities shall be construed to represent the maximum allowable units which may be constructed on the gross land area, determined by dividing the maximum allowable units by the gross land area (i.e., dwelling units/gross land area). 
(c)  Gross land area shall be construed to represent all land under common ownership proposed for residential development. 
(d)  Density designations shall be restricted or reduced for the following circumstances: 
(1)  Waters of the state shall not be included as gross land area. 
(2)  Land area which encompasses wetlands, transitional wetlands, mangroves, upland hammocks, or other environmentally sensitive land areas designated on the future land use map as "conservation" shall be restricted to development densities established in the table in section 122-1151. No development shall be permitted within jurisdictional lands and waters of the state or federal government, except when agencies having jurisdiction determine that development rights exist. In the latter case section 122-1142 applies. 
(e)  In reviewing applications/site plans for development of particular building sites, the specific residential density approved by the city shall include the following considerations: 
(1)  Protect neighborhood cohesiveness and stability of residential characters; 
(2)  Ensure compatible transitions in land use density and intensity; 
(3)  Protect environmentally sensitive areas, particularly wetlands and floodplains; 
(4)  Minimize impacts of flood hazards to development; 
(5)  Require that all applicable land development regulations are satisfied, including but not limited to performance criteria of article II of chapter 108 pertaining to development plan review procedures; 
(6)  Ensure that the number of units proposed is suitable for the site and that the site plan incorporates design features which are consistent with the requirements of the land development regulations. 
(f)  The maximum intensity stipulated for nonresidential activities is stated in terms of floor area ratio (FAR). The city shall reserve the power to mandate changes in the site plan as well as mandate reductions in the density and/or intensity of development proposed by an applicant/developer if the city finds that the proposed site plan does not satisfy provisions of the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations. See the floor area ratio illustration in section 122-1142. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-198. - Open space ratio. 
    The minimum percentage of permeable green open space in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall be based on the type of land use proposed and shall comply with the minimum open space ratios stipulated in the table in section 122-1151 pertaining to size and dimension regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-199. - Impervious surface ratio. 
    The term "impervious surface" is defined in section 122-1143. The maximum impervious surface ratio allowed by land use type in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) is cited in the table in section 122-1151. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-200. - Frontage and accessibility. 
    Every land use permitted in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall have access to a paved street which meets standards for local city streets. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-201. - Lot size. 
    There is no minimum required lot size for residential and nonresidential land uses in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD), including mixed use structures. However, the development plan must demonstrate compliance with the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations, especially performance criteria cited in article II of chapter 108 pertaining to development plan review procedures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-202. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Minimum setbacks shall be stipulated for typical lots proposed in the conceptual development plan for the planned redevelopment and development (PRD). The preliminary development plan shall provide detailed information on all setbacks for each respective lot. There shall be no minimum setbacks aside from perimeter boundary setbacks. However, the city shall retain the authority to mandate minimum setbacks during development plan review based on specific site plan considerations and consistent with sound application of urban design principles and practices. 
(b)  Consideration shall be directed toward provision of usable open space, privacy, fenestration (i.e., roofline, placement and design of windows and doors), access to light and air, preservation of natural vegetation, landscaping, pedestrian and vehicular access, surface water management, pedestrian plazas, and other similar attributes of urban design which impact lot configuration, building layout and arrangement of open spaces. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-203. - Height. 
    The height of structures in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall not exceed 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 107-204. - Building configuration and open space. 
    The arrangement and orientation of structures, open space, landscaping, and pedestrian and vehicular circulation improvements in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) shall provide a functional and an aesthetically pleasing environment for pedestrian users. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-20.1(F)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 108 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; development agreements, § 90-676 et seq.; historic preservation, ch. 102; planned redevelopment and development district, ch 107; resources protection, ch. 110; signs, ch. 114; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122; mixed use planned redevelopment/development district, § 122-536 et seq.; historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD), § 122-986 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 108-1. - Land use and soil compatibility. 
(a)  Land use activities, including their densities and intensities, shall be compatible with soil types. Soil on sites proposed for development shall have properties capable of supporting the proposed development. 
(b)  If the future land use map or the official zoning map identifies a land use allowed within an incompatible soil type, a field study may be performed on the site by a professional hydrologist, registered engineer, soil scientist or other professional competent in delineating and evaluating actual soil types exhibited on the subject site. The city shall reserve the right to have such a field study verified by the local U.S. Soil Conservation Office or a comparable state agency and shall render a decision ensuring that the land use is compatible with the soil type. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.6), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-2-108-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-31. - Intent. 
    The intent of development plan review is to set forth uniform procedures, well-defined application processes and information requirements. The purpose is to ensure that: 
(1)  Development of individual sites within the city is consistent with all applicable development standards; 
(2)  Approval of such development will be based upon the provision and availability of adequate public facilities and services coincident with the impact of the development; and 
(3)  Development is compatible and coordinated with existing and anticipated development within the immediate area surrounding the site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 34 of Ord. No. 05-04, adopted Jan. 19, 2005, renumbered and revised § 108-32 as § 108-203. Former § 108-32 derived from Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 
Secs. 108-33-108-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE 

Sec. 108-61. - Established and membership. 
(a)  The development review committee (DRC) is established which shall be composed of representatives from city departments responsible for reviewing land development proposals. 
(b)  The purpose of the development review committee is to facilitate and coordinate technical comments by the city staff on development applications. 
(c)  The development review committee shall be comprised of the following personnel and/or designated staff: 
(1)  City planner; 
(2)  Recreation director; 
(3)  Fire chief; 
(4)  Engineering services director; 
(5)  City engineer; 
(6)  Police chief; 
(7)  Building official; 
(8)  Landscape coordinator; 
(9)  HARC planner; 
(10)  Utilities director; 
(11)  ADA/bicycle-pedestrian coordinator, and 
(12)  Any other staff designated by the city manager. 
(d)  In addition, the city manager may appoint additional members to serve on the development review committee. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.6(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-26, § 1, 11-6-2002) 
Sec. 108-62. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  The chairperson of the development review committee shall be the city planner. The development review committee may elect a vice-chairperson from among its members. The city planner shall appoint a secretary to the development review committee to keep a record of its findings and comments, which shall be a public record and shall be maintained in the office of the city planner. 
(b)  Meetings of the development review committee shall be open to the public and shall be held at the call of the chairperson and/or at such times as the development review committee shall determine. 
(c)  Members of the development review committee may meet or communicate with one another to resolve conflicting comments. The members may forward issues, questions and comments to each other or the entire committee. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.6(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-26, § 2, 11-6-2002) 
Sec. 108-63. - Powers and duties. 
    The development review committee shall have the responsibility to review applications for annexation, subdivision, development plans, conditional uses, requests for vacation of rights-of-way or easements, planned development projects, developments of regional impact and other applications referred to the committee by the city planner or other members. In reviewing such applications, members of the development review committee shall provide individual comments on the project and respond to comments by other members; provided however that the development review committee shall not provide a formal recommendation. The committee's secretary shall transmit comments by the development review committee to the appropriate reviewing authority, including but not limited to the city commission and the planning board. The powers and duties of the development review committee shall include other responsibilities and authority as specifically set forth in the article and in chapter 107 and chapter 118. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.6(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-26, § 3, 11-6-2002) 
Sec. 108-64. - General considerations. 
    The development review committee has the authority to consider the following in its comments: 
(1)  Whether an application and/or a plan is consistent with applicable goals, objectives, policies, standards and proposals in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Whether all public facilities and services necessary to serve the proposed use shall be available concurrent with the actual impact of the use in question. 
(3)  Whether the established level of service of public facilities necessary to serve the development or phase thereof shall be adversely impacted by the proposed use or activity. 
(4)  Whether the proposed development satisfies the development review criteria and other applicable requirements of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.6(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-26, § 4, 11-6-2002) 
Secs. 108-65-108-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICABILITY AND FILING PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-04, adopted Jan. 19, 2005, repealed and/or amended §§ 108-91-108-101 to read as herein set out. Formerly §§ 108-91-108-101 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No, 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 

Sec. 108-91. - Scope; major and minor developments. 
    The following types of development shall require minor and major development plan approval. 
A.  Within the Historic District: 
1.  Minor development plan required for: 
(a)  Permanent residential and transient residential development: addition or reconstruction of three or four units. 
(b)  Nonresidential floor area: addition or reconstruction of 500 to 2,499 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Commercial land use: addition of outdoor commercial activity consisting of restaurant seating, outdoor commercial storage, active recreation, outdoor sales area or similar activities of 500 to 2,499 square feet. 
2.  Major development plan required for: 
(a)  Permanent residential and transient residential development: addition or reconstruction of five or more units. 
(b)  Nonresidential floor area: addition or reconstruction of equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Commercial land use: addition of outdoor commercial activity consisting of restaurant seating, outdoor commercial storage, active recreation, outdoor sales area or similar activities equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
(d)  Any development located within tidal waters extending 600 feet seaward of the corporate city limits. 
(e)  A port facility expansion proposed in the Truman Waterfront Parcel. 
B.  Outside of the Historic District: 
1.  Minor development plan required for: 
(a)  Permanent residential and transient residential development: addition or reconstruction of five to ten more units. 
(b)  Nonresidential floor area: addition or reconstruction of 1,000 to 4,999 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Commercial land use: addition of outdoor commercial activity consisting of restaurant seating, outdoor commercial storage, active recreation, outdoor sales area or similar activities of 1,000 to 4,999 square feet. 
2.  Major development plan required for: 
(a)  Permanent residential and transient residential development: addition or reconstruction of eleven or more units. 
(b)  Nonresidential floor area: addition or reconstruction of equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Commercial land use: addition of outdoor commercial activity consisting of restaurant seating, outdoor commercial storage, active recreation, outdoor sales area or similar activities equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(d)  Any development located within tidal waters extending 600 feet seaward of the corporate city limits. 
C.  Modifications of development plan: 
1.  Administrative Modifications. The following and similar modifications that do not rise to the status of minor or major plan modifications may be approved by the city planner: 
(a)  Reduction of building size; 
(b)  Reduction of impervious area; 
(c)  Expansion of landscaping; or 
(d)  A revision to enhance storm water management, landscaping, handicapped accessibility, and/or utilities. 
2.  Minor Modifications. The following and similar modifications must be approved by the city planner, city engineer and planning board chairperson and reported to the planning board at a regularly scheduled meeting: 
(a)  Relocation of at least ten feet of pools, parking spaces, drives and driveways, or buildings from the location shown on the approved plan; 
(b)  Addition of parking spaces not to exceed 25 percent (including fractions thereof) of the total number of existing parking spaces or five spaces, whichever is the lesser amount, and no such additional parking shall consume the approved landscaped area; 
(c)  Attached or detached additions to buildings in the historic district that do not increase the floor area in excess of 500 square feet; 
(d)  Installation of utility system improvements including buildings not exceeding 200 square feet; or 
(e)  Any use, except single-family dwelling units and accessory structures thereto, or change in use resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface area on the entire site. 
3.  Major Modifications. Modifications exceeding those to be treated as administrative or minor will be treated in the same manner as the original approval. 
4.  Changes to specific conditions required by the original approval shall require approval by the administrative body that originally approved the development and shall be noticed in accordance with division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
D.  Administrative determination: 
1.  For development not fitting within the categories set forth herein, the city planner shall determine the appropriate review process after considering similarity, complexity of the development, impacts on the demand for city services, and the potential for adverse impact(s) upon neighboring areas. 
2.  In applying the criteria set forth herein, all phases of the total project or development shall be considered. In determining the appropriate level of review, the city planner may aggregate previous development completed within two years of a new application. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 22, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-92. - Preapplication. 
    An optional nonbinding preapplication conference is encouraged for development plan review. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to provide potential applicants an opportunity to discuss conceptual development and determine applicable public policy and regulatory procedures. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 23, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-93. - Filing, application and fee. 
    An application for development plan approval shall be filed with the city's planning department in a form prescribed by the city planner. The fee schedule for development plan review shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 24, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-94. - Review by staff. 
    Each application for development plan approval shall be reviewed by the city planner and transmitted to the development review committee and other staff as may be designated by the city planner based upon the type of development proposed. The city planner shall review each application for compliance with land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 25, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-95. - Performance guarantee. 
    A performance guarantee may be required from applicants as a condition of development plan approval if all required on- or off-site infrastructure improvements are not in place at the time of development plan approval. The performance guarantee shall be in the form of a performance bond or other instrument approved by the city commission. The performance guarantee shall be furnished and payable to the city in the sum of 125 percent of the total cost of the city engineer's estimates for extension of potable water distribution system components; sanitary sewer system components; street improvements, including acceleration and/or declaration lanes, traffic control devices, markings, signage, and/or related street improvements; sidewalks, curbs, and/or gutters; stormwater management improvements; and/or other improvements required in the development plan approval. The terms of the performance guarantee may be modified by the city commission after considering recommendations of staff and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 26, 1-19-2005) 
Secs. 108-96-108-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-04, adopted Jan. 19, 2005, repealed and/or renumbered and amended §§ 108-131-108-134. Former §§ 108-131-108-134 pertained to approval, disapproval and appeal process, and derived from Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. Similar subject matter can now be found in §§ 108-201-108-203. 

Secs. 108-131-108-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-04, adopted Jan. 19, 2005, repealed §§ 108-161-108-167 which pertained to review criteria, and derived from Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 

Secs. 108-161-108-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REVIEW PROCESS 

Sec. 108-196. - Review and action by planning board. 
(a)  After reviewing a major development plan or a minor development plan for a property and staff recommendations therefor, the planning board shall act by resolution to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove it based on specific development review criteria contained in the land development regulations and the intent of the land development regulations and comprehensive plan. The planning board resolution shall provide written comments documenting any conditions of approval that the planning board finds necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article and carry out the spirit and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations. If the development plan is recommended for disapproval, the planning board resolution shall specify in writing the reasons for recommending such denial. The planning board's decision on a major development plan or a minor development plan for a property in the historic district shall be advisory to the city commission. The decision on a minor development in the historic district shall be placed on the city commission's consent agenda for ratification. 
(b)  The planning board's decision on a minor development outside the historic district shall be final unless appealed. The board may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.4(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-04, § 27, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-197. - Appeals of decisions of planning board directed to city commission. 
    Section 108-196(b) provides for an appeal to the city commission from a decision of the planning board pertaining to a minor development plan for a property outside of the historic district. Any aggrieved person may appeal such decision by filing a written appeal pursuant to division 4 of article V of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.4(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-04, § 28, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-198. - Review and action by city commission. 
    A development plan shall be reviewed by the city commission either in its final approval capacity or its appellate capacity, as provided in section 108-196(b). The city commission shall approve with or without conditions or disapprove the development plan based on specific development review criteria contained in the land development regulations and based on the intent of the land development regulations and comprehensive plan. The city commission may attach to its approval of a development plan any reasonable conditions, limitations or requirements that are found necessary, in its judgment, to effectuate the purpose of this article and carry out the spirit and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations. Any condition shall be made a written record and affixed to the development plan as approved. If the city commission disapproves a development plan, the reasons shall be stated in writing. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.4(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-04, § 29, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-199. - Notification procedures. 
    Prior to taking any action regarding development plan review, the planning board and the city commission, respectively, shall be required to notify the public in accordance with division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.4(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 22, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 05-04, § 30, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-200. - Special workshop and notification procedures for port expansion at the Truman Waterfront Parcel. 
    Prior to initiating the development review process outlined in this article, a joint workshop will be held between the planning board and the port advisory board for the purposes of encouraging public discussion about the proposed expansion. The workshop will be chaired by the planning board chairperson, according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  The meeting will be held in a workshop format designed to encourage public discussion and interaction. The applicant will be encouraged to provide responses to questions and explain aspects of the application during the workshop. Board members will also be encouraged to enter the discussion or provide information. A hearing format is discouraged. 
(2)  A neutral facilitation process can be used at the discretion of the city planner. 
(3)  At the end of the workshop, the following findings will be made by the members present from both boards: Is additional information necessary for the planning board and city commission to consider the plan? Is additional public workshop discussion needed to clarify the plan? The findings should not include recommendations for or against the project at this time. If additional discussion is needed, further workshops can be scheduled. Additional information can be provided either at future workshops, if they are scheduled, or as an amendment to the development plan. 
(4)  The public workshop will be advertised in the local newspaper a minimum of ten days in advance of the meeting. 
    The development plan application, together with the record of the public workshop(s), and the recommendation of the planning board as required by section 108-196, shall form the basis for the finding of the city commission that the proposal does or does not on balance, contribute to rather than detract from the quality of life for the residents of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 2 (Exh. A(4-18.4(E)), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 05-04, § 31, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-201. - Effects of approval. 
(a)  Upon the approval of a development plan, a building permit may be issued by the building official if construction plans have been found to meet all building code requirements. No building permit shall be issued until the building official has received demonstrated evidence that all conditions of development plan approval have been satisfied. 
(b)  Development plan approval involving residential units shall be consistent with the city's building permit allocation system, referenced in division 3 of article X of this chapter. Vesting shall not occur until a building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 32, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-202. - Timing of release of building permits. 
    No permits shall be granted by the building official until the time for appeal to the city commission from a final decision of the planning board or a time for appeal to a court from a final decision of the city commission shall have expired. Notwithstanding, an applicant for a building permit may be granted such permit prior to the end of the appeal period, if the applicant signs an affidavit acknowledging that the applicant has been put on notice by the city that any construction undertaken prior to the end of the appeal period is undertaken at the applicant's risk, and such applicant shall hold the city harmless for any damage incurred if the terms of approval are altered or nullified by the city commission or the court. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 33, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-203. - Expiration, transferability and extension. 
(a)  The development plan approval shall expire 12 months after final approval, if construction has not been started as evidenced by steady and continuous progress, including the pouring of footings by the termination date. Notwithstanding, if a phased schedule for construction is approved by the city as part of the development plan approval process, such schedule shall become the standard for determining development plan expiration. Where a building permit expires the city may require revisions to the development plan to achieve compliance with the most current land development regulation and other applicable laws and ordinances or address changed conditions, such as but not limited to traffic flows and neighboring land uses. 
(b)  If the property receiving development plan approval shall be sold, transferred, leased, or the ownership thereof changes in any way whatsoever, the development plan approval shall be transferable. A development plan approval may be extended only one time for 12 months by a favorable vote by the body that granted the original approval, if the applicant submits a petition for such extension prior to the development plan's expiration and demonstrates reasonable cause for the extension. The burden of proof in justifying reasonable cause shall rest with the applicant. Subsequent extensions may be granted but shall be fully noticed in accordance with division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 34, 1-19-2005) 
Secs. 108-204-108-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REQUIRED INFORMATION 

Sec. 108-226. - Scope. 
    A development plan, for the purposes of this division, shall include but not necessarily be limited to the requirements in this division. With the exception of sections 108-227 through 108-229, the city planner may waive or modify requirements, information and specific performance criteria for development plan review after rendering a finding in writing that such requirements: 
(1)  Are not necessary prior to development plan approval in order to protect the public interest or adjacent properties; 
(2)  Bear no relationship to the proposed project or its impacts; and 
(3)  Are found to be impractical based on the characteristics of the use, including the proposed scale, density/intensity, and anticipated impacts on the environment, public facilities and adjacent land uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-227. - Title block. 
    The development plan shall contain the following pertaining to the title block: 
(1)  Name of development. 
(2)  Name of owner/developer. 
(3)  Scale. 
(4)  North arrow. 
(5)  Preparation and revision date. 
(6)  Location/street address of development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-228. - Identification of key persons. 
    The development plan shall contain the following pertaining to identification of key persons: 
(1)  Owner. 
(2)  Owner's authorized agent. 
(3)  Engineer and architect. 
(4)  Surveyor. 
(5)  Landscape architect and/or environmental consultant. 
(6)  Others involved in the application. 
(7)  A verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the subject property, except publicly held corporations whose stock is traded on a nationally recognized stock exchange, in which case the names and addresses of the corporation and principal executive officers together with any majority stockholders will be sufficient. 
(8)  If the applicant is not the owner, the applicant must provide an original notarized statement from the current property owner authorizing representation of the specific development plan review application. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-04, § 35, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 108-229. - Project description. 
    Project description should be included on the site plan sheet. The development plan shall contain the following pertaining to the project description: 
(1)  Zoning (include any special districts). 
(2)  Project site size (acreage and/or square footage). 
(3)  Legal description. 
(4)  Building size. 
(5)  Floor area ratio, permitted and proposed. 
(6)  Lot coverage, permitted and proposed. 
(7)  Impervious surface. 
(8)  Pervious surface. 
(9)  Landscape areas. 
(10)  Parking spaces, permitted and proposed. 
(11)  Delineation of location of existing and proposed structures. 
(12)  Existing and proposed development type denoted by land use including density/intensity. 
(13)  Setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-230. - Other project information. 
    A general outline of the proposed development shall include the following criteria where applicable: 
(1)  Proposed stages or phases of development or operation and facility utilization. 
(2)  Target dates for each phase. 
(3)  Expected date of completion. 
(4)  Proposed development plan for the site. 
(5)  A written description of characteristics of the proposed development (i.e., number and type of residential units; floor area by land use; number of tourist accommodations units; seating or parking capacities; number of hospital beds; any proposed outside facilities or areas to be used for storage, display, outside sales, waste disposal or similar use; and any other proposed uses). 
(6)  For planned unit developments, indicate design techniques (i.e., clustering, zero lot line, or other techniques) used to reduce public facility costs, reduce disturbance of natural resources, and preserve scenic quality of the site. 
(7)  Buildings and siting specifications which shall be utilized to reduce damage potential and to comply with federal flood insurance regulations. 
(8)  Protection against encroachment together with proposed mitigation measures to be employed within environmentally sensitive areas. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-231. - Residential developments. 
(a)  If the development includes residential units, the following characteristics shall be discussed in the written description: 
(1)  A breakdown of the proposed residential units by number of bedrooms; 
(2)  Tenure (i.e., owner-occupied or rental); and 
(3)  Structure type, such as single-family, duplex, multiple-family, mobile home. 
(b)  Refer to division 10 of article V of chapter 122 for information and legal instruments needed to satisfy the city's affordable housing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-232. - Intergovernmental coordination. 
    The development plan shall contain the following pertaining to intergovernmental coordination: 
(1)  Provide proof of coordination with applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies, including but not limited to the following agencies, that will be involved in the project: 
a.  South Florida Regional Planning Council (SFRPC). 
b.  City electric system (CES). 
c.  State department of environmental protection (DEP). 
d.  Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE). 
e.  South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD). 
f.  State department of transportation (DOT). 
g.  State department of community affairs (DCA). 
h.  Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority (FKAA). 
i.  State fish and wildlife conservation commission (F&GC). 
j.  The county. 
(2)  Provide evidence that any necessary permit, lease or other permission from applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies has been obtained for any activity that will impact wetland communities or submerged land. 
(3)  When intergovernmental coordination efforts are incomplete, the applicant shall provide evidence of good faith efforts towards resolving intergovernmental coordination issues. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(A)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-233. - Concurrency facilities and other utilities or services. 
    Development plans shall satisfy concurrency management regulations cited in chapter 94. This component of the plan shall identify demands on concurrency facilities generated by the proposed development and identify how the demands shall be accommodated through improvements. The development plan shall also list the utility providers currently serving the site together with a description of the existing infrastructure serving the site. Include the location, design and character of all concurrency facilities and other utilities, such as underground or overhead electric lines, gas transmission lines, or other similar facilities or services, on the development plan. Concurrency facilities shall include the following: 
(1)  Potable water supply. 
a.  Identify projected average daily potable water demands at the end of each development phase and specify the consumption rates which have been assumed for the projection. 
b.  Provide proof of coordination with the Florida Key Aqueduct Authority. Assess the present and projected capacity of the water supply system and the ability of such system to provide adequate water for the proposed development. 
c.  Describe measures taken to ensure the water pressure and flow will be adequate for fire protection for the type of construction proposed. 
d.  Denote both planned system improvements required to establish and/or maintain adopted level of service and proposed funding resources to provide these improvements. 
(2)  Wastewater management. 
a.  Provide projection of the average daily flows of wastewater generated by the development at the end of each development phase. Describe proposed treatment system, method and degree of treatment, quality of effluent, and location of effluent and sludge disposal areas. Identify method and responsibilities for operation and maintenance of facilities. 
b.  If public facilities are to be utilized, provide proof of coordination with the city public service department. Assess the present and projected capacity of the treatment and transmission facilities. 
c.  If applicable, provide a description of the volume and characteristics of any industrial or other effluent. 
d.  Denote both planned system improvements required to establish and/or maintain adopted level of service and proposed funding resources to provide these improvements. 
(3)  Water quality. Discuss disposal areas, septic tank drainfield, urban runoff area impervious surfaces, and construction-related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of potential pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and after construction. 
a.  Identify any wastewater disposal areas, septic tank drainfield, urban runoff area impervious surfaces, and construction-related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of these potential pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and after construction. 
b.  Describe plans for revegetation and landscaping of cleared sites including a completion schedule for such work. 
(4)  Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan for the site shall be provided, including: 
a.  Retention of runoff or discharge of such runoff into adequately sized natural vegetative filtration areas in a manner approximating the natural runoff regime; 
b.  Permanent drainage systems which make maximum use of natural drainage patterns, vegetative retention and filtration; and 
c.  Evidence that the proposed drainage improvements shall accommodate stormwater runoff without adversely impacting natural systems or the city's adopted level of service for drainage. 
(5)  Solid waste. Identify projected average daily volumes of solid waste generated by the development at the end of each phase. Indicate proposed methods of treatment and disposal. Provide proof of coordination with the city technical service department. Assess the present and projected capacity of the solid waste treatment and disposal system and the ability of such facilities to provide adequate service to the proposed development. 
(6)  Roadways. Provide a projection of the expected vehicle trip generation at the completion of each development phase. Describe in terms of external trip generation and average daily as well as peak hour traffic. Evaluate the capacity of the existing roadway network serving the development. Provide recommendations for any required improvements to the existing network required by the proposed development including additional right-of-way, roadway improvements, additional paved lanes, traffic signalization, access and egress controls, and other similar improvements. 
(7)  Recreation. Identify projected demand generated by the development and cite land and facility improvements provided to ensure the city's level of service is not adversely impacted. 
(8)  Fire protection. Identify existing and proposed hydrant locations in relationship to buildings and other fire protection systems. The applicant may be required by the fire department to provide fire wells to augment the available water supply. 
(9)  Reclaimed water system. Include the amount of any reclaimed water to be utilized and the method of application on the site. 
(10)  Other public facilities. Discuss provisions included in the proposed development to minimize adverse effects upon the following facilities: educational, police, fire protection, recreational, electric power, health care and disaster preparedness. Include map of the service areas of all existing and proposed public facilities, such as sewage, water supplies, fire protection, health care, which serve the site, and a map of the highway and transportation network map of the site and surrounding area. A letter of coordination with the city electric system (CES) shall be include in the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74; concurrency management, ch. 94. 
Sec. 108-234. - Appearance, design and compatibility. 
    The development plan shall satisfy criteria established in chapter 102; articles III, IV and V of this chapter; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-235. - Site location and character of use. 
(a)  Compliance. The development plan submitted for review should be in compliance with all applicable performance criteria set forth in chapter 94, chapter 102, chapter 106, articles I and III through IX of this chapter, chapter 110 and chapter 114. 
(b)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map shall be provided with the project's location noted together with a general written description of the proposed development. Show the relationship of site to surrounding streets and public facilities at a scale of approximately one inch to 200 feet. 
(c)  Land use compatibility. Adjacent land uses shall be identified including current zoning designation, conditional uses and/or special districts within 50 feet of the boundaries for a minor development, and 100 feet of the boundaries for a major development. If applicable, assess the impact of the proposed development upon the unincorporated part of the county. 
(d)  Historic and archeological resource protection. A review of the project's impact on archaeological and historic resources shall be included. In addition to compliance with development plan review procedures of this article, developments within the historic district shall be consistent with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and the city's historic architectural review commission's (HARC) Design Guidelines in Key West's Historic District, as provided in chapter 102. Include the written record of the historic architectural review commission's review of the project's impacts in the development plan. 
(e)  Subdivision of land. Any subdivision of land shall comply with section 108-1 and chapter 118 pertaining to subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-236. - Appearance of site and structures. 
    The applicant for development plan approval shall submit a development plan that exhibits harmonious overall design characteristics in compliance with the performance standards stipulated in sections 108-278 through 108-288. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-237. - Site plan. 
    Development plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger. The maximum sheet size for development plans shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Multiple sheets may be used provided each sheet is numbered and the total number of sheets is indicated on each sheet. Cross referencing between sheets shall be required. Necessary notes and symbol legends shall be included. Abbreviations should be avoided but if used they shall be defined in the notes. The development plan shall address the following issues: 
(1)  Existing, where appropriate, and proposed building layout. 
(2)  Lot configuration. 
(3)  Finished floor elevations. 
(4)  Proposed topographic contours showing proposed drainage patterns and stormwater retention measures. 
(5)  Building coverage/open space ratio for the proposed development. 
(6)  Size and dimensions in compliance with zoning district regulations. 
(7)  Type, quantity and density of dwelling units. 
(8)  Floor area ratios. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(2)(a)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-238. - Architectural drawings. 
    All architecture or engineering designs must be prepared and sealed by a professional architect or engineer registered in the state pursuant to F.S. chs. 471 and 481, respectively. Drawings submitted for development plan approval shall include the following minimum information: 
(1)  A scaled drawing of the side, front and rear facades of the building or structure, including roof pitch, fenestration including treatment of roofline, windows, and doors. 
(2)  Description of materials to be used. 
(3)  Generalized floor plan indicating uses and square footage of each proposed use within each building or structure, building exterior construction material, and building height. 
(4)  Location, height and general character of perimeter or ornamental walls, fences, landscaping, including berms and other required screening devices and other plans for protecting adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(2)(b)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-239. - Site amenities. 
(a)  Generally. The site plan shall include amenities required to comply with appearance, design and compatibility regulations outlined in chapter 102; articles III, IV and V of this chapter; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110. 
(b)  Existing. All existing site amenities (i.e., signs, lighting fixtures, water features, etc.) shall be indicated as to location, character, color, and dimension. 
(c)  Proposed. State the location, size, character, color, height and design of all newly proposed site amenities in the form of working drawings and/or photographs. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(2)(c)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-240. - Site survey. 
    A site survey prepared by a certified land surveyor shall be included in the development plan illustrating the following: 
(1)  Existing conditions. 
a.  A site survey at a scale of 100 feet to one inch showing topographic contours at five-foot intervals and extending 25 feet beyond the property boundaries. 
b.  High water elevation or boundaries of coastal shoreline and/or other waterbodies and canals, both on site and within 50 feet of the site. 
c.  Existing surface drainage characteristics of site including relationship to adjacent land areas. The site survey shall include all existing structures. Any existing structures on site which do not comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood hazard regulations shall be identified on the survey. 
d.  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood hazard zone or limits of the 100-year flood. 
e.  Boundaries of environmentally sensitive areas, including an environmental survey and audit as needed. Management plans must be submitted and approved by state and/or federal regulatory agencies for areas recognized as a habitat for species listed by the state fish and wildlife commission as endangered, threatened, or species of special concern. 
(2)  Proposed development. The city shall require plans prepared by a state-registered engineer and other competent professionals as may be required which shall demonstrate compliance with the city's stormwater management performance criteria in article VIII of this chapter. In addition, the plans for land excavation or fill shall demonstrate that the proposed site alterations shall include mitigation techniques designed to comply with performance criteria addressed in article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-241. - Soil survey. 
    The soil survey for the development plan shall be as identified in the soil survey for the county, U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service or other competent expert evaluation. When soil suitability limitations are indicated for the proposed development, the city engineer may require a preliminary soil analysis by a qualified soils engineer. The development plan shall comply with environmental protection criteria in section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-242. - Environmentally sensitive areas. 
    Using maps from the comprehensive plan, future land use map series (FLUM), the development plan shall indicate whether or not the parcel is located within a floodplain, floodway or drainageway, wetland, open water, upland wildlife habitat, or coastal high hazard area. Site specific surveys may be required. 
(1)  Proposed impact. Illustrate how any activity or structure that will impact environmentally sensitive areas will be performed, located, constructed and/or maintained to prevent or mitigate any adverse impacts to wetland and endangered upland vegetative communities, wildlife habitats, floodplain, and other environmentally sensitive areas. 
(2)  Shoreline protection. If the project fronts a shoreline, indicate measures to allow public access to the shoreline, such as easements or rights-of-way, and illustrate any structure that may impede movement along the shoreline below the mean high water line, and demonstrate measures being taken to mitigate any such impediment. The development plans shall comply with applicable sections of article IV of chapter 110 and section 122-1186. 
(3)  General requirement. If environmentally sensitive areas are found in or adjacent to the site, the following information is necessary: 
a.  Existing conditions. Developers shall provide an existing vegetation map identifying boundaries of environmentally sensitive areas and indicating alterations in these areas including dredging, filling, spoil sites, canals and channels. 
b.  Preservation. Developers shall preserve the functions of these environmentally sensitive areas and shall comply with restrictions and interpretations for development in wetlands found in section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110. Management plans must be submitted and approved by state and/or federal regulatory agencies for areas recognized as a habitat for species listed by the state fish and wildlife commission as endangered, threatened, or species of special concern. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-243. - Land clearing, excavation and fill, tree protection, landscaping and irrigation plan. 
(a)  Land clearing, excavation and fill. The development plan and all development activity shall comply with section 108-289. The development plan shall include a statement of procedures which the developer shall carry out in order to ensure compliance with all applicable performance criteria in section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 governing the following: 
(1)  Native habitat preservation as provided in sections 110-86 through 110-91 and articles IV and V of chapter 110; 
(2)  Soil erosion control and sedimentation as provided in division 3 of article III of chapter 110; 
(3)  Freshwater lens protection as provided in section 110-151; 
(4)  Flood damage prevention as provided in article VII of chapter 110; and 
(5)  Protection of native vegetation as provided in article V of chapter 110. 
(b)  Tree protection. The development plan shall satisfy performance criteria of article VI of chapter 110. The plan shall indicate location, size and type of existing trees as required, including all proposed tree removals requiring a tree removal permit pursuant to sections 110-321 through 110-336. The plan shall also identify existing trees to be protected and shall explain or illustrate the method to preserve such trees during and after construction. 
(c)  Landscaping plan. The development plan shall satisfy the performance criteria of article VI of this chapter as well as the open space and land use screening requirements of article V of this chapter. The landscaping plan shall include a scaled working drawing indicating planting specifications for landscaping, buffers, open spaces, recreation areas and other required landscaped areas which shall comply with those performance criteria included in article VI of this chapter. The plan shall also show any environmentally sensitive areas and preservation areas, as well as those areas involving aquatic plantings. 
(d)  Irrigation plan. The development plan shall satisfy the performance criteria of section 108-515 and article VIII of chapter 110. The irrigation plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect, engineer or an irrigation contractor working under the supervision of a registered landscape architect or engineer and shall utilize the current techniques emphasizing design efficiency and water conservation, as well as public health, safety, and welfare as discussed in article VI of this chapter. The minimum requirements for plan approval shall include the following: 
(1)  Location and specifications for irrigation equipment; 
(2)  Design which promotes water conservation and efficient relationship of plant types to water demanded; and 
(3)  Source of water for irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-244. - On-site and off-site parking and vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation. 
    Development plans shall satisfy on- and off-site vehicular and bicycle circulation, and parking requirements of articles IV and VII of this chapter. Development plans shall include location, dimensions and typical construction specifications for: 
(1)  Existing and proposed driveways, approaches and curb cuts; 
(2)  Vehicular access points, accessways and common multimodal access points with pavement markings or other improvements to achieve safe internal circulation without conflict among modes of travel; 
(3)  Existing and proposed vehicle and bicycle off-street parking spaces, loading, unloading and service area space requirements: 
a.  Number of employees and number and type of vehicles owned by the establishment; and 
b.  Any combined off-street parking facilities shall be submitted with an agreement specifying the nature of the arrangement, its anticipated duration, and signatures of all concerned property owners; 
(4)  Other vehicular use areas; 
(5)  Bicycle ways as well as pedestrian ways and other pedestrian use areas; 
(6)  Typical cross sections, by type of improvement; 
(7)  Traffic control devices; 
(8)  Proposed parking surface material, pavement markings, and other related improvements; and 
(9)  Dedicated easements including cross easements, indicating their purpose, design, location, alignment, dimensions, and maintenance responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 70-116 et seq. 
Sec. 108-245. - Housing. 
(a)  If the development project includes residential development, a breakdown of the proposed residential units by price or rental range and type of unit shall be provided, such as single-family, duplex, townhouse, mobile home. 
(b)  If lots are to be sold without constructed dwelling units, the number and percentage of such lots and the extent of improvements to be made prior to sale shall be indicated. 
(c)  The potential of the proposed development to meet local or regional housing needs shall be assessed. In particular, any measures taken to provide low and moderate income housing shall be indicated. 
(d)  Hurricane evacuation considerations which acknowledge the current evacuation and emergency operations plans, how project residents will be informed about these plans, and any developer responsibilities identified in such plans shall be described. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Fair housing, § 38-26 et seq. 
Sec. 108-246. - Economic resources. 
(a)  An analysis of the estimated average ad valorem tax yield from the proposed project during each phase of development shall be provided. Assumptions and standards utilized including but not limited to assessed value, exemption and millage rate shall be indicated. 
(b)  For each development phase, the average annual construction expenditure by type (labor, materials) and the percentage of this expenditure which will occur within the city shall be estimated. 
(c)  For nonresidential developments, the number of permanent employees using appropriate standard industry classifications shall be projected. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-247. - Special considerations. 
(a)  The relationship of the proposed development to city land use plans, objectives and policies shall be described. Also, the relationship to existing or proposed public facilities plans, such as wastewater treatment and transportation shall be indicated and any conflicts identified. 
(b)  Any relationship of the project to special zoning districts, such as airport noise and hazard zones, solid or liquid waste treatment or disposal areas, shall be indicated. 
(c)  If applicable, the proposed development's impact on the unincorporated portion of the county shall be assessed. 
(d)  If the project fronts a shoreline, measures to allow public access to the shoreline, such as easements or rights-of-way, shall be indicated, and any structure that may impede movement along the shoreline below the mean high water line shall be illustrated, and measures being taken to mitigate any such impediment shall be demonstrated. 
(e)  Any special facilities that will be provided to accommodate bus ridership (i.e., bus stop, bus access lane, or other similar facilities) shall be indicated. 
(f)  Any special design features that will be utilized to reduce energy consumption shall be described. Further, any measures that will be taken to utilize solar energy or other alternative energy sources shall be described. 
(g)  If the building is to be elevated, the uses for the area between the bottom floor and the grade shall be indicated by square footage. 
(h)  The size and nature of private and public recreation facilities provided on the site shall be indicated. 
(i)  Proof of coordination with applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies, including the state department of environmental protection and the army corps of engineers, that will be involved in the project shall be provided. 
(j)  Evidence that any necessary permit, lease or other permission from the state department of environmental protection has been obtained for any activity that will impact wetland communities or submerged land shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-248. - Construction management plan and inspection schedule. 
    When the proposed development contains two or more phases and/or the project's proposed construction schedule is anticipated to exceed a period of one year, the applicant shall be required to submit a construction management plan and inspection schedule as part of the development plan. 
(1)  Content of construction management plan and inspection schedule. The construction management plan shall specify the following: 
a.  The timing and phasing of construction activities, including specific benchmarks for the completion of structures accommodating the principal use. 
b.  A schedule of inspections which complies with the city's adopted building codes, including a program of improvements anticipated to be completed prior to each scheduled inspection. 
c.  The building permit shall not be valid for a period exceeding two years, and no single phase of development shall extend for a period longer than two years. 
d.  The schedule shall acknowledge in writing that a new building permit must be obtained whenever: 
1.  Construction is not commenced within 90 days from the time the permit was released; 
2.  Construction activity is dormant for a period of six months or more; 
3.  The developer fails to call for and achieve approved inspections within planned 120-day intervals as shall be evidenced in the construction schedule; and 
4.  A new phase of a phased development is commenced. 
e.  The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the construction activity is consistent with the development plan and has occurred in a timely manner consistent with the approved construction management plan and inspection schedule. The applicant shall further acknowledge that, upon failure to meet the inspection schedule, the building permit shall expire. A new building permit shall be required in order to undertake construction activity on a site where a building permit has expired. 
(2)  Timing of adjustments to construction management plan and schedule. A building permit holder shall bear the burden of keeping a construction management plan current. Any event which may cause a delay in the permittee's compliance with the terms of a construction management plan and schedule shall brought to the attention of the chief building official. The burden shall be on the applicant to successfully negotiate and effectuate an adjustment to the construction management plan and schedule prior to a lapse in any scheduled inspection. Such lapse shall be defined as a failure to complete improvements consistent with the agreed upon construction and inspection schedule. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-18.5(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-249. - Truman Waterfront Port facilities. 
    Applications for new port facilities or expansions to existing port facilities at the Truman Waterfront Port shall address the following questions: 
(1)  How will the project positively or negatively impact the areas targeted for redevelopment in the community, the community as a whole, and residents on a per capita basis? 
(2)  What specific positive or negative impacts to the quality of life in the community will result from this project? Specific areas of concern include: increased demand for housing, particularly affordable housing, jobs and job training programs, economic diversity, environmentally sensitive resources, public amenities including recreation and waterfront access, and transportation and traffic. 
(3)  A description of the type of port facility, including proposed number of berths, whether the port use includes passenger ferries, cruise ship or marina-type uses. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 2 (Exh. A(4-18.5(K)), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-5-2000) 
Secs. 108-250-108-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SITE PLAN 

Sec. 108-276. - Scope. 
    The city shall not approve a site plan unless a finding is made that such site plan conforms to all applicable sections of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(art. X), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-277. - Site location and character of use. 
    The comprehensive plan together with the land development regulations, including size and dimension regulations, general provisions, performance criteria, and the list of permitted and conditional uses, off-street parking, landscaping, required open spaces, yards and building setbacks shall collectively be the principal guides in determining the suitability of the location of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-278. - Appearance of site and structures. 
    Within all zoning districts within the city, the appearance of a site and structures shall be coordinated for the purpose of creating a pleasing and harmonious overall environment. The choice of building materials, plant materials, lighting and other building and site improvements shall be commensurate with the objectives of the subject use and considering impact on surrounding properties or transportation corridors. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall also consider the factors in sections 108-279 through 108-288. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-279. - Location and screening of mechanical equipment, utility hardware and waste storage areas. 
    Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs shall be harmonious with the building or they shall be located and/or screened so as not to be visible from any public ways within the impacted area. All refuse and waste storage areas shall be screened from adjacent properties and public ways by appropriate fences, walls or landscaping. Front-end loaded refuse containers shall also be required to be screened by vegetation or structural means to shield an unsightly condition. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-280. - Front-end loaded refuse container location requirements. 
(a)  Generally. No front-end loaded refuse container shall be located in any required parking space or vehicular use area or in any required bufferyard or landscaping area. 
(b)  Service access. Front-end loaded refuse container sites shall be provided which allow refuse vehicle service access without manually moving the container of service. Fifty feet of clear backup, as measured perpendicular from the screen areas, shall be provided from the face of the refuse container's screening unless otherwise approved by the historic preservation planner who shall find that the reduction is necessary to provide property rights enjoyed by others in the same zoning district and will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. No encroachment into this area by parking spaces, nondriveway sidewalks, or landscape areas shall be allowed. 
(c)  Siting obstructions. A front-end loaded refuse container shall not: 
(1)  Be sited within six feet of any building or structure; 
(2)  Be sited below obstructing wires; 
(3)  Obstruct any electrical service equipment, fire protection equipment, or roof overhangs; or 
(4)  Be sited adjacent to any other obstruction to the container dumping process. 
(d)  Container pads. Front-end loaded refuse container pads shall be provided for all front-end loaded containers and shall, as a minimum, be constructed either of 3,000 psi concrete six inches thick with six-inch by six-inch to ten-inch by ten-inch wire mesh, four inches thick, with number 3 steel reinforcing bars on 12 inch centers in each direction or as approved by the administrative official who shall find that the reduction is necessary to provide property rights enjoyed by others in the same zoning district and will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. A six-foot-long approach slab of identical width, thickness, and composition to the container pad shall also be constructed adjacent and of equal slope to the pad. 
(e)  Screening requirements. Front-end loaded refuse containers shall be opaquely screened from view from public streets and adjacent properties, to a height of at least six feet or six inches higher than the height of the container, whichever is higher. This screening may be achieved by walls, landscaping or bufferyards, or by virtue of the location of the container on the building site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-281. - Roll-off compactor container location requirements. 
(a)  Container pads. Roll-off compactor container pads shall be provided for all roll-off compactor containers and shall be constructed of minimum 3,000 psi concrete, steel reinforced, six inches thick, and shall comply with the following minimal dimension requirements for each container: ten feet wide by 20 feet long. 
(b)  Service access. A paved service vehicle access apron, constructed to a minimum load of 60,000 pounds and extending a minimum of 45 feet in front of each roll-off compactor container is required. Service height clearance of 25 feet is required in the container service access area. 
(c)  Electrical requirements. The industry recommendations for roll-off compactor electrical requirements are three phase, 460-480 volt, 60 amp electrical service to each compactor location. Other electrical requirements may be approved by the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-282. - Utility lines. 
    In new construction, all utility lines shall be placed underground. All telephone lines shall be placed underground. Service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual installations shall be placed underground. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed underground or on concrete poles provided that the poles are within the street right-of-way and have provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and shall be mounted on pads and contained within enclosures or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the construction and design shall be compatible with primary building design. Landscaping with shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen pad-mounted transformers. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74. 
Sec. 108-283. - Commercial and manufacturing activities conducted in enclosed buildings. 
    All businesses, services or manufacturing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, excepting activities duly permitted by the city such as mobile vendors, activities at Mallory Dock, entertainment, vehicle rentals, flea markets, and merchandise displays permitted under division 2 of article II of chapter 106 and sections 114-2 through 114-5. If the city determines that a demonstrated necessity exists for limited outside storage due to the impracticality and unreasonableness of enclosure of such goods, the goods shall be effectively screened by a 95-percent or greater opaque wall, fence or planting so that the activity will not be visible from a public way, unless the screening is demonstrated by the applicant to the city's satisfaction to be impractical and unreasonable. Notwithstanding, the city commission shall render decisions on major developments as defined in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-284. - Exterior lighting. 
    Light sources shall be shielded and arranged to eliminate glare from roadways and streets and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the district. Shielding of lighting elements shall be accomplished by using an opaque shade to direct the light. Street lighting shall be installed on all internal and perimeter streets, within parking areas, and along pedestrian walkways. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-285. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be required to be harmonious with the urban design theme of the project and shall be aesthetically pleasing and reinforcing good principles and practices of streetscape design. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 114. 
Sec. 108-286. - Pedestrian sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed to link major activity centers and shall also link vehicle use areas including parking areas with all principal buildings. The pedestrian circulation system shall include marked pedestrian crossings in order to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
Sec. 108-287. - Loading docks. 
(a)  When loading docks are required, they shall be located at the side or rear of the principal structure being served. Similarly, parking for trucks and all other company-owned or company-controlled vehicles shall be located at the rear of the principal structure. Provisions for locating loading docks may be modified by the city planner after coordinating with the design review committee if the size and shape of the property is insufficient or inadequate to reasonably accommodate the stated size and dimension criteria. 
(b)  No loading dock shall be permitted within 100 feet of any residentially zoned property or within 40 feet of any property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-288. - Storage areas. 
    Any proposed exterior storage areas shall be located at the rear of the principal structure. Such outside storage areas shall be enclosed by a solid wall with solid entrance and exit gates. The wall shall be a minimum of six feet and a maximum of eight feet in height, and in no case shall materials be stacked or stored so as to exceed the height of the wall. Storage areas shall be located only in side or rear yards. No motor vehicle which is inoperative shall be stored or used for storage on any lot or parcel in any PD or PRD district unless it is within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.2(B)(9)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-289. - Land clearing, excavation or fill. 
(a)  Without prior development plan approval, no site work shall be undertaken which: 
(1)  Impacts the 100-year floodplain or impacts a designated conservation area; 
(2)  Redirects and/or increases or reduces off-site natural drainage or runoff from a site; or 
(3)  Results in removal of vegetation. 
(b)  The city shall require plans prepared by a state-registered engineer and other competent professionals as may be required which shall demonstrate compliance with the city's surface water management performance criteria in article VIII of this chapter. In addition, the plans for land excavation or fill shall demonstrate that the proposed site alterations shall include mitigation techniques designed to comply with performance criteria addressing the following: 
(1)  Native habitat protection as provided in articles III, IV, V and VII of chapter 110; 
(2)  Site reclamation, including restoration of vegetative cover within disturbed upland open space; planting and stabilizing banks of drainageways with vegetation which is tolerant to anticipated changes in water levels, including hydric conditions as provided in articles III, IV and VII of chapter 110; 
(3)  Sedimentation and soil erosion control as provided in section 108-1 and articles III, IV and VII of chapter 110; 
(4)  Protection of aquifer recharge as provided in articles III, IV, VII and VIII of chapter 110; 
(5)  Flood damage prevention as provided in articles III, IV and VII of chapter 110; and 
(6)  Tree and native vegetation protection as provided in article VI of this chapter; and articles III, IV, V and VI of chapter 110. 
(c)  The city shall not permit commercial borrow pits or mining activities since there are no sites within the city appropriate for such use. Borrow pits and mining activities may cause adverse impacts to the city's natural coastal resources and/or adversely impact water quality, surface water management, and flood damage prevention. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.6), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-290-108-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC IMPACTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 

Sec. 108-316. - Advice from planning board. 
    The planning board and/or designated staff shall advise on matters related to this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-317. - Internal circulation system design and access/egress considerations. 
(a)  Driveways, curb cuts, aisles, bicycle ways, pedestrian ways, and areas for parking and internal circulation of vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians shall be located, designed and controlled so as to provide for safe and convenient circulation within the site and safe and convenient access from and onto adjoining streets. The city staff shall review such design considerations based on standard traffic engineering principles and practices, and such specifications as may be adopted by resolution of the city commission. Requirements of article VII of this chapter shall be applied for off-street parking. 
(b)  Among factors to be considered shall be the following: 
(1)  The need for acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
(2)  The number, location and size of curb cuts, access drives, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways from adjacent streets, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways together with any special markings necessary to avoid conflict among vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; 
(3)  The location and design of driveways, access aisles, and bicycle ways to parking spaces; 
(4)  The arrangement, delineation and marking for parking areas; and 
(5)  The means of access to buildings for firefighting apparatus and other emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-318. - Separation of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. 
    Parking areas, driveways, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways shall be clearly identified, designed, and marked, where appropriate, to achieve safe and convenient circulation for motorized vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. Motorized traffic should be separated from principal bicycle ways, pedestrian routes and recreation areas by curbs, pavement markings, planting areas, fences or similar features designed to promote vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian safety. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-319. - Driveway and curb cut approvals. 
    The city shall require that the proposed location of driveways and curb cuts be coordinated with utility companies responsible for providing utility services in order to ensure that proposed construction activities are consistent with improvement plans as well as operation and maintenance activities and policies of utility service providers. No development plan or building permit shall be issued until proof of such coordination is presented to the city by the applicant/developer. In addition, the applicant/developer submitting plans for driveway and curb cut improvements shall comply with applicable surface water management regulations of article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-320-108-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN SPACE, SCREENING AND BUFFERS 

Sec. 108-346. - Open space, landscaping and removal of exotic vegetation. 
(a)  Open space shall be comprised of permeable open surfaces, excluding principal structures and impermeable surfaces. No parking or paved areas shall be included as open area. Active recreation areas may be counted as open area. 
(b)  Residential uses shall provide a minimum of 35 percent open space. Nonresidential uses shall provide a minimum of 20 percent open space. The total open space provided by mixed uses shall be based on the percent of total square feet of floor area on site allotted to the respective residential and nonresidential uses. 
(c)  Open space and spaces between buildings required by this article, shall be located and improved so as to reasonably serve the purposes for which the requirements are intended. These purposes include provision of adequate light and air, appropriate separation between buildings and uses, enhancement of privacy, sufficient area for recreation and leisure pursuits in residential areas, and to facilitate surface water drainage. 
(d)  The natural landscape of the site shall be preserved as much as possible for purposes of enhancing the general appearance of the site as well as to prevent excessive stormwater runoff, erosion, siltation and dust. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new development, the owner/applicant shall remove all nuisance and invasive exotic vegetation from the site for which a development order or permit is requested. Nuisance plants include those plants which may or may not be native, and their growth habits are hard to control or they exhibit some undesirable features. Invasive exotic vegetation is those plants which have been introduced into the area and may have undesirable growth habits or maintenance constraints. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-347. - Required screening. 
(a)  Application of standards. In order to maintain and perpetuate land use compatibility where different types and/or intensities of land use activities abut one another, the standards in the tables in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be applied to future development or redevelopment. The development plan applicant and successors in ownership shall maintain the bufferyard and landscape screening in perpetuity. The city may require more restrictive buffers to mitigate adverse impacts due to high impact development. 
_____
(b)  Table of minimum standards for required bufferyards and landscape screening. The table of minimum standards for required bufferyards and landscape screening is as follows: 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR REQUIRED BUFFERYARDS AND LANDSCAPE SCREENING 
Adjoining Use Proposed Use Single-family, Detached Multifamily Low Impact (1) Medium Impact (2) High Impact (1) Single-family, detached None B (2) C (2) D (2) E (2) Multifamily B A B (2) D (2) E (2) Low impact C B None B (2) D (2) Medium impact D E B None C (2) High impact E E D C None  
Footnotes: (1) A use is considered "low," "medium," or "high" impact based on its effect on adjacent land uses considering the following criteria: a. Noise. b. Outdoor parking and loading space. c. Exterior storage. d. Height of structure. e. Production of dust, fumes and vibration. f. Litter, including use of disposable containers. g. Lighting. h. Overall design compatibility with adjacent uses, including scale, elevation, building material, roof and fenestration. i. Density and/or intensity of use. The city shall use the above-cited criteria in determining whether a proposed mixed use or other nonresidential development is low, medium or high impact. (2) The maximum buffer that may be required. If all or any part of the buffer has been provided on the adjacent property, the proposed use must provide only that amount of the buffer which has not been provided on the adjacent property.  
(c)  Table of bufferyard and landscape screening types. The table of bufferyard and landscape screening types is as follows: 
BUFFERYARD AND LANDSCAPE SCREENING TYPES 
Landscape Screening Type and Number of Plant Units (1) Required Per 100 Linear Feet of Bufferyard Bufferyard Widths 
(linear feet) A B C D E 2.5-4.99 30 45 80 37 (2) (4) 5.0-9.99 24 40 72 15 (2) (4) 10.0-19.99 17 36 64 112 (4) 20.0-35.0 56 75 (4) 35+ (3) 42 64 (4)  
(1) A plant unit is a measurement describing the amount of required plant material in flexible units based on the stated unit values in subsection (d) of this section. (2) An opaque fence or wall is required in addition to the specified landscape material. (3) Where standard bufferyard requirements will not adequately protect public health, safety and welfare, the city may require the following options: a. Increase the dimensions of landscape buffer required; b. Increase the density of landscaping material required; and/or c. Require the use of a 100-percent opaque wall or fence. (4) Specific requirements to be determined by the city on a case by case basis. The city will evaluate the criteria in footnote (1) of the table in subsection (b) of this section in determining whether additional buffers are needed.  
_____
(d)  Type of plant material and landscape plant units. The table for the type of plant material and landscape plant units is as follows: 
Type of Plant Material Landscape Plant Units One canopy shade tree = 10 One evergreen or ornamental tree = 5 One shrub = 1  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-348. - Existing plant material. 
    Credit may be given for existing plant material against the requirements of sections 108-347 through 108-352. Existing plant material may be native vegetation, a previously planted landscape buffer installed by abutting development, existing or proposed walls or a combination of such vegetation, buffer or walls. Such existing landscaping or manmade barriers shall be accurately located and labeled on the development plan when submitted for review. The clearing of native vegetation sufficient to create the required landscape screening or portion thereof is prohibited without approval from the city. Such approval by the city should be based on the following factors: 
(1)  The need to preserve access to a utility easement; 
(2)  The existing native vegetation is in a deteriorated condition and the proposed replacement plants are clearly superior specimens and reinforce accepted design objectives; or 
(3)  The existing vegetation is classified as undesirable plant species pursuant to section 110-254. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-349. - Landscape specifications. 
    Landscape specifications for bufferyard plantings relative to size, quality, spacing, and maintenance; drought tolerance techniques; and irrigation requirements shall be in compliance with those criteria cited in article VI of this chapter. Wherever berms are used, they shall be constructed with a grade not to exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal (1:3 slope). If berms are used to satisfy the screening and bufferyard requirements, they shall be landscaped with plant material to achieve the required height. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-350. - Exceptions. 
    In order to provide optimum growing conditions and create an effective vegetative buffer, no bufferyards shall be less than 2.5 feet wide. Bufferyards between 2.5 feet and ten feet in width may substitute an opaque wooden fence or masonry wall at least six feet in height for the shrub requirement. However, canopy and/or shade trees required as part of the buffer must be installed regardless of whether a fence or wall is being used or not. Where a district boundary runs along a canal, no buffer is required if the specified buffer is an A or B buffer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-351. - Increasing landscape and/or bufferyard requirements. 
(a)  Increased buffer requirements may be required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Where it is determined by the city that minimum standards for landscape and bufferyards would not adequately buffer uses of different intensities, the city may require the following: 
(1)  An increase in the bufferyard dimensions. 
(2)  An increase in the density of landscaping required (i.e., closer plant spacing, larger plant sizes at installation, or suggesting plants which attain a larger mature growth). 
(3)  A six-foot, 100-percent opaque fence or wall. If a six-foot wall was part of the original buffer design, the city may increase the height of the fence or wall as well as recommend a building material that will more effectively screen undesirable views and/or other nuisances. 
(b)  The city will review a use for the following indicators to determine if it is a low, medium or high impact use and conclude whether the bufferyard submitted with the development plan is adequate: 
(1)  Noise. 
(2)  Outdoor parking and loading space. 
(3)  Exterior storage. 
(4)  Height of structure. 
(5)  Production of dust, fumes and vibration. 
(6)  Density and/or intensity of use. 
(7)  Litter, including use of disposable containers. 
(8)  Lighting. 
(9)  Overall design compatibility with adjacent uses, including scale, elevation, building material, roof and fenestration. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-352. - Reducing landscape and/or bufferyard requirements. 
    Upon review of the development plan it may become apparent that bufferyard and landscape screening requirements may be reduced without having a negative impact on existing or proposed abutting designated land uses. The following may constitute sound reasons for reducing the general requirements for bufferyard and/or landscape requirements: 
(1)  Credit may be given for existing native vegetation located within the bufferyard. 
(2)  Credit may be given for existing landscape screens, walls or fences installed by abutting development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.8(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-353-108-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LANDSCAPING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Tree protection, § 110-251 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-381. - Purpose, intent and applicability. 
    The intent of this article is to require screening and beautification of all storage, parking, display or sales areas so as to improve, protect and preserve the city's unique aesthetic characteristics and qualities. This article shall apply to all development requiring site plan approval. A landscape plan shall be a required component of all site plans. If sections of this article conflict with other land development regulations, the more restrictive provisions apply. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-382. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory vehicular use area means all land upon which vehicles traverse the property, excluding the parking lot. 
    Accessway means a paved or unpaved area intended to provide ingress and egress from a public or private right-of-way to a public or private premises, including an off-street parking area. 
    Barrier means a solid and unbroken visual screen, including a masonry fence or solid wood fence, which presents a 100-percent opaque screen. An open chainlink fence shall not constitute a barrier. 
    Berm means mounding of soil which is planted with living plant material designed as a natural landscape buffer to screen incompatible land uses or to absorb or otherwise reduce nuisance impacts, such as noise, smoke, glare, or other similar impacts. 
    Buffer means a landscape area comprised of trees, shrubs and ground cover, and/or other landscaping material that is used to separate one use from another or from a roadway, and/or to shield or block noise, light or other nuisances. 
    Caliper means diameter at breast height (dbh) of a dicot or conifer tree trunk as measured 4.5 feet above the ground. Caliper of a monocot is the diameter of the tree trunk measured one foot above the ground. 
    Canopy tree and shade tree mean a single-trunked dicot or conifer tree which by virtue of its natural shape provides at maturity a minimum shade canopy of 15 feet in diameter. 
    Dripline means the natural outside end of the branches of a tree or shrub projected vertically to the ground. 
    Encroachment means a protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area or accessway into a landscaped area. 
    Excavation means to make a hole, unearth, scrape, or dig out for the purpose of construction, demolition or removal with specific relation to a tree dripline and root system. 
    Grass means green herbage, commonly referred to as "grass," which is commonly grown yearround in the city. For the purpose of this article, no artificial grass shall be considered living plant material. 
    Ground cover means low-growing living plant material or landscaping material. 
    Hatracking means pollarding or flat-cutting a tree such that the leaders are severed, or such that the canopy spread is reduced by one-third or more during any 365-day period. 
    Hedge means a dense and continuous visual screen of self-supporting living plant material. 
    Interior parking space means any parking space which is not adjacent to a required landscape strip. 
    Landscape area means an area containing trees, barriers, ground cover and/or other plant material as required by this article. 
    Lawn grass means grass areas which shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the vicinity of the city. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. When grass seed is sown it shall be a variety of seed which produces complete coverage within 90 days from sowing. In areas where a ground cover other than solid sod or grass seed is used, nursegrass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
    Living plant material means grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines and trees. 
    Mulch means an organic soil additive or topping such as compost, wood chips, wood shavings, seasoned sawdust, bark leaves or straw, used to reduce evaporation, prevent erosion, control weeds enrich the soil and lower soil temperature. Install at a three-inch depth, maximum. 
    Protected tree means a tree species which, due to its size, shape, character, age and/or aesthetic value, is declared by the city commission to be a locally unique example of the species. 
    Shock means a physiological state of or degeneration of the vital processes resulting from but not limited to root damage, wounds, damage, impact, partial or total girdling, or improper cutting. 
    Shrub means a self-supporting, woody, evergreen plant smaller than a tree and branching from or near the ground. 
    Synthetic plants means synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers or vines which shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
    Transplanting means the relocation of a plant from one location to another. 
    Tree means a self-supporting, wood plant of a species which normally at maturity has a trunk with a diameter of at least 21/2 to three inches measured 41/2 feet above grade and has an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
    Tree abuse means any action or inaction which causes the decline or death of a tree. Abuse includes but is not limited to improper trimming, damage inflicted upon the tree including but not limited to abuse by machinery, changing the natural grade within the dripline, destruction of the natural shape or any action which causes infection, infestation, decay, or destroys the natural landscape function of the tree or results in the death of the tree. 
    Vehicular use areas includes all areas used for the circulation, parking and/or display of any and all types of vehicles, mobile homes, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether self-propelled or not, and all land upon which vehicles traverse as a function of the primary uses. This includes but is not limited to activities of a drive-in nature, such as service stations, convenience stores, banks, restaurants and similar activities. 
    Vine means a plant which normally requires support to reach mature form. Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.2), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 108-383-108-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC AREAS 

Sec. 108-411. - Landscape plan approval. 
(a)  Development plan review. A landscape plan showing proposed landscaping shall be submitted at such time as any development plan is submitted for development plan review. All landscape plans shall be drawn to scale and shall include sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with all of the landscape requirements of this article and section 108-243. All landscape plans must include a complete list of the plant types and sizes to be planted along with a planting and maintenance schedule. 
In addition to review procedures identified in article II of this chapter, landscape plans shall be reviewed by the tree commission. The tree commission, within 30 days of receiving a development plan with the landscape component, shall hold a public meeting to review and act on such plans. Required tree removal permit information identified in article VI of chapter 110 shall be submitted with the landscape plan. 
The planning board shall not review a development plan until the plan has been reviewed by the tree commission, unless the city landscape coordinator renders a finding that the subject development plan is compliant with all criteria of this article and article VI of chapter 110. In the latter case, the development plan may be reviewed by the planning board prior to review by the tree commission; however, in such case any development plan approval by the planning board shall be conditioned on approval by the tree commission. Notice of the date of all public meetings of the tree commission shall be provided to the applicant. The applicant shall be given reasonable opportunity to be heard at the public meeting prior to the tree commission's action. 
(b)  Building permits. Where development plan review is not required, a landscape plan shall be submitted at the time application is made for a building permit. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall clearly delineate the location and dimensions of the existing and proposed landscaping. The landscape plan shall also include a detailed plan of off-street parking areas as well as the location of existing and proposed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-412. - Minimum landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Minimum landscaped areas. The minimum area of a building site which shall be landscaped with trees, including canopy trees, shrubs and ground cover, and other landscaping as defined in this article shall be a minimum of 20 percent of the building site area. 
(b)  Minimum native plant requirement. Seventy percent of the minimum required landscaping shall be native plant species. 
(c)  Landscaping combination requirement. All landscaping must consist of a combination of trees, including canopy and shade trees, shrubs and ground cover and must be in compliance with the land development regulations. 
(d)  Maintenance. The owner or the owner's agent, where appropriate, shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained free of debris and free of tree abuse. Where newly installed plants do not survive, they shall be replaced no later than 30 days from the time the prior tree expired. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-413. - Requirements along street frontage. 
(a)  Location of landscaping. Landscaping shall be required to be located within the property line and/or building setback as established by the land development regulations or as otherwise established. Landscaping, when required in easements, may be adjusted by the planning board. A decision on any related issue decided upon by the planning board but remaining in dispute shall be resolved by the city commission. 
(b)  Minimum standards. The landscaping shall comply with the following stipulated minimum standards and shall, in all cases, consist of a minimum of 70 percent native species. The local extension service provides a list of native trees, shrubs, and ground cover: 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPING ALONG THE RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Area of Site Width of Required Landscaping 
(linear feet) Number of Plant Units* Required per 100 Linear Feet of Property Line or Right-of-Way Less than 0.5 acre 10  40 0.5 to <1 acre 20  80 1 to <3 acres 30 120 3 or more acres 40 160 *A plant unit is a measurement describing the amount of required plant material in flexible units based on the unit values in the following table.  
Type of Plant Material Number of Plant Units One canopy or shade tree 10 One evergreen or ornamental tree 3 One shrub 1  
All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between the right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped with grass or other ground cover. 
(c)  Required screening material. Any combination of barriers, shrub or landscaped berm shall be planted or installed along the entire length of each required landscape strip. In all residential or commercial or mixed use districts, the barrier, shrub, or landscape berm (berm with shrubs) shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet in height, except in commercial districts, where the barrier, shrub or landscaped berm along street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of three feet in height. 
Where a barrier is erected, the barrier shall be restricted to a decorative masonry wall pursuant to standards cited in section 108-449. Where a decorative wall is provided, the required plant material shall be planted on the street side along a public right-of-way and shall be maintained in perpetuity by the applicant or successive owners. All nonliving barriers abutting public streets shall be at least 18 inches inside the property line or within the building setback line, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-414. - Requirements for interior areas. 
(a)  Scope. This section presents a summary of the minimum requirements for landscaping and tree planting within the interior of parking lots and along the other perimeters of a parking lot. 
(b)  Size and composition of interior landscaping. All off-street parking areas including all paved areas for off-street parking, drives, aisles, standing zones, and other vehicular use areas, except parking areas for single-family residences, shall have a minimum landscape area of 20 percent of the total parking area. Each landscaped area shall have a minimum dimension of six feet with a minimum of 60 square feet of continuous landscaped open area and is required to contain at least one shade tree. All landscaped open area shall contain grass, ground cover or other living plant material. Landscaped area for the interior of parking lots as well as landscaped area for perimeter requirements and other nonvehicular use areas shall not include any water areas. The total number of required trees shall be one tree for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of required landscape area. 
(c)  Use of interior landscape strip. Interior parking landscaping shall, insofar as possible, be used to delineate and guide major traffic movement within the parking area and to prevent cross space driving wherever possible. Landscaping dividing strips with concrete curbing along the outer perimeter and with or without walkways shall be used to subdivide parking areas. Landscaping shall be designed so no more than ten spaces shall be in an uninterrupted row. Where two rows of parking spaces are adjacent to one another (i.e., head to head), a landscape strip with a minimum dimension of six feet shall be planted along the common boundary. In addition, each ten parking stalls must be separated by a parallel landscaped area with a minimum dimension of nine feet to allow car doors to open freely. The end of each aisle and corner area must be landscaped. Each landscape strip shall contain a minimum of one shade tree. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-415. - Perimeter landscape requirements. 
(a)  Scope; standards. Perimeter landscaping defines parking areas and prevents two adjacent lots from becoming one large expanse of paving. Perimeter landscaped areas for all off-street parking areas, excepting single-family homes and parking lots for six or less vehicles, must meet the following standards: 
MINIMUM PARKING LOT 
PERIMETER LANDSCAPING 
Building Site 
(sq. ft.) Perimeter Landscaping Width 
(feet) 20,000 or less 5.0 20,000-50,000 7.5 Over 50,000 10.0  
(b)  Required plant material in perimeter landscape strip. One canopy shade tree and ten shrubs per 35 linear feet or fraction thereof is required in perimeter landscaped areas. 
(c)  Cross easements. Cross easements between abutting parking lots together with coordinated plans for access, egress and internal circulation may be required for purposes of maintaining adopted levels of service for traffic circulation and avoiding the cumulative effect of uncontrolled curb cut proliferation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-416. - Other landscape requirements for nonvehicular use areas. 
(a)  Trees shall be planted in the nonvehicular open space, excluding the required street frontage landscape strips, the interior parking lot landscape strips, and the perimeter landscape strips, to meet the following requirements: 
LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS IN 
NONVEHICULAR USE AREAS 
Percent of Site in Nonvehicular Open Space (NOS) 
(percent) Tree Requirement Less than 30 4 trees/2,000 sq. ft. NOS 30-39 4 trees/2,500 sq. ft. NOS 40-49 4 trees/3,000 sq. ft. NOS 50-59 4 trees/3,500 sq. ft. NOS 60 or more 4 trees/4,000 sq. ft. NOS  
(b)  Grass, ground cover, shrubs, and other landscaping materials shall be used to treat all ground not covered by building, paving, or other structures. All structures shall be treated with landscaping so as to enhance the appearance of the structure and to screen any unsightly features. Trees, as required in this section, shall be spaced in clusters or situated in strategic locations consistent with good principles of design and plant installation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.8), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-417-108-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-446. - Applicability. 
    The general regulations in this division shall apply to all landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-447. - Protection of plant material. 
(a)  All landscape strips required by this article shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by raised curbing. 
(b)  During the construction stage of development, the developer shall not cause or allow the cleaning or storage of equipment or material, within the dripline (refer to the figure in section 108-448) of any tree or groups of trees to be maintained. The developer shall provide and maintain protective barriers, in a form to be approved by the landscape coordinator, around all landscaping existing on site prior to construction. The developer shall not cause or allow the disposal of waste material such as paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or any other material harmful to the life of a tree within the dripline of any tree or groups of trees. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-448. - Required coverage. 
    All landscape strips required by this article shall be covered by a living plant material, excepting a mulched area having a radius no larger than three feet from the outside diameter of the fill. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the vicinity of the city. Grass areas shall be sodded. Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers or vines shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
PROTECTIVE BARRIER DETAIL 
NOTES: 
1.  Trees to be protected shall be centered within protective barrier (minimum shown above). 
2.  Protective barrier shall be enlarged when necessary to enclose all exposed roots. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-449. - Berms and decorative masonry walls. 
(a)  Berms are encouraged for use in meeting the landscape barrier requirements of this article. If berms are utilized, they shall be landscaped with living plant material to achieve the required heights. Berms must be at least 1.5 feet high with a minimum slope of 2:1. The minimum crown of the berm shall be two feet. The berm must be covered with live vegetation. 
(b)  Where berms or decorative masonry walls (i.e., faced with stucco, brick, or other ornamental material) are constructed within the required landscape strip, the number of required plant units may be reduced by 50 percent. Notwithstanding, canopy or shade trees shall be provided pursuant to section 108-415(b). All such plant material shall be planted on the side of the wall facing the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-450. - Landscape screening. 
    A landscape strip is required along the entire perimeter of all storage, parking, display, sales or accessory vehicular use areas except along the portion of the perimeter which is entirely screened visually from adjacent property by buildings on the property being improved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-451. - Credit for existing trees. 
    Credit shall be granted for trees which are preserved on a site and which meet the tree requirements of any landscaping section of this division. Where a tree is of exceptional quality, as determined by a qualified landscape professional, the planning board shall grant a two-tree credit for the preserved tree. Exceptional quality shall be judged on the basis of such factors as extraordinary size of the tree, vigorous health, large canopy cover, historic value, rareness, and age. No credit will be granted for preserved trees which are classified as undesirable, which are extremely poor specimens or which are in declining health. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-452. - Required sight distances for landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way and points of access. 
    When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular area described in this section shall allow unobstructed cross visibility at a level between 30 inches above the sidewalk grade and six feet above the sidewalk grade. However, trees or palms shall be permitted provided the trees or palms are trimmed so as to allow visibility at the levels indicated in this section and provided they are located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Triangular areas are as follows: 
(1)  Clear zone adjacent to intersection of accessway and public right-of-way. The clear zone adjacent to an intersection of an accessway and a public right-of-way shall be the triangular areas of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the accessway and the public right-of-way line for a distance of 15 feet in length along the accessway and eight feet in length along the public right-of-way, and the third line connecting the ends of the two sides. 
(2)  Clear zone adjacent to intersection of two or more intersecting rights-of-way. The clear zone adjacent to the intersection of two or more intersecting rights-of-way shall be the area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way with two sides of the triangular area being 30 feet in length along the abutting public rights-of-way measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two lines. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-453. - Required clearance over roadways and fire lanes. 
    Every tree, whether new or existing, shall have a minimum of 14 feet of clearance over any roadway or fire lane, whether public or private, to allow for the unobstructed passage of emergency apparatus to safely travel under. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-454. - Attachments to trees; excessive cut or fill. 
(a)  Attachments to trees prohibited. It shall be unlawful to attach anything to a tree trunk or stem having a diameter of six inches or more, other than protective wires, braces or other similar noninjurious materials. 
(b)  Excessive cut and/or fill. It shall be unlawful to remove any material or ground within the dripline of a tree which is necessary for the growth of the subject tree. Also, when raising the existing grade of a site, it shall be unlawful to raise the grade within the tree's dripline more than six inches without incorporating retaining walls to preserve the tree's root system. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.9(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-455-108-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANTING METHODS, MATERIAL, MAINTENANCE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 108-481. - Specifications for plant materials. 
(a)  Trees. All trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height with a minimum of six feet of clear trunk space immediately after planting. Trees shall be of a species having an average mature crown of greater than 30 feet wide and having trunks which can be maintained with over six feet of clear wood. Trees or palms having an average mature crown spread of less than 30 feet may be substituted by grouping the trees or palms so as to create the equivalent of 20 feet of crown spread. Such a grouping shall count as one tree toward meeting the tree requirement for any section in this article. If palms are used, they shall constitute no more than 25 percent of total tree requirements for any section in this article. No other tree species shall account for more than 50 percent of the total number of trees. Trees must be spaced between ten and 50 feet apart depending on the characteristics of the tree species and the function of the respective tree. 
(b)  Shrubs and hedges. Individually planted shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height immediately after planting. Shrubs planted for required hedges shall have minimum heights immediately after planting as follows: two feet for three-foot high hedges; 21/2 feet for four-foot high hedges and three feet for five-foot high hedges. The planning board may waive the size and minimum standard specifications if the applicant can demonstrate that current market conditions are such that shrubs and hedges meeting these specifications are not readily available. Shrubs shall be planted no further apart than four feet on center. Hedges shall reach the required height and form a solid and unbroken visual screen within one year after planting. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.10), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-482. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Plant quality and installation. All plant materials shall be of a species adaptive to the Florida Keys and shall conform to standards for Florida No. 1 or better, as stated in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, part I (1973) and part II (1975), state department of agriculture, as may be amended. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of noxious pests or diseases. Installation of all landscaping shall be in a sound workmanlike manner according to accepted good planting procedures. Prohibited species of trees shall be those species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public improvements. Prohibited trees include the following: 
(1)  Australian pine (Casuarine sp.). 
(2)  Melaleuca (Cajeput) (Melaleuca leucadendra). 
(3)  Brazilian pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius). 
(b)  Maintenance, including irrigation. Maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or agent, jointly and severally. The landscaping shall be maintained in perpetuity in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. All landscaped areas must be equipped with an irrigation system approved by the planning board. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
If at any time after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other form of approval the landscaping of a development to which this article is applicable is found to be noncompliant, the administrative official shall issue notice to the owner that action is required to comply with this section and shall describe what action is required to comply. The owner, tenant, or agent shall have 30 days to restore the landscaping as required. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of this section, the punishment for which shall be as provided pursuant to the Code of Ordinances. If, after due process, the landowner fails to comply with the order of the city, the city commission may order the administrative official to enter into a contract for city commission approval for purposes of undertaking required maintenance and bill the property owner or lessee for the costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.11), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-483-108-510. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Drought Tolerant Landscape 

Sec. 108-511. - Landscape plan required. 
(a)  A landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning board prior to issuance of a site plan approval where applicable or prior to issuance of a building or paving permit where a site plan is not applicable. The landscape plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner and designer. 
(2)  North arrow, scale and date; the minimum scale is one inch equals 50 feet. 
(3)  Property lines, easements and rights-of-way with internal and property line dimensions. 
(4)  Location of existing or proposed utility service. 
(5)  Location and size of any existing or proposed structures. 
(6)  Location and size of any existing or proposed site features, such as earthen mounds, swales, walls, and water areas. 
(7)  Location and size of any existing or proposed vehicular use areas. 
(8)  Location and size of any existing or proposed sidewalks, curbs and wheel stops. 
(9)  Irrigation plan, showing location of sprinkler heads, hose bibs or quick couplers and other information on irrigation. 
(10)  Calculations of required type, dimensions, and square footage of landscape material and of required landscape areas, including total site area, parking areas, other vehicular use area, percentage of nonvehicular open space, perimeter and interior landscape strips, required number of trees. 
(11)  Location of required landscape areas and dimensions. 
(12)  Location, name, height, and size of all existing plant material to be retained. 
(13)  Location, size, height, and description of all landscape material including name, quantity, quality, spacing and specified size and specification of all plant material. 
(14)  Height, width, type, material, and location of all barriers of nonliving material. 
(15)  Indicate location, dimensions and area of landscaping for freestanding signs. 
(16)  Show all landscaping, buildings or other improvements on adjacent property within five feet of the common property line. 
(b)  The landscaping plan shall be drawn by a landscape architect or other person with comparable experience in the field of landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-512. - Techniques utilized. 
    Landscape designs shall incorporate appropriate plant material which will survive and flourish with comparatively little supplemental irrigation. These plants are native, drought tolerant, noninvasive plants. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-513. - Landscape plans in industrial, commercial, civic and multifamily residential buildings or structures and common areas of single-family or multifamily residential developments. 
    Industrial, commercial, civic and multifamily residential buildings or structures and common areas of single-family or multifamily residential developments shall incorporate drought tolerant trees, shrubs, and ground covers in landscape plans as a water conservation measure. A list of plants which require minimal water can be found in section 108-518 as well as Xeriscape Plant Guide II, made available through the South Florida Water Management District. Interior remodels or minor modifications to the exterior of a structure are not subject to this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-514. - Review of landscape plans. 
    The administrative official shall review all landscape plans to verify that the following drought tolerant fundamentals have been utilized: 
(1)  Consideration for the site's soil characteristics, topography, drainage, and microclimatic conditions should be made when making plant selection. 
(2)  Organic mulches (pine and cypress) and inorganic mulches (rock, stone and gravel) shall be specified in planting beds to a minimum depth of three inches. Mulches will help in holding moisture, cooling the surface, reducing weed growth, slowing erosion, and, in the case of organic mulches, even improve the soil quality as they decompose. 
(3)  Drought tolerant, native and noninvasive exotic plants shall be used. This conserves water resources and increases a plant's chance of survival. Plants shall be installed and maintained in a professional and responsible manner so as to allow for the plant's optimum growth and longevity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-515. - Irrigation plan required. 
(a)  The landscape plan shall be accompanied be an irrigation plan showing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the irrigation contractor responsible for the design. 
(2)  A schedule of materials, including heads, piping, meters, cocks, etc., with sizes and quantities specified. 
(3)  Include a scaled drawing showing location of all heads, piping, meters and cocks. 
(4)  Indicate the source of water to be used (i.e., on-site well, city water or reclaimed water). The irrigation system shall be designed to connect to the city's reclaimed water system if and when it becomes available within 100 feet of the site. 
(5)  Backflow preventers shall be indicated on the design. 
(b)  The irrigation design shall provide for 100-percent coverage of all planted areas, and irrigation zones shall accommodate plants with similar watering requirements. 
(c)  All irrigation systems shall include a rain sensor device or switch which will override the irrigation cycle of the system when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
(d)  Shrubs, trees, ground covers, and low mass plantings shall be watered with bubblers of low volume emitters placed in separate zones from turf sprinklers. 
(e)  In an effort to conserve water, very narrow areas where sprinkler heads would overspray, mulches, gravel or other nonliving forms of ground cover shall be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-516. - Review and approval procedure. 
    Landscape and irrigation plans shall be subject to review and approval as part of the development plan review procedure. The administrative official shall authorize the inspection of all landscaping and irrigation, and no certificate of approval and occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping and irrigation are completed in accordance with the submitted landscape and irrigation plans and the requirements of this article. A decision on any related issue in dispute shall be resolved by the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-517. - Waivers or modifications. 
(a)  An application for waiver or modification to the standards of this ordinance shall be filed with the city planning office and shall be considered by the planning board after reviewing recommendations of the city planner or designated staff. The planning board shall render the final action. The application shall: 
(1)  Be filed on forms provided by the administrative official. 
(2)  State clearly and in detail the waivers requested and reasons therefor. 
(3)  Be accompanied by sketches, surveys and statistical information. 
(4)  Be accompanied by an application fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the resolution of the city commission. 
(5)  Be executed and sworn to by the owner or authorized agent. 
(b)  The planning board may approve or grant the waiver or modification only if it determines that the waivers or modifications are not contrary to the intent of this subdivision and that a literal enforcement of the standards of this subdivision would be impracticable and would not violate the following criteria: 
(1)  Public interest; adjacent property. The waiver or modification would not have a significant adverse impact on the public interest, or on adjacent property. 
(2)  Not discriminatory. The waiver or modification is not discriminatory, considering similar situations in the general area. 
(3)  Superior alternatives. The development will provide an alternative landscape solution which will achieve the purposes of the requirement through clearly superior design. 
(4)  Protection of significant features. The waiver or modification is necessary to preserve or enhance significant existing environmental or cultural features, such as trees, scenic areas, historic sites or public facilities, related to the development site. 
(5)  Deprivation of reasonable use. Strict application of the requirement would effectively deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions, or location, provided that: 
a.  Such effect upon the owner is not outweighed by a valid public purpose in imposing the requirement in this case; and 
b.  The unusual conditions involved are not the result of actions of the developer or property owner which occurred after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(6)  Technical impracticality. Strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-13.12(E)), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Sec. 108-518. - Recommended plant material. 
    Recommended plant material shall be as follows: 
RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIAL* 
Common Name/Scientific Name Natural 
Height 
(feet) Salt 
Tolerance Drought 
Tolerance Ground Covers Swamp fern/Blechnum serrulatum 2-4 L L Silver sea oxeye/Borrichia arborescens 2-4 H H Beach bean/Canavalia maritima 0.5-1 H H Pineland snowberry/Chiococca pinetorum 2-3 H H Condradina/Condradina grandiflora 1-3 H H Swamp lily/Crinum americanum 1-2 M M Christmas berry/Crossopetalum ilicifolium 1-2 H H Seashore saltgrass/Distichlis spicata 0.25-0.5 H H Twinflower/Dyschoriste oblongifolia 0.5-1.5 H H Golden creeper/Ernodea litteralis 1-3 H H Blanket flower/Gaillardia pulchella 1-1.5 H H Beach sunflower/Helianthus debilis 1-2 H H Spider lily/Hymenocallis floridana 1-2 M L Spider lily/Hymenocallis latifolia 1-3 M H Alligator lily/Hymenocallis palmeri 1 H M Dwarf yaupon holly/Ilex vomitoria "Schellings dwarf" 1-3 H, M M Railroad vine/Ipomoea pes-caprae 0.3-0.6 H H Beach morning glory/Ipomoea stolonifera 0.5 H H Seacoast beach elder/Iva imbricata 1-3 H H Dwarf lantana/Lantana ovatifolia var. reclinata 0.7 H H Gopher apple/Licania michauxii 0.3-1 H H Matchweed/Lippia nodiflora 0.3 H H Sea lavender/Mallotonia gnophalodes 4-6 H H Giant sword fern/Nephrolepis biserrata 3-4 L L Beach peanut/Okenia hypogaea 0.5 H H Basket grass/Oplismenus setarius 0.2-0.75 L M Beach panic grass/Panicum amarum 1-2 H H Baby rubber plant/Peperomia obtusifolia 1-1.5 L H Pennyroyal/Satureja rigida 0.5-2 L H Inkberry/Scaevola plumieri 1-6 L H Saw palmetto/Serenoa repens 4-8 H H Sea purslane/Sesuvium portulacastrum 1-1.5 H H Spiderwort/Tradescantia ohiensis 1-2 M M Sea oats/Uniola paniculata 3-5 H H Wild allamanda/Urechites lutea 1-2 M H Shiny blueberry/Vaccinium myrsinites 1-2 L H Beach verbena/Verbena maritima 0.5-1 H H Bear grass/Yucca filamentosa 1-2 H H Coontie/Zamia pumila 1-3 H H Shrubs Sweet acacia/Acacia farnesiana 8-10 M H Paurotis palm/Acoelorrhaphe wrightii 15-20 M M Black calabash/Amphitecna latifolia 20-30 H H Torchwood/Amyris elemifera 12-16 H M Pineland allamanda/Angadenia berterii 2-4 L H Marlberry/Ardisia escallonioides 12-15 H M Butterfly weed/Asclepias tuberosa 3-4 L H Salt bush/Baccharis halimifolia 5-7 H H Tarflower/Beraria racemosa 4-8 L M Silver sea oxeye/Borrichia arborescens 2-4 H H Slender buchthorn/Bumelia reclinata 20-30 H M Locustberry/Byrsonima lucida 15-20 L H Beautyberry/Callicarpa americana 4-8 L H Spicewood/Calyptranthes pallens 10-25 M H Jamaican caper/Capparis cynophallophora 8-10 H H Seven-year apple/Casasia clusifolia 5-10 H H Buttonbush/Cephalanthus occidentalis 15 L L Rosemary/Cerotiola ericoides 4-5 H H Snowberry/Chiococca alba 6-9 H H Cocoplum/Chrysobalanus icaco 6-8 H M Sea grape/Coccoloba uvifera 15-30 H H Coffee colubrina/Colubrina arborescens 15-20 H H Silver buttonwood/Conocarpus erectus 15-20 H H Coin vine/Dalbergia ecastophyllum 6-9 H H Varnish leaf/Dodonaea viscosa 5-12 H H Golden dewdrop/Duranta repens 12-15 M M Coral bean/Erythrina herbacea 4-20 L M Stoppers/Eugenia spp. 8-20 H H Wild olive/Forestiera segregata 5-20 H H Wild cotton/Gossypium hirsutum 10-15 H H Scarletbush/Hamelia patens 5-6 M H Dahoon holly/Ilex cassine 25-40 M M Gallberry/Ilex glabra 6-10 M M Yaupon holly/Ilex vomitoria 2-8 H H Marsh elder/Iva frutescens 3-10 H M Joewood/Jacquinia keyensis 10-15 H H Christmas berry/Lycium carolinianum 6-8 H H Rusty lyonia/Lyonia ferruginia 10-20 L H Sea lavender/Mallotonia gnaphaloles 4-6 H H Florida mayten/Maytenus phyllanthoides 4-8 M M Wax myrtle/Myrica cerifera 12-15 H H Rapanea/Myrsine guianensis 15-20 H H Blackhead/Pithecellobium guadelupense 15-20 H H Cat's claw/Pithecellobium unguis-cati 15-20 H H Wild coffee/Psychotria nervosa 4-6 L M White indigoberry/Randia aculeata 6-10 H M Needle palm/Rhapidiphyllum hystrix 3-5 L M Winged sumac/Rhus coppalina 5-25 L H Scrub palmetto/Sabal etonia 3-4 M H Dwarf palmetto/Sabal minor 5-7 H H Maidenbush/Savia bahamensis 8-10 H H Inkberry/Scaevola plumieri 1-6 H H Saw palmetto/Serenoa repens 6-15 H H Necklace pod/Sophora tomentosa 6-10 H M Bay cedar/Suriana maritima 10-15 H H Yellow elder/Tecoma stans 10-20 M H Florida tetrazygia/Tetrazygia bicolor 5-20 M H Shiny blueberry/Vaccinium myrsinites 1-2 L H Spanish bayonet/Yucca aloifolia 12-15 H H Spanish dagger/Yucca gloriosa 6-8 M H Trees Sweet acacia/Acacia farnesiana 10-12 M H Red maple/Acer rubrum 35-50 L L Paurotis palm/Acoelorrhaphe wrightii 15-25 M M Black calabash/Amphitecna latifolia 20-30 H H Pond apple/Annona glabra 25-40 M L Marlberry/Ardisia escallonioides 15-25 L M Black mangrove/Avicennia germianans 20-30 H L Strongbark/Bourreria suculenta var. revoluta 20 M H Buckthorn/Bumelia spp. 20-40 M, L M, H Gumbo limbo/Bursera simaruba 40-60 M H Wild cinnamon/Canella alba 20-35 M H Satin leaf/Chrysophyllum oliviforme 30-40 M H Fiddlewood/Citharexylim fruticosum 25-30 M H Pitch apple/Clusia rosea 25-30 H H Pigeon plum/Cocoloba diversifolia 25-30 H H Sea grape/Coccoloba uvifera 15-30 H H Silver palm/Coccothrinax argentata 10-20 H H Buttonwood/Conocarpus erectus 30-50 H H Geiger tree/Cordia sebestena 20-25 H H Willow-leaved bustic/Dipholis salicifolia 30-50 L M Stoppers/Eugenia spp. 15-20 H H Princewood/Exostema caribaeum 20-25 L M Strangler fig/Ficus aurea 40-50 M H Shortleaf fig/Ficus citrifolia 40-50 M H Loblolly bay/Gordonia lasianthus 30-40 L L Lignum vitae/Guaiacum sanctum 10-20 M L Blolly/Guapira discolor 35-50 M H Everglades velvetseed/Guettarda elliptica 10-20 L H Rough velvetseed/Guettarda scabra 15-30 H H Crabwood/Gymnanthes lucida 15-30 M H Mahoe/Hibiscus tiliaceus 30-45 H H White ironwood/Hypelate trifoliata 30-40 H H Dahoon holly/Ilex cassine 25-40 M H Tawnyberry holly/Ilex krugiana 25-40 H M Yaupon holly/Ilex vomitoria 20-25 H H Southern juniper/Juniperus silicicola 25-30 H H Black ironwood/Krugiodendron ferreum 20-30 M H White mangrove/Laguncularia racemosa 40-60 H L Wild tamarind/Lysiloma bahamensis 40-50 H H Southern magnolia/Magnolia grandiflora 60-100 H H Sweetbay/Magnolia virginiana 40-60 L L Mastic/Mastichodendron foetidissimum 45-70 H H Twinberry/Myrcianthes fragrans 20-30 H H Wax myrtle/Myrica cerifera 15-25 H H Lancewood/Nectandra coriacea 30-40 L M Red bay/Persea borbonia 50-60 M H Sand pine/Pinus clausa 60-80 H H South Florida slash/Pinus elliottii var. densa 80-100 M H Jamaican dogwood/Poscidia piscipula 35-50 H H Sycamore/Plantanus occidentalis 70-110 L L West Indian cherry/Prunus myrtifolia 15-40 L M Buccaneer palm/Psuedophoenix sargentii 10-15 H H Laurel oak/Quercus laurifolia 60-100 L H Live oak/Quercus virginiana 50-80 H H Darling plum/Reynosia septentrionalis 20-30 H H Red mangrove/Rhizophora mangle 30-80 H L Florida royal palm/Roystonea elata 60-125 M M Cabbage palmetto/Sabal palmetto 45-70 H H Coastal plain willow/Salix caroliniana 20-30 L L Soapberry/Sapindus saponaria 35-45 H H Florida boxwood/Schaefferia frutescens 20-40 M M Paradise tree/Simarouba glauca 35-50 M H Mahogany/Swietenia mahogani 35-60 H H Bald cypress/Taxodium distichum 60-100 M H Yellow elder/Tecoma stans 10-20 M H Key thatch palm/Thrinax morrisii 15-30 H H Florida thatch palm/Thrinax parviflora 20-25 H H Thatch palm/Thrinax radiata 15-25 H H Florida basswood/Tilia floridana 30-60 L L Tallowwood plum/Ximenia americana 20-25 H H Hercules club/Zanthoxylum clava-herculis 25-50 M H Wild lime/Zanthoxylum fagara 20-30 H H  
L = Low M = Medium H = High  
*The plants recommended in this list are taken from the following periodicals: 
Native Ground Cover for South Florida, Alan W. Meerow; Cooperative Extension Service, University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences; Reprinted August 1990. 
Native Shrubs for South Florida, Alan W. Meerow; Cooperative Extension Service, University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences; 1989. 
Native Trees for South Florida, Broschat, Donselman, and Meerow; Cooperative Extension Service, University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences; March 1992. 
Another comprehensive source for drought tolerant plants can be found in the publication "Xeriscape, Plant Guide II," distributed by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(app. XIII-A), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Secs. 108-519-108-545. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 70-116 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 108-546-108-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS FOR REQUIRED SPACES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 108-571. - Applicability. 
    Parking shall be provided in all districts at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity by a change of use or the addition of dwelling units, transient units, floor area, seats, beds, employees or other factors impacting parking demand as stated in this article. The parking spaces shall be delineated on a development plan if required pursuant to article II of this chapter. If a development plan is not required, the applicant shall submit a scaled drawing which shall be approved by the building official and filed with the building department. The land comprising approved parking spaces required by the land development regulations shall be maintained as off-street parking spaces in perpetuity and shall not be used for other purposes unless there is a city-approved change in land use on the premises which warrants a change in the design, layout, or number of required parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-572. - Schedule of off-street parking requirements by use generally. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule for motor vehicles and bicycles: 
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required For: Use Motorized Vehicles Bicycles As % of Motor 
Vehicles (1) Single-family 1 space per dwelling unit None (2) Multiple-family: a. Within historic district 1 space per dwelling unit 10% b. Outside historic district 2 spaces per dwelling unit 10% (3) Churches; public or private schools, libraries, or museums; public buildings; public or private auditoriums, community centers, theaters, facilities for spectator sports, trade institutions, transit facilities and other places of assembly 1 space per 5 seats or 1 space per 150 square feet of floor area in the main assembly hall, whichever is greater 10%, except libraries: 20%; public/private recreation, community centers, and city parking structures: 35% (4) Dormitories or single-room occupancy (SRO), roominghouses and/or boardinghouses 1 space for every 2 beds 35% (5) Day care centers, kindergartens, nursery schools and other preschool facilities 1 space per employee, with a minimum of 2 employee spaces, plus 5 spaces; or 1 space per employee plus 1 space for every 2 children enrolled; or 1 space for each 300 square feet of building areas, whichever is greater 10% (6) Marinas and offshore activities 1 space per liveaboard boat, plus 1 space per 4 pleasure boats stored on site, plus 1 space per 3 passengers based on the total capacity of commercially licensed vessels. The planning board may require additional parking spaces for dry storage slips. For offshore structures: 2 spaces, plus 1 space per 3 passengers based on the cumulative total capacity of motorized watercraft and other seating associated with the permitted activities. No additional off-street parking shall be required for offshore activities operating as an accessory use to an approved principal upland shoreline use 25% (7) Motels, hotels and other transient lodging facilities 1 space per lodging unit plus 1 space for the owner or manager 35% (8) Private clubs and lodges 1 space per 5 seats or 1 space per 150 square feet within the main assembly area 10% (9) Restaurants, bars and lounges 1 space per 45 square feet of serving and/or consumption area 25% (10) Scooter, moped, etc., bicycle rental 1 space per 3 scooters, mopeds, etc., and bicycle rentals based on licensed capacity; or 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater 10% (11) Hospitals 1 space for each 4 beds, plus 1 space for every employee, excluding doctors, on the largest shift, plus 1 space for each doctor 10% (12) Nursing or convalescent homes 1 space for each 4 beds 10% (13) Doctors' and dentists' offices or clinics 5 spaces per each doctor or dentist 10% Use Motorized Vehicles Bicycles As % of Motor 
Vehicles (14) Funeral homes 1 space for each 8 seats of chapel capacity, plus 1 space for every 2 employees, plus sufficient parking area to accommodate each hearse 10% (15) Banks, public administration offices, office buildings and professional offices other than doctors' or dentists' offices 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 25% (16) Retail stores and service establishments 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 25% (17) Warehousing or manufacturing 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor space 10%  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Sec. 108-573. - Special provisions within historic commercial pedestrian-oriented area. 
(a)  Description of area. The area within the historic commercial pedestrian-oriented area shall include all land zoned HRCC-1; HRCC-2, excepting those properties east of Trumbo Road and Grinnell Street; HRCC-3; HNC-1, excepting all land located east of lots which front on the east side of Simonton Street; HNC-3; as well as the lands within the HRO district which is located immediately east of Truman Annex, the post office and the courthouse; the HNC-2 district abutting the south side of Caroline Street; and the three HPS districts located west of Simonton Street. 
(b)  Special off-street parking requirement. Within the historic commercial pedestrian oriented area described in subsection (a) of this section, parking requirements shall be applied whenever: 
(1)  New nonresidential floor area is constructed; 
(2)  New residential or transient residential units are constructed; 
(3)  The amount of nonresidential floor area is increased due to expansion of existing structure or conversion of residential floor area to nonresidential floor area; or 
(4)  The number of residential or transient residential units available is increased due to conversion of nonresidential uses to residential or transient residential uses or internal or external construction of additional residential or transient residential floor area. 
(c)  Change of existing commercial pedestrian oriented uses. No additional off-street parking shall be required within the historic commercial pedestrian-oriented area if a commercial structure is the subject of a change from one type of commercial use to another type of commercial use, so long as no additional or expanded floor area is created. However, the off-street parking regulations in this article shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Additional floor area; or 
(2)  Any nonresidential floor area created after January 1, 1998, and converted to another use requiring more parking. 
Any preexisting off-street parking serving the structure must be maintained to service the new use. Similarly, preexisting parking shall not be used as a site for additional floor area unless the total off-street parking required pursuant to this article is made available to accommodate the existing and new proposed floor area. 
(d)  Location of bicycle parking. In the historic commercial pedestrian-oriented area, as part of development plan review pursuant to article II of this chapter, the city may approve the provision of bicycle parking in the right-of-way or in a public bicycle parking area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.2(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 16, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 108-574. - Substitution of bicycle parking spaces. 
    An applicant for development plan approval pursuant to article II of this chapter may file a request for a variance to substitute additional bicycle parking (i.e., bicycle parking in excess of that required pursuant to section 108-572). The planning board may grant such variance upon a finding that such additional bicycle parking would be beneficial and would satisfy the specific conditions of sections 90-394 and 90-395. However, hardship conditions shall not be a mandatory condition of obtaining the subject variance. If the planning board determines the requested bicycle parking is compliant with the referenced criteria, the planning board shall require that such additional parking be located on a site within 100 feet of the subject site. Furthermore, in determining the appropriate substitution, four bicycle parking spaces shall be equivalent to one motorized vehicle parking space. All such approved bicycle parking spaces shall satisfy pavement, maintenance, and construction specifications of subdivision II of this division as well as bicycle parking, design, lighting, and security criteria of section 108-643. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.2(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 18, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 108-575. - Computation of parking spaces. 
    In computing the number of required parking spaces, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  Floor area calculation. Floor area means gross floor area of a specific use. The gross floor area for a specific use includes common areas such as hallways, storage areas, restrooms, and similar areas. 
(2)  Interpretation of computation with fractions. When calculation of required parking results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction shall be rounded off to the next highest number. 
(3)  Requirements for uses not identified. The parking requirement for any use not specified shall be the same as that required for a use of a similar nature as recognized in this division or, where not recognized in this division, shall be based on criteria published by the American Planning Association or similarly recognized standards of their profession, and such standard shall be approved by the city commission. 
(4)  Requirements for mixed uses. For mixed uses the parking spaces shall be equal to the sum of the several uses computed separately. 
(5)  Applicability of standards to expanding uses. Whenever a building or use is enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or in any other manner so as to create a need for a greater number of parking spaces than that existing, such spaces shall be provided in accordance with this section. Any parking deficiency shall be brought into conformity concurrently with the enlargement or change of use. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-576. - Location of off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  Unenclosed parking spaces may be located within a required yard, except that no parking may be located within the coastal control line setback as defined in section 122-1148, and no parking may be located within any wetland buffer zones as set forth in section 110-91. Parking areas required by activities other than residential may be located on the same lot as the principal structure or may be located all or in part on another lot. If located on another lot, such lot shall have an appropriate zoning designation and shall not be more than 500 feet, measured along a street, from the principal structure of the activity. Where parking is to be located on a separate lot, the applicant shall provide satisfactory evidence of a recorded deed restriction or recorded perpetual easement providing for such required parking on the designated site for the duration of the principal use. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, all required bicycle parking shall be located on site within 50 feet of primary entrances and not farther than the motor vehicle parking space nearest to such primary entrances. However, in the historic commercial pedestrian-oriented area, as defined in section 108-573(a), such distance may be exceeded when and if the location of the required bicycle parking is allowed in the public right-of-way or in a public bicycle parking area based on a component of a development plan approved pursuant to procedures stated in article II of this chapter. The 50 feet may also be exceeded if provision of required handicapped parking creates a conflict with this requirement. However, the location of the bicycle parking area under such conditions shall provide for safe and convenient access to the bicyclist. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.3(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-577. - Combined parking spaces. 
    The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.3(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-578. - Driveways serving single-family dwellings. 
    To meet the requirements for two parking spaces for each single-family dwelling, a driveway leading to a carport or garage may be considered a parking space if the driveway is at least 20 feet in length between the front lot line and the front of the carport or garage. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.3(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-579-108-605. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Parking Area Regulations 

Sec. 108-606. - Drainage plans for parking surfaces. 
    Adequate drainage shall be provided for all parking areas. Drainage plans shall be in compliance with this article and shall be approved by the city before construction is begun on any parking area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-607. - Landscaping required. 
    For parking areas containing more than five spaces, at least ten percent of the total area shall be landscaped and shall comply with article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 17, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 108-608. - Site plan required. 
    The construction of any off-street parking area shall require a site plan approved pursuant to article II of this chapter. The site plan shall include the site characteristics, including but not limited to elevation, slope, drainage, soil type and adjacent surface conditions, and the type and amount of anticipated traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-609. - Use of parking areas for purposes other than parking prohibited. 
    All parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no motor vehicles sales or any other sales activity, dead storage, nonemergency repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-610. - Lighting. 
    Parking areas designed for nighttime use shall have a system of lighting to provide adequate illumination for the entire parking area. Such lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties and public ways. Energy conservation measures shall be employed, including directing light sources downward and away from the sky. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-611. - Paving of parking surface, maintenance and construction specifications. 
(a)  All parking areas shall be paved to meet city standards and maintained in perpetuity. The paving plan shall be approved by the administrative official before construction is begun on any parking area. The owner or successor in ownership shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance. This subsection shall be enforced by the city's code enforcement regulations. 
(b)  Parking lots shall be paved with concrete or asphalt or, upon approval of the city engineer, with other dustfree, porous materials. Parking lots paved with concrete or asphalt shall be paved in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Asphalt. Driveways, from the street to the property line, shall have an eight-inch limerock base and shall be paved with one inch of type III virgin asphalt. Parking lots with a stabilized subbase shall have a six-inch limerock base and shall be paved with one inch of type III virgin asphalt. Parking lots without a stabilized subbase shall have an eight-inch limerock base and shall be paved with one inch of type III virgin asphalt. 
(2)  Concrete. Driveways and parking lots excepting single-family and two-family structures shall be paved with six inches or 3,000-pound concrete. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-612-108-640. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Design and Specifications for Parking and Loading Areas 

Sec. 108-641. - Driveways, aisles and stalls. 
    The term "driveways" as used within the context of this article shall describe the entrance roadway used to connect the parking area with the nearest street. Driveways may be either one way or two way and shall be constructed to meet the minimum dimensions* in the following table and in any case shall allow for the maneuvering of fire protection vehicles. Aisles are those circulation paths between rows or vehicles allowing access to the individual stalls. The aisles shall be designed to meet the minimum dimensions in the following table. However, when an aisle is coincident with a fire lane, the aisle must be a minimum of 20 feet wide to accommodate fire protection vehicles. Stalls (i.e., parking spaces) are the actual parking area designated for the storage of individual vehicles. The various angles for parking stalls are provided in the following table with their respective dimensions. In addition, the construction and delineation of stalls shall follow the standards outlined in sections 108-642 through 108-646. 
*Modifications. Forty percent of total spaces may have a width and length of 7.5 feet by 15 feet. The city commission may approve modifications upon demonstrated need by the applicant and based on recommendations of the city staff. In considering modification to the specifications required by this subdivision, the city commission shall be guided by the current edition of the Architectural Graphic Standards by Ramsey and Sleeper or an equivalent commonly accepted source of standards. 
_____
PARKING SPACE ANGLE 
Dimension 
(feet) 45 Degrees 60 Degrees 90 Degrees Parallel Width of stall 9 9 9 9 Length of stall 18 18 18 23 Width of aisle 14 18 24 14 Width of one-way driveway 14 14 24 14 Width of two-way driveway 20 20 24 20  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Sec. 108-642. - Design of stalls for motor vehicles. 
    Each parking stall shall be accessible from an aisle or driveway and designed so that no automobile shall back into a public street in order to exit a parking stall. The internal design of the parking lot shall be designed to facilitate vehicular circulation and avoid conflict between pedestrian and vehicular movements. Internal circulation also shall be designed so as not to create conflict with access into or egress from the site and shall be consistent with the landscape requirements of this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-643. - Bicycle parking design, lighting and security criteria. 
    Each bicycle parking space shall be at least two feet wide by six feet long with a seven-foot minimum vertical clearance. An access aisle at least five feet wide shall be provided and maintained beside or between rows of bicycle parking. A facility for bicycle parking shall offer security including either a lockable storage enclosure or a stationary rack to which the bicycle can be locked. Bicycle rack design must accommodate both U-shaped locks and cables and include such common shapes as an inverted "U" design or a "ribbon" design. Racks shall be securely anchored. Lighting shall also be provided in bicycle parking areas so that all bicycle facilities are thoroughly illuminated and no less illuminated than any motor vehicle parking stalls on site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-644. - Encroachment to entryways of buildings. 
    No door or pedestrian entrance at ground level shall open directly upon any driveway or access aisle unless the doorway or pedestrian entrance is at least three feet or more from the driveway or access aisle and appropriate improvements are provided to allow for safe pedestrian access to the door. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-645. - Wheel stops. 
(a)  All paved parking spaces shall have lines between spaces to indicate individual stalls, and each stall shall be equipped with wheel stops or similar devices unless a waiver is granted by the city engineer. 
(b)  Wheel stops for stalls adjacent to landscaped strips shall be located three feet from the front end of the stall to prevent encroachment into required landscaped areas. The front 21/2 feet of the stall may be kept as a maintained vegetative ground cover area although no credit will be extended toward open space requirements of this subpart B. 
(c)  Wheel stops for stalls not adjacent to landscaped strips shall be located 31/2 feet from the front end of the stall. The front three feet of the stall may be kept as a maintained vegetative ground cover area although no credit will be extended toward the open space requirements of this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 18, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 108-646. - Compact car spaces. 
    Parking lots with 20 or more spaces may be comprised of a maximum of 15 percent compact car parking stalls. Such compact car stalls shall be 71/2 feet wide by 15 feet long and marked for use by small vehicles. The markings shall be maintained in perpetuity. The intent is to deter larger cars from using compact car spaces. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-647. - Accessibility standards. 
    All publicly maintained and operated parking facilities intended for public use and all businesses, firms, or other persons licensed to do business with the public shall comply with requirements for access established in the Accessibility Requirements Manual published by the department of community affairs, state board of building codes and standards. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(A)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-648. - Entries, exits, drives and vehicle maneuvering areas. 
(a)  All uses which are required to provide three or more off-street parking spaces shall have entryways and exitways and drives at least 20 feet in width to accommodate two-way traffic unless a one-way traffic system is utilized, in which case entryways and exitways and drives shall be at least 12 feet in width. If a one-way traffic system is utilized, appropriate traffic direction markers shall be installed. The internal circulation system, including drives and maneuvering areas, shall be designed to permit convenient maneuvering of cars and service vehicles into and out of each parking and loading space and shall be arranged so that no vehicle need back onto a public right-of-way. Where three or more off-street parking spaces are required, no occupied parking or loading space shall interfere with access to any other parking or loading space. The design of parking facilities shall also comply with landscape requirements of article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  No parking spaces or loading spaces required pursuant to sections 108-572 through 108-574 shall interfere with access to or along any pedestrian walkway. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-649. - Required off-street loading spaces. 
    The following off-street loading spaces shall be provided for the uses indicated. All loading areas shall be designed in a manner which maintain all movements on site without entry directly into the right-of-way: 
(1)  Loading space dimensions. Loading spaces required under this subdivision shall be at least 50 feet long and 12 feet wide. 
(2)  Required loading spaces. Required loading spaces shall be as follows: 
a.  Every lot used for commercial or manufacturing purposes and having one or more buildings with a total floor area of at least 10,000 square feet and every lot used for office purposes on which there is one or more buildings having a total floor area of at least 20,000 square feet shall be provided with an off-street loading space. 
b.  Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building, or similar use having a floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet, requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials and merchandise, shall have at least one permanently maintained off-street loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
c.  Retail operations, wholesale operations, and industrial operations with a gross floor area of less than sufficient space, not necessarily a full berth, so as not to hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
d.  An additional off-street loading space shall be required for lots used for commercial or manufacturing purposes where the floor area of all buildings exceeds 100,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
_____
Sec. 108-650. - Provision for handicapped parking and loading zones.[8] 
(a)  Location. Parking spaces designated for physically handicapped people and accessible passenger loading zones that serve a particular building shall be located on the shortest possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance of the building. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking spaces for physically handicapped people shall be located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. 
(b)  Parking spaces. Parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Any commercial real estate property owner offering parking for the general public shall provide specially designed and marked motor vehicle parking spaces for the exclusive use of physically disabled persons who have been issued parking permits pursuant to F.S. § 316.1958, 320.0842, 320.0843, 320.0845 or 320.0848. 
(2)  Diagonal or perpendicular parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide as shown in figure 108-650(b)(2). 

parking spaces 1 
(3)  Parallel parking spaces shall be located either at the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to alley entrances as shown in figure 108-650(b)(3). Curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere with the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors. 

parking spaces 2 
(4)  Each such parking space shall be conspicuously outlined in blue paint and shall be posted and maintained with a permanent, abovegrade sign bearing the international symbol of accessibility or the caption "Parking by Disabled Permit Only," or bearing both such symbol and caption as shown in figure 108-650(b)(4). Such signs shall not be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. All handicapped parking spaces must be signed and marked in accordance with the standards adopted by the state department of transportation. 

parking spaces 3 
(5)  All spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle 60 inches wide minimum as shown in figure 108-650(b)(2). Parking access aisles shall be part of the accessible route to the building or facility entrance and shall comply with the accessible route section of the state board of building codes and standards, Accessibility Requirements Manual. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible circulation route. 
(6)  All spaces shall have access to a curb ramp or curb cut, when necessary to allow access to the building served, and shall be located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked vehicles. 
(7)  The minimum number of such parking spaces shall comply with the following table: 
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of 
Accessible Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1000 2% of total Over 1000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(c)  Passenger loading zones. Passenger loading zones shall provide an access aisle at least 48 inches wide and 20 feet long adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space as shown in figure 108-650(c). If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space, a curb ramp complying with the curb ramp section of the state board of building codes and standards, Accessibility Requirements Manual, shall be provided. A minimum vertical clearance of 108 inches shall be provided at accessible passenger loading zones and along vehicle access routes to such areas from site entrances. 

(d)  Fire lanes and zones. Fire lanes and zones shall be provided pursuant to the city fire protection code. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note- Excerpt from the state board of building codes and standards, Accessibility Requirements Manual, department of community affairs, January 1990. 

Secs. 108-651-108-675. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 108-676. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means every description of watercraft, barge and air boat other than a seaplane, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on or under the water. 
    Boat trailer means a trailer used for or designed for carrying boats. 
    Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons and any motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Pole trailer means any vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Recreational vehicle means an item of tangible personal property designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
    Road tractor means any motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or as any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Semitrailer means any vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by, another vehicle. 
    Straight truck means any truck on which the cargo unit and the motive power unit are located on the same frame so as to form a single, rigid unit. 
    Tandem trailer truck means any combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer coupled together so as to operate as a complete unit. 
    Trailer means any vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 108-677. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
    Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-678. - Scope. 
    The parking of commercial vehicles (i.e., any vehicle licensed by the state as a commercial vehicle, including but not limited to trucks and tractor trucks, tandem trailer trucks, straight trucks, semitrailer trucks, road tractors, pole trucks, trailers, buses) and recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, and camping vehicles in residential districts shall be regulated as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-679. - Commercial vehicles. 
    No commercial vehicles and accessory equipment, including trailers and the like, shall be parked at any time in any residential district unless actually engaged in temporary work or service on the premises. No commercial vehicle of more than 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or 20 feet in length shall be parked in any residential district overnight. There shall be no more than one commercial vehicle of any type parked overnight at any one residence in any residential district. Advertising signs with letters more than six inches in height on commercial vehicles parked within residential districts shall not be visible to the public from the property. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-680. - Recreational vehicles and boats. 
(a)  With the exception of properties located in a single-family zoning district or medium density residential district, all recreational vehicles, boats and trailers, and the like, as defined in this division, shall be parked within an enclosed structure, within a carport behind the front setback, within the required minimum rear yard or in the minimum side yard, as defined in Section 86-9, behind the front structure line of the main dwelling. If not located within an enclosed structure, the recreational vehicle, boat and/or trailer shall be screened by a fence and/or plant vegetation of sufficient height and opaqueness so that the vehicle, boat, and/or trailer cannot be seen from a location off the site. A recreational vehicle, boat, and trailer, and the like must be for the resident's individual use or related to employment. 
(b)  In single-family zoning district or medium density residential district, all recreational vehicles and the like, as defined in this division shall be parked within the rear yard as defined in Section 86-9. Recreational vehicles may also be parked within the side yard as defined in Section 86-9 so long as more than 50% of the length of the recreational vehicle is located behind the front structure line of the main dwelling, including any permanent structures attached to the front of the main dwelling. For purposes of this subsection, in the event of a corner lot, the front elevation shall be considered giving deference to the historical street address. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(B)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-27, § 1, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 108-681. - Camping vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  With the exception of properties located in a single-family zoning district or medium density residential district, no vehicle or equipment primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, or self-propelled motor homes shall be parked forward of the front building line. 
(b)  In single-family zoning district or medium density residential district, all vehicles or equipment primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, as defined in this division shall be parked within the rear yard as defined in Section 86-9. Recreational vehicles can also be parked within the side yard as defined in Section 86-9 so long as more than 50 percent of the length of the recreational vehicle is located behind the front structure line of the main dwelling, including any permanent structures attached to the front of the main dwelling. For purposes of this subsection, in the event of a corner lot, the front elevation shall be considered giving deference to the historical street address. 
(c)  All automobile trailers, recreational vehicles and the like occupied for living quarters in the city shall be parked in a regularly licensed trailer park. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(B)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-27, § 2, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 108-682. - Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats and camping vehicles in multifamily developments. 
    In addition to the general requirements in sections 108-678 through 108-681, multifamily residential developments, excluding two-family residences, shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles, boats, and camping vehicles in multifamily residential areas of 25 dwelling units or more (i.e., apartment and condominium structures) shall be parked only in areas specifically designated for such parking purposes. 
(2)  Any multifamily development with 25 dwelling units or more shall provide a minimum of one space per 25 units for the purpose of parking and storing of recreational vehicles, boats and/or trailers. Any fraction of 25 shall require spaces rounded up to the next whole number. 
(3)  The designated area for storing recreational vehicles identified in this section shall be at a distance most remote from the dwelling units. The parking area shall be screened with plant material, decorative walls, fences, berms or any combination thereof, in an effort to diminish any visual impact the area may have on the rest of the site. 
(4)  The designated area for storing recreation vehicles, boats, and/or trailers shall be a paved surface consistent with the rest of the parking area within the development and shall provide ample ingress and egress and space for easy maneuverability for the type of vehicles and equipment using the area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-27, § 3, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 108-683. - Exceptions. 
    Exceptions to this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Commercial vehicles and equipment on residential property. Commercial vehicles and equipment driven home as a job requirement by employees of the government, private utility companies, or for emergency use may be parked on residential property. Further, vehicles being used for routine deliveries or construction services may be parked on residential property while in the routine course of business. 
(2)  Commercial vehicles and equipment in nonresidential districts. Commercial vehicles and equipment may be parked on a lot in a district zoned other than residential so long as the vehicles are in regular use by the business located upon the premises. Further, vehicles being used for routine deliveries or construction services may be parked on nonresidential property while in the routine course of business. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in all residential zoning districts may be parked on a residential premise for a period not to exceed 24 hours during active loading and unloading. No such vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
(4)  Recreational vehicle, boats and/or trailers in single-family (SF) or medium density residential (MDR) zoning districts. Properly registered and licensed recreational vehicles, boats and or trailers may be parked and/or stored on the property without the requirement for structural or vegetative screening or storage within an enclosed structure, with the provision that no part of the recreational vehicle, boat and/or trailer extends into a public right-of-way or an adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-15.7(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-27, § 4, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 18-07, § 3, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 108-684. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division are not complaint driven. Such provisions shall be uniformly and indiscriminately enforced by the Key West Police Department, Key West Parking Division and Key West Code Compliance Department. 
(Ord. No. 12-27, § 5, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 108-685-108-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER AND SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Water and water management, § 74-276 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-711. - Applicability. 
    The surface water management regulatory sections established in this article shall apply to all development within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-712. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the surface water management policy is to: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Implement those drainage objectives and policies found in the public facilities element of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(3)  Ensure protection of land and improvements together with natural resources through the use of responsible stormwater management and flood protection practices; 
(4)  Ensure replenishment of the city's surficial aquifer system and provide a continuing usable water supply; and 
(5)  Ensure compliance with level of service criteria and concurrency management policies established in the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-713. - Intent. 
    The surface water management requirements are intended to complement regulations of the state department of environmental protection (DEP) including but not limited to those found in F.A.C. ch. 17-25, entitled "Regulation of Stormwater Discharge," and the surface water management rules of the South Florida Water Management District, all as adopted or as may be amended from time to time. Approval of a stormwater management system under this article shall not relieve any applicant of the necessity to obtain required permits or approvals from other state, regional, or local agencies, including specifically but not limited to observance of the state department of environmental protection permitting requirements for use of the "landward extent of waters of the state," as defined in F.A.C. 17-4.02(17). If a conflict occurs between the city regulations and state regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-714. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adverse impacts means any modifications, alterations or effects upon a feature or characteristic of water or floodprone land, which are or potentially may be harmful or injurious to water resources and environmentally sensitive areas, as well as human health, welfare, safety or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. The term includes secondary and cumulative as well as direct impacts. 
    Alter and alteration mean any work beyond maintenance of the original condition including additions to an existing system; changes of any part of an existing system to capacities or locations different from those originally constructed; and changes in the rate, volume, or timing of discharges. 
    Best management practice (BMP) means the best management practices for stormwater which are those which meet discharge quantity and quality criteria as contained in Manual of Stormwater Management Practices, and future amendments, as prepared for the county by the South Florida Regional Planning Council. 
    Coastal high hazard area, as defined in F.A.C. 9J-5.003(19), means the coastal high hazard area which shall encompass the evacuation zone for a category 1 hurricane as established in the regional hurricane evacuation study applicable to the city. 
    Control elevation means the lowest elevation at which water can be released through the discharge structure. 
    Detention and to detain mean the collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a manner as to provide for treatment through physical, chemical, or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater to the receiving waters, in which the capacity for the specified treatment volume of stormwater is again provided within 72 hours following a storm event. On-line detention is temporary storage along the axis of the drainage system, whereas off-line detention is temporary storage at a location away from the system's direct path. 
    Detention, dry, means water storage with the bottom elevation at least one foot above the control elevation. Sumps, swales, and other minor features may be at a lower elevation. 
    Detention, wet, means water storage with the bottom elevation lower than one foot above the control elevation of the system. 
    Development project means any manmade change or improvement to land which increases the amount of impervious cover or results in the change in elevation of any portion of the land or changes the existing stormwater system and flood management system. A development project includes but is not limited to all projects which require site plan or subdivision approval under the city's land development regulations. 
    Discharge means the outflow of water from a project site, drainage basin or other facility. 
    Drainage system, artificial, means any canal, ditch, culvert, dike, storm sewer or other manmade facility which tends to control the surface flow of water. 
    Drainage system, natural, means surface streams or marshes which convey water to natural points of drainage. 
    Elevation means height in feet expressed in relation to mean sea level and referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Filtration and to filter mean the selective removal of suspended matter from stormwater by passing the water through suitable fine textured granular media such as porous soil, sand and gravel or other natural or artificial aggregate, which may be used in conjunction with filter fabric or underdrain pipe or both. 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway means the normal channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must remain unobstructed to convey the regulatory flood discharge without raising flood elevations above specified levels as determined in section 108-794(3)d. 
    Hydrograph means a graph of discharge or, for the purposes of this article, volume of stormwater, versus time. 
    Impervious surface means a surface which is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, porous and nonporous parking lots and other similar structures. 
    Legal positive outfall means the availability of a permanent and legally established watercourse or similar facility or means which has the hydraulic capability of conveying the stormwater discharge from a development project to receiving waters downstream. The term "legally established watercourse" refers to a watercourse which is established by either an express easement, plat dedication, or other documentation, or implied easement or servitude as may be demonstrated to exist in accordance with state law. 
    Lowest floor means the top surface of the lowest area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of a building. For slab-on-grade type buildings or buildings with basements, the top surface of the slab or basement floor would constitute the lowest floor. For footing, foundation walls, or pile-type buildings with crawl spaces under the building without a basement, the top surface of the finished flooring above the horizontal joist, beam or other supporting member would constitute the lowest floor. 
    Maintain and maintenance mean to keep in an acceptable state of performance and repair as determined by the city engineer. The city engineer shall determine if the performance standards of the respective water management plans are maintained. The type and height of aquatic vegetation shall be secondary to the integrity of the water management plan. 
    Mangrove stand means an assemblage of one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Languncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
    Master stormwater management plan and master plan mean an engineering plan, written report, or engineering drawing outlining the primary and secondary drainage and stormwater treatment facilities needed for the proper development of a specific increment of the incorporated area of the city. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Regulatory flood means the 100-year flood. The 100-year flood is that flood which has, on the average, a one-percent probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given year, as indicated on the official city flood hazard map. 
    Retention and to retain mean the prevention of or to prevent the discharge of a given volume of stormwater runoff into surface waters of the state by complete on-site storage where the capacity to store the given volume of stormwater is again provided within 72 hours following the storm event. The required storage volume must be provided by a decrease of stored water caused by percolation through soil, evaporation, evapotranspiration, or spray irrigation. Retention shall be off-line (i.e., outside of the primary drainage path), unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that water quality in the receiving waters will not be adversely impacted by on-line retention. Wet retention refers to an area the lowest elevation of which penetrates the dry season groundwater table. Dry retention refers to an area the lowest elevation of which lies at least two feet above the wet season groundwater table. 
    Sediment means fine particulate material which is capable of gravity settlement, whether mineral or organic, and which is in suspension or has settled in a waterbody. 
    Stormwater and flood management system means a system of natural or artificial waterbodies or watercourses which stores, conveys and/or treats water. The system generally includes a dam, impoundment, reservoir, inlet, pipe, swale, ditch, appurtenant works, or a combination thereof that is intended to provide drainage, water storage conveyance, prevent or impair inundation, or other water management capabilities in and for a discrete area or a work that traverses waters in the city. A system may be designed and constructed in phases. 
    Water means all water on or beneath the surface of the ground including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water standing, percolating or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as all coastal waters within the city. 
    Waterbody means any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland which flows either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks or other discernible boundary. 
    Watershed means a drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow of water directly or indirectly into receiving waters. 
    Wetland. Wetlands shall be defined based on hydrology as well as hydric soil and wetland vegetation. Wetlands include transitional wetlands and include those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do or would support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The following vegetative species are wetland species commonly found in the city, although the applicable state and federal list of jurisdictional wetland vegetation shall apply: 
Common Name of Wetland Species Specific Name Black mangrove Avicennia germinas White mangrove Laguncularia racemosa Red mangrove Rhizophora mangle Buttonwood Conocarpus erectus Saltwort Batis maritima Glasswort Salicornia spp. Sea purslane Sesuvium protul 
 acastrum Sea blite Suada linearis Sea oxeye daisy Borrichia spp. Salt grass Distichlis spicata Dropseed Sporobilus virginicus Key grass Monanthochloe Fringe-rushes Fimbristylis spp. Cordgrass Spartina spartinae Sawgrass Cladium jamaicewsis Spike rush Eleocharis celluosa Cattail Typha spp.  
Wetland jurisdictional determinations shall be consistent with those of the state department of environmental protection, the South Florida Water Management District and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.4), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 108-715. - Prohibited activity. 
(a)  It shall be illegal and subject to the penalties provided in this subpart B for any person to construct or arrange for, authorize, or participate in the construction of a development project within the incorporated area of the city without first obtaining a valid permit to construct either a stormwater management system (referred to as a "type A permit") or a flood protection-stormwater management system, when applicable, (referred to as "type B permit") pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall be illegal and subject to the penalties provided in this subpart B for any person to construct any structure in such a manner as to impede the functioning of a drainage system that is (i) publicly maintained or (ii) located on private property and is a part of a drainage system serving more than one owner when such system is located in an easement which exists for the benefit of other landowners. Notwithstanding, this subsection shall also apply to natural tributaries for which no designated easement exists. A structure which meets the requirements of the city standard specifications for the construction of public facilities and physical improvements shall not impede the functioning of the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-716. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the surface water management permitting requirements established in this article: 
(1)  Bona fide agricultural uses except when an artificial drainage system will be used to increase the flow of surface water from the applicant's land to a city-maintained drainage system, or when the particular agricultural use requires site plan approval. 
(2)  Maintenance work performed on existing mosquito control canals or impoundment areas. 
(3)  Any maintenance, alteration, renewal, repair, use or improvement of an existing structure or the construction of any structure or modification thereto which does not create an impervious surface exceeding 500 square feet. This shall not exempt the applicant from retaining the first one inch of rainfall on site as required by F.A.C. 17-25. 
(4)  A change to any part of an existing drainage system without changing the flow characteristics of the artificial watercourse. 
(5)  All activities by a water management district, drainage district, or water control district established under the laws of the state and all activities undertaken by the state. 
(6)  These surface water management policies shall not be construed to prevent the doing of any act otherwise lawful and necessary to prevent material harm to or destruction of real or personal property as a result of a present emergency, including but not limited to fire, infestation by pests, or hazards resulting from violent storms or hurricanes or when the property is in imminent peril and the necessity of obtaining a permit is impractical and would cause undue hardship in the protection of the property. A report of any such emergency action shall be made to the city engineer by the owner or person in control of the property upon which emergency action was taken as soon as practicable, but not more than ten days following such action. Remedial action may be required by the city engineer, subject to appeal to the city commission in a dispute. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-717. - Construction of driveways, swales and other improvements affecting drainage. 
(a)  The design of new or existing driveways or other elements within the circulation system potentially impacting drainage shall be approved by the city engineer prior to commencement of construction or excavation activity. Review by the city engineer is necessary in order to ensure that: 
(1)  New driveways and other elements of the circulation system provide adequate drainage, swales, ditches or similar storm water channels; and 
(2)  Improvements to existing driveways or other elements of the circulation system are designed to protect and/or enhance existing or planned drainage improvements, as deemed appropriate by the city engineer. 
(b)  Driveways are encouraged to be paved and culverts shall be designed to meet state department of transportation standards. The city engineer shall administer this section based on generally accepted engineering principles and practices. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-718. - Gravity injection wells as alternative to article requirements. 
    The city engineer may, where appropriate, require the use of gravity injection wells for stormwater management instead of the requirements set forth in this article. Gravity injection wells offer an important benefit because they reduce the discharge of stormwater directly to economically valuable and environmentally sensitive coastal receiving waters. At a minimum gravity injection wells shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Baffle box and pretreatment. All gravity injection wells shall have a baffle box in order to capture sediment and floatable material from stormwater flows. The baffle box shall meet all design standards established by the city engineer. Where possible, stormwater shall be pretreated through swales and/or ponds, in conjunction with the baffle box, prior to entering the gravity injection well. All pretreatment shall meet South Florida Water Management District standards. 
(2)  Depth. All gravity injection wells within the city shall be 90 feet to 100 feet in depth, and the first 60 feet below the surface shall be cased. The casing material shall be approved by the city engineer. The remaining 30 feet or more shall be open to allow for exfiltration of the stormwater. The width of the gravity injection well shall depend on the amount of stormwater to be managed. 
(3)  Permits. All permits for gravity injection wells shall be approved by the state department of environmental protection and the city engineer. The city shall not approve any development plan utilizing a gravity injection well unless documentation showing the state department of environmental protection's authorization is submitted to the city engineer. 
(4)  Maintenance. All development plans using a gravity injection well and baffle box shall include an agreement acceptable to the city engineer for perpetual maintenance by the owner or successor in ownership. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.12), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-719. - Duties of city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall perform the following specific duties under this article: 
(1)  Render professional determinations. Make all professional engineering determinations required with respect to analysis of any given application. 
(2)  Provide recommendation on modifications. Recommend appropriate courses of action regarding any requested changes or amendments to an approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)  Provide necessary information. Provide a courtesy notice as to the general description and location of newly constructed wet or dry retention facilities to special districts or political entities as may be appropriate. 
(4)  Certificates of completion. After the completion of a project, require as-built plans from the owner or applicant and a certificate of completion from the engineer of record. 
(5)  Maintenance recommendations. Any surface water management improvements required by the land development regulations shall be maintained by the owner, successor owners, or an entity designated by the owner, except that the city engineer may recommend that the city commission accept certain drainage facilities or systems for city maintenance. The selection of critical areas or structures to be maintained by the city shall be recommended to the city commission by the city engineer. All areas or structures to be maintained by the city must be dedicated to the city by plat or separate instrument and expressly accepted by the city commission. For any system which is to be maintained by the applicant or entity succeeding in ownership other than the city, easements shall be established which permit the city to inspect and if necessary, as determined by the city, to take corrective action if the entity fails to properly maintain the system. Such easements shall also establish a right of entry as may be necessary for special purposes as directed by state laws or as may be duly determined by the city. If the applicant or entity succeeding in ownership fails to properly maintain a system as required, the city engineer shall give the applicant or entity succeeding in ownership written notice of the nature of the corrective action necessary. If the applicant or entity succeeding in ownership fails, within 30 days from the date of the notice to take or commence taking corrective action to the satisfaction of the city engineer, the city may enter upon lands and take corrective action, and the cost of such corrective action shall become a lien on the property benefitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.13(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-720. - Administration. 
    The city engineer or other designated city official shall have authority to administer this article and shall perform the following specific duties: 
(1)  Determine adequacy of information. Determine any additional information that must be submitted for flood management review. 
(2)  Determine completeness of applications and evaluation. Review applications for compliance with the standards of surface water management policies of this article, after input from the administrative staff and the city attorney as to those matters within their professional disciplines, and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on that review. If application approval is denied, the city engineer shall state the reasons for denial. 
(3)  Filing of building plans. The building official shall maintain a record of the actual, as-built elevation or floodproofing of all buildings constructed after flood management review. 
(4)  Coordinating review functions. Coordinate the review with other permitting agencies, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.13(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-721-108-745. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 108-746. - Preliminary application. 
    Any person in doubt as to whether a proposed activity requires a permit under this article may request a review by the city engineer upon completion of a preliminary application form supplied by the city clerk. No fee may be charged for the preliminary application pursuant to city commission resolution. The preliminary application form shall be filed by the owner/applicant and shall contain the following elements: (i) a location map; and (ii) a statement and sketch expressing the intent and scope of the proposed project. The completed preliminary application shall be submitted to the city engineer for review. Within ten working days after submission of the complete preliminary application, the city engineer will notify the applicant that either the project is approved, is exempt, or a formal permit application must be filed for the project. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.11(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-747. - Review procedures for type A or B permit applications. 
    If a type A or type B permit is required for the project, the applicant shall furnish all required stormwater management information, together with flood protection information, if applicable, to the city engineer on forms furnished by the city clerk. The requirements of the surface water management policies shall be administered during the site plan review processes, as provided in article II of this chapter, if the project requires site plan review. If the applicant is subdividing, administrative provisions for administrating subdivision review shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.11(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-748. - Review procedures for type C permit applications. 
    If a type C permit is required for the project, the applicant shall furnish all necessary flood protection information to the city engineer on forms furnished by the city clerk. The application shall be reviewed by the city engineer within ten working days of receipt of the application. The city engineer's recommendation shall be submitted to the planning board for approval. The decision of the planning board may be appealed to the city commission pursuant to procedures cited in the administrative procedures of this subpart B. In reviewing such permit application, the planning board, and the city commission in appeal cases, shall consider the recommendations of the city engineer as well as criteria cited in this article and the applicant's plan and supportive data. No development shall be approved if such development will result in an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisance impacts, or violation of the public interest or local ordinance. A fee schedule may be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.11(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-749-108-775. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REVIEW CRITERIA 

Sec. 108-776. - Criteria for type A permit. 
    All developments not exempted pursuant to section 108-716 are required to obtain a type A permit. No type A permit to construct a development project shall be issued unless the criteria in this division are met. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-777. - Water quality criteria. 
    All new surface water management systems will be evaluated based on the ability of the system to prevent degradation of receiving waters and the ability to conform to state water quality standards established in F.A.C. ch. 17-302. Developments which plan to utilize outstanding Florida waters for discharge of stormwater will be given more detailed evaluation by the city staff. The following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  Discharge. Projects shall be designed so that discharges will meet state water quality standards, as set forth in F.A.C. ch. 17-3. 
(2)  Retention/detention criteria. Retention and detention criteria shall be as follows: 
a.  The first flush of runoff contains the majority of pollutants. As a minimum, the amount of water to be treated in a stormwater management system shall be equal to the first inch of runoff or 2.5 inches times the percent of impervious coverage. Commercial or industrial projects shall provide at least one-half inch of dry detention or retention pretreatment as part of the required retention/detention. 
b.  Systems with inlets in grassed areas will be credited with up to 20 percent of the required wet detention amount for the contributing areas. Full credit will be based on a ratio of 10:1 pervious area runoff to impervious areas with proportional credit granted for greater ratios. Grassed areas must be permanently protected from vehicular use and structural encroachment. 
c.  Projects having greater than 40 percent impervious area which discharge directly to sensitive receiving water shall provide dry detention or retention pretreatment equal to 50 percent of the total required, depending on the arrangement of on-site facilities. Sensitive receiving waters are defined as: 
1.  Class I or class II waters. 
2.  Class III, outstanding Florida waters. 
3.  Canals connecting with these waters. 
d.  Water surfaces can be deducted from site areas for water quality pervious/impervious calculations. 
(3)  Master drainage plan for subdivisions. Projects to be subdivided for sale are required to have installed by the permittee, as a minimum, a stormwater management system which provides for a master stormwater collection and conveyance system to interconnect the retention/detention system with the outfall, with access points to the system available to each individual lot or tract. The systems shall be sized to limit discharge under design conditions to the allowable discharge. Projects permitted in such a manner may require deed restrictions which identify to lot or tract purchasers the amount of additional on-site stormwater management necessary to provide flood protection for specific design events and any additional retention/detention required for water quality proposed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-778. - Water quantity criteria. 
    All new stormwater management systems will be evaluated on the ability of the system to prevent flooding of on-site structures, adjacent properties, roads, and road rights-of-way based upon antecedent rainfall conditions. The following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  Discharge. Off-site discharge is limited to amounts which will not cause adverse off-site impacts. These amounts are: 
a.  Historic discharges based on natural site drainage patterns; or 
b.  Amounts determined in previous South Florida Water Management District or county permit actions. 
(2)  Drainage and flood protection criteria. The surface water management system shall be designed using a 24-hour rainfall duration and 25-year return frequency in computing allowable off-site discharge rate. The applicant shall also provide data indicating the effect of a 25-year, 72-hour storm on the development project as proposed. If the more intense storm event will cause drainage problems for the proposed surface water management system, than city staff shall require the surface water management system to be designed for the 25-year, 72-hour storm event instead of the 25-year, 24-hour storm event. Flood protection and floodplain encroachment standards shall be those established in this subpart B. If post-development conditions are such that a volume greater than the retention and/or detention volume required for stormwater management is already being retained on site, that condition will be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-779. - Construction criteria-Generally. 
    Construction of all new stormwater management systems shall meet the criteria in sections 108-780 through 108-793. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-780. - Same-Discharge structures. 
    Discharge structures for new stormwater management systems shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All design discharges from the site shall be made through and controlled by structural discharge facilities. Earth berms shall be used only to disperse or collect sheet flows from or to ditches, swales, or other water channels, served by discharge structures. 
(2)  Discharge structures shall be constructed so that they are stationary. 
(3)  Discharge structures shall include gratings for safety and maintenance purposes. Removal of trash is mandatory if the stormwater management system discharges into surface waters and/or outstanding Florida waters. 
(4)  Discharge structures shall include a method which would allow discharge from the middle of the water column and shall include a cleanable jump area for the sediment removal. Discharge structures for areas with greater than 50 percent impervious area or systems with inlets in paved areas shall include a baffle, skimmer, or other mechanism suitable for preventing oil and grease from passing through the structure. 
(5)  Direct discharges, such as through culverts, storm drains, or weir structures, will normally be allowed to receive waters which, by virtue of their large capacities and configuration, are easily able to absorb concentrated discharges. Such receiving waters might include existing storm sewer systems and manmade ditches, canals, the bay, channels, and the ocean. 
(6)  Indirect discharges, such as overflow and spreader swales, are required where the receiving water or its adjacent supporting ecosystem might be degraded by a direct discharge. The discharge structure would therefore discharge into the overflow, spreader swale, or other channel, which in turn would release water to the actual receiving water. Such receiving waters might include marshes, wetlands, salt marshes, and land naturally receiving overland sheet flow. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-781. - Same-Dry retention/detention areas. 
    This section is not applicable to natural or mitigation wetland areas. All dry retention/detention areas for new stormwater management systems shall comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Dry retention/detention areas shall allow for the return of the groundwater level in the area to the control elevation. 
(2)  On-site mosquito control ditches or other appropriate features for such purposes shall be incorporated into the design of dry retention/detention areas. 
(3)  The design of dry retention/detention areas shall incorporate considerations for regular maintenance and vegetation harvesting procedures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-782. - Same-Wet retention/detention areas. 
    Criteria for wet retention/detention areas for new stormwater management systems shall be as follows: 
(1)  Dimensional criteria. Dimensional criteria, as measured at or from the control elevation, shall be as follows: 
a.  Depth. A minimum of 20 percent of the area shallower than six feet is required. 
b.  Side slopes. For purposes of public safety, water quality enhancement and maintenance, all wet retention/detention areas should have side slopes no steeper than 4:1 (horizontal:vertical) out to a depth of two feet below the control elevation, or an equivalent substitute. Side slopes should be topsoiled, nurtured or planted from two feet below to one foot above control elevation to promote vegetation growth. Refer to section 108-518 containing the recommended plant material for suitable plant selection. 
(2)  Support facility design criteria. Perimeter maintenance and operation easements of 20-foot (minimum preferable) width at slopes no steeper then 4:1 (horizontal:vertical) should be provided beyond the control elevation water line. Control elevations must be set so as not to cause flooding in roadways and to protect road subgrades. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-783. - Same-Impervious areas. 
    For new stormwater management systems, runoff shall be discharged from impervious surfaces through retention areas, detention devices, filtering and cleansing devices, and/or subjected to best management practice (BMP) prior to discharge from the project site. In projects which include substantial paved areas, such as shopping centers, large highway intersections with frequently stopped traffic, and high density developments, provisions shall be made for the removal of oil, grease, and sediment from the stormwater prior to discharge into the receiving waters or watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-784. - Same-Stagnant water conditions. 
    Configurations which create stagnant water conditions shall not be allowed in new stormwater management systems. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-785. - Same-Disposition of storm-water runoff. 
    The stormwater management system for developments located predominately on excessively drained soils should maximize stormwater infiltration. This shall be accomplished through the use of infiltration or exfiltration facilities, grading to retard runoff, natural or artificial retention or detention basins, or other methods depending on the characteristics of the land area. Specific guidelines are as follows: 
(1)  Areas and lots shall be developed to maximize the amount of natural rainfall which is percolated into the soil and to minimize direct overland runoff into adjoining streets and watercourses. Stormwater runoff from roofs and other impervious surfaces should be diverted into swales or terraces on the lot. 
(2)  Street drainage shall be by grassed swales or curb and gutter in accordance with city specifications, provided all curb and gutter systems shall discharge or direct water into a best management practice. Whenever practical, as indicated by soil characteristics, water table elevation, and topography, the overflow from any swale used shall be diverted to percolation areas, ponding areas or natural or artificial seepage basins of sufficient capacity to retain and provide for the maximum infiltration of stormwater runoff from each drainage area for the 25-year, 24-hour storm. Except in those development projects where temporary ponding is allowable pursuant to section 108-789, each percolation or retention area shall include positive drainage facilities which provide for drainage to public outfalls or a lake or watercourse, to handle the runoff from storms of longer duration and severity than the 25-year, 24-hour storm. The area surrounding these retention or detention basins is recommended to be used as public or private open space and shall be grassed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-786. - Same-Material specifications for culverts and storm sewers. 
    The following pipe materials are acceptable for new stormwater management systems: 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe; bituminous coated, corrugated steel pipe; aluminum pipe; aluminum pipe arch; bituminous coated structural plate steel pipe; and bituminous coated steel pipe arch are acceptable. PVC pipe shall be acceptable only for installations in a privately maintained system and only if it is comprised of an appropriate wall thickness for the intended use. 
(2)  Workmanship and pipe materials shall conform to state department of transportation standard specifications, latest edition. 
(3)  Only concrete and aluminum pipes shall be used under public right-of-way pavement and/or into saltwater outfalls. Concrete for reinforced concrete box culverts shall conform to the state department of transportation's standard specifications, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-787. - Same-Inlets. 
    Design and spacing of inlets for new stormwater management systems shall be in accordance with the state department of transportation's standard specifications or the city's standard specifications. These standards shall be prepared by the city engineer and shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-788. - Same-Drainage structures. 
    All cross drains and storm sewers for new stormwater management systems shall have headwalls, flared-end sections, mitered end sections or terminating structures in accordance with the city's standard specifications or the state department of transportation's specifications. End walls, inlets, or other appropriate terminating and intermediate structures and backflow devices may be required where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(9)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-789. - Same-Control of temporary ponding. 
    For new stormwater management systems, temporary ponding is allowable in areas specifically designed with high percolation rates so that ponding does not last more than eight hours. The height of allowable ponding shall not exceed one-quarter of the distance between the ground and the lowest floor. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(10)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-790. - Same-Facilities impacting roads. 
    For new stormwater management systems, materials used in drainage facilities which cross, traverse, or encroach major roads as depicted on the city thoroughfare plan shall be designed in accordance with the state department of transportation standards. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(11)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-791. - Same-Water management tracts. 
    All stormwater facilities shall be established in dedicated water management tracts, easements, or specified common areas. Condominium documents, deed restrictions, or other legally binding instruments shall describe the location of such areas, shall specifically define the mechanism for preservation and maintenance of any private drainage systems, and shall appoint an entity responsible for maintenance and preservation. All water management tracts shall include a maintenance berm, the top of which may be level or have a slope not steeper than eight feet horizontal to one foot vertical. In addition, such facilities, as well as open channels and ponds, shall have an easement for access to and around the perimeter for maintenance. Retention or detention facilities shall be graded to slopes not steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical above the conservation elevation and shall be graded to slopes not steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical below the conservation elevation. Dry retention slopes and wet retention slopes above the designed low water elevation shall be grassed or otherwise stabilized. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(12)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-792. - Same-Watershed areas. 
    In watershed areas where the city has an adopted master stormwater management plan, all proposed facilities for new stormwater management systems shall be in conformance with the adopted plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(13)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-793. - Same-Impacts on drainage districts. 
    Stormwater systems connected to any local, regional, or state drainage district system shall be designed with consideration given to the capacity of the overall system and shall be compatible with the objectives of each respective jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(C)(14)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 108-794. - General criteria. 
    All new surface water management systems shall comply with the following general criteria: 
(1)  Rainfall runoff from roads, parking lots, roofs, and other impervious surfaces shall be directed to areas where percolation into the soil can be accomplished prior to introduction into any off-site receiving facilities. Pervious areas on line shall be covered with grass or suitable ground cover which has effective filtering characteristics. Where pervious or grassed areas are not available, runoff from impervious surfaces should be directed into some other kind of stormwater best management practice for pretreatment prior to discharging into a watercourse. 
(2)  The stormwater management system shall handle all stormwater that flows into, through and from the project without creating adverse impacts on other lands served by the stormwater management system or by the receiving waters relative to flooding, erosion hazards, or water quality and quantity. 
(3)  The applicant will demonstrate that the development project is not in a flood hazard zone. Flood hazard zones are identified under the following procedure: 
a.  A flood hazard zone shall encompass all lands subject to inundation by the regulatory flood, including lands in a critical flood zone or coastal high hazard zone. 
b.  A critical flood zone shall encompass the following: 
1.  Lands subject to inundation by a ten-year flood, i.e., the flood that has a ten-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
2.  Wetlands, watercourses and waterbodies. 
3.  Floodways. See subsection (3)d of this section. 
4.  Isolated topographic depressions with a history of flooding or a high potential for flooding. 
c.  A coastal high hazard zone is defined in section 108-714. 
d.  A floodway shall include the normal channel of a watercourse and adjacent lands that must remain unobstructed to convey the regulatory flood discharge without causing flood elevations to rise along any stretch of the watercourse above a specified permissible increase known as the floodway surcharge. The floodway surcharge shall be established, considering both existing and potential development, at a level that avoids an increase in potential flood damage. The floodway surcharge may be increased; however, if an applicant wishes to construct some additional obstruction, flowage easements must first be obtained from the owners of all land that would be affected by increased levels. In no case, however, may a floodway surcharge exceed one foot. The floodway shall normally be calculated assuming equal encroachment on the floodplain from both sides of the watercourse, unless legally enforceable deed restrictions, limiting development rights, are recorded for the lands needed for the floodway. 
e.  Flood hazard zones, critical flood zones, coastal high hazard zones, and flood elevation data have been identified through flood hazard studies and delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps (FIRM). A copy of these maps are on file in the city planning office. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-12.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-795-108-820. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 13-05, adopted Mar. 19, 2013, repealed div. 4, Policy for flood hazard areas, consisting of §§ 108-821-108-927, and deriving from Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997, in its entirety. 

Secs. 108-821-108-955. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 108-956. - Potable water and wastewater. 
    All development plans shall include commitments demonstrating ability to comply with the following: 
(1)  Access to potable water. All applicants for new development prior to issuance of development orders or permits must demonstrate that a source of water supply is available and that all issues surrounding usage of such potable water are being managed and coordinated with the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority. 
(2)  Access to wastewater disposal systems. Prior to the issuance of development orders or permits, all applicants for new development must demonstrate compliance with regulations of all federal, state, and local on-site wastewater treatment systems. The location, timing, and scale of development shall be regulated in order to ensure that new development is effectively served by wastewater services. The proliferation of permanent package treatment plants shall be discouraged. System reviews shall be coordinated with the state department of environmental protection in order to promote best management practices and compliance with relevant state permitting procedures. On-site wastewater package treatment plants, including their impacts on water quality, shall be regulated. All new or altered on-site individual wastewater treatment improvements shall be compliant with regulations of federal and state agencies having jurisdiction. Furthermore, no new septic tanks shall be permitted. The city shall not approve any on-site package plant unless the plant complies with all federal and state regulations. Use of on-site wastewater collection systems shall be limited to the following conditions: 
a.  Existing septic tank and package treatment plants may remain in service until such time as centralized service is made available. 
b.  Use of septic tank systems for new development shall be prohibited within the service area of the city system west of the Cow Key Channel Bridge. The potential for water quality problems emerging in the city is increased by the high water table and the likelihood of tile fields beginning to submerge during high tides. Under such conditions the pollutants cannot be absorbed and the pollutants enter the groundwater system and are eventually discharged to the waters surrounding the city. 
c.  Use of package treatment plants shall comply with applicable laws governing the location, use, and design of the facility. Package treatment plants shall be designed in a manner which facilitates integration into the citywide system in the future. Package treatment plants shall be designed to achieve effluent limitations of 20 milligram/liter BOD and 0.5 total suspended solids on an annual average. In addition, NO 3 cannot exceed 12 mg/l on an annual average. All owners of wastewater treatment plants shall provide sufficient on-site certified operator time as determined by the state department of environmental protection, in order to ensure that estuarine and potable water systems are protected from pollution. As a minimum, the following are required: 
1.  Surge tanks (flow equalization tanks) are required on all treatment plants with design flows less than 100,000 gallons per day. 
2.  The system for monitoring treatment efficiency shall include a schedule with a minimum frequency increased to one grab sample per week. 
3.  A flow measuring device is required which will provide a record of diurnal flow changes as well as total daily flow. 
4.  An emergency power source for treatment facilities shall be provided for purposes of preventing interruptions in treatment services. 
d.  All development located within areas where central sewer facilities are not currently available shall be required to connect into the central sewer system when the system has been extended within 100 feet of the subject parcel. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.9), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 74. 
Sec. 108-957. - Conservation of potable water supply. 
    The city shall assist in regulating development for purposes of complying with policies of the South Florida Water Management District directed toward conservation of potable water supply and to achieve a reduction in the current rates of water consumption. Therefore, development plans shall be required to comply with the following potable water supply performance criteria: 
(1)  Where nonpotable alternative sources of irrigation water are available, potable water supplies shall not be used to meet irrigation needs. 
(2)  All new development shall be required to use water-saving plumbing fixtures. 
(3)  In order to reduce demand for irrigation water, which in turn often places greater demand upon potable water sources, at least 70 percent of all landscaping material obtained from off-site sources for use on any site should be native plant material adapted to soil and climatic conditions existing on the subject site. Further, at least 50 percent of all trees used in landscaping shall be drought tolerant native species adapted to soil and climatic conditions existing on site in order to lessen water demand. Refer to section 108-518 for recommended plant material. 
(4)  The city shall require, to the extent lawful, reuse of water, including use of cisterns for collecting rainwater, for use in spray irrigation. In addition, the city may require mandatory hookup to systems distributing reclaimed water within 500 feet of the site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.10), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 108-958-108-985. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUILDING PERMIT ALLOCATION SYSTEM[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 09-07, adopted May 5, 2009, amended the title of Art. X, Building Permit Allocation and Vested Rights, to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-986. - Definitions. 
    The definitions for terms identified in this chapter are found in chapter [section] 86-9, definition of terms, and are applicable throughout the land development regulations. 
    Accessory units and single room occupancies (SROs) means units that must be deed-restricted as affordable: restricted to occupancy by permanent residents, and cannot be sold separately as a condominium. When an accessory unit occupancy permit is originally initiated, the principal unit must be owned and occupied by a permanent resident. An accessory unit or SRO cannot take up more than 40 percent of the principal structure nor can it exceed 600 square feet and the minimum size shall be 300 square feet. SROs by definition shall be restricted to one-room efficiencies. No accessory unit shall have more than one bedroom unless an additional bedroom is approved as a variance by the planning board. If such variance is approved, the total square footage shall not exceed 600 square feet. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1374; Ord. No. 09-07, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 108-987. - Purpose and intent. 
    The intent of the building permit allocation system is to implement the city's comprehensive plan by updating the city's residential building permit allocation system limiting annual permanent and transient residential development in the city in order to: 
(1)  Reduce or maintain hurricane evacuation clearance times measured by the Transportation Interface for Modeling Evacuations (TIME) Model for the Florida Keys. 
(2)  Limit the amount of residential development commensurate with the city's ability to maintain a reasonable and safe hurricane evacuation clearance time of no more than 24 hours for permanent residents. 
(3)  Regulate the amount of permanent and transient residential building permits in order to maintain and improve public facility service levels. 
(4)  Allocate the limited number of permanent residential units available under this article, based upon the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the city comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Limit units allocated from the BPAS by using those units which are identified and derive from the following sources: City of Key West Comprehensive Plan Policy 1.1.1.1; units recovered by the city which were previously allocated and unused and subsequently returned to the city; units recaptured by the city which are derived from decreases in existing residential density and changes in residential uses and subsequently returned to the city through the waiver and release of building permit allocation process and any pre-existing reserve units. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1371; Ord. No. 08-04, § 19, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 09-07, § 3, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-11, § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 108-988. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "building permit allocation system ordinance." 
(Code 1986, § 34.1372(1); Ord. No. 09-07, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 108-989. - Authority. 
(1)  The city, pursuant to F.S. Ch. 163, part II, adopted a comprehensive plan as required by state law; and 
(2)  The city, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202(1), is required to adopt land development regulations that are consistent with and implement the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1372 (2); Ord. No. 09-07, § 5, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Sec. 108-990. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to the development of all new permanent and transient residential units within the city that shall be allocated as provided for herein except as expressly exempted in section 108-991. Nothing in this article shall relieve the owner of property from complying with other applicable sections of the city land development regulations for development on the property. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1372(3); Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Sec. 108-991. - Development not affected by article. 
    Development consistent with the following shall not be affected by the terms of this article, but such development shall comply with all applicable sections of the city's land development regulations: 
(1)  Any use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign or activity which does not result in a net addition to the number of residential dwelling unit stock. 
(2)  Redevelopment or rehabilitation which replaces but which does not increase the number of dwelling units above that existing on the site prior to redevelopment or rehabilitation. 
(3)  Units determined to have been in existence at the time the April 1, 2010, census was prepared are presumed not to be affected by BPAS. The city planner shall review available documents to determine if a body of evidence exists to support the existence of units on or about April 1, 2010. Units existing in 2010 will be documented through a mandatory site visit by city staff and at least two of the following records: 
a.  Aerial photographs and original dated photographs showing that the structure existed on or about April 1, 2010; 
b.  Building permits issued prior to April 1, 2010; 
c.  Copies of city directory entries on or about April 1, 2010; 
d.  Applications received after May 2, 2017 must demonstrate that the unit sought to be established hereunder is or has been legally permissible under the current or any former zoning requirements of the applicable district in which the unit is located. 
Transient units which meet the criteria in this subsection will be licensed by the city. 
e.  Rental, occupancy or lease records from before and including April 1, 2010, indicating the number, type and term of the rental or occupancy; 
f.  Copies of state, county, and city licenses on and about April 1, 2010, indicating the number and types of rental units; 
g.  Documentation for Keys Energy Service, Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority and other available utilities indicating the type of service (residential or commercial) provided and the number of meters on or about April 1, 2010; 
h.  Documentation for the Monroe County Property Appraiser's Office for the time on or about April 1, 2010, (Green Card); and 
i.  Similar documentation as listed above. 
Provision of affidavits to support the existence of a unit is allowed, but cannot be the sole record upon which a decision is based. Provision of documents is the responsibility of the applicant. The city planner's decision shall be rendered to the department of economic opportunity for a determination of consistency with the principals for guiding development. 
Units which are determined not to be affected by the building permit allocation system per this subsection but which have not been previously acknowledged by the city planner are presumed to be lawfully established per chapter 122, article II, nonconformities, if the additional following requirements are met: 
a.  The applicant satisfies the building department that the unit meets the Florida Building Code, through as-built certifications or other means acceptable to the building official; and 
b.  Fees: All back fee payments shall be paid current and in full, from the date determined to be the established date of the unit. All impact fees shall be paid in full for units determined to have been established after the implementation of the Impact Fee Ordinance (January 1, 1985). 
c.  Occupational license with the city is updated, and street addresses are assigned commensurate with the updated unit count. 
d.  Applications received after May 2, 2017, must demonstrate that the unit sought to be established hereunder is or has been a legally permissible under the current or any former zoning requirements of the applicable district in which the unit is located. 
Transient units which meet the criteria in this subsection will be licensed by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1372(4); Ord. No. 09-07, § 6, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 5-3-2017) 
Sec. 108-992. - Exemptions. 
    Development consistent with the following shall be exempt from the terms of this article, but such development shall be subject to the terms and limitations of applicable exemption sections and shall comply with all applicable sections of the city's land development regulations: 
(1)  The holder of an unexpired vested rights order approved by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1372(5); Ord. No. 09-07, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 108-993. - Construction of article. 
    This article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out the intent and purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(code 1986, § 34.1378; Ord. No. 09-07, § 9, 5-5-2009) 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMIT ALLOCATION SYSTEM[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 13-19, adopted Nov. 6, 2013, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2 consisted of §§ 108-994-108-999, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-07, adopted May 5, 2009; Ord. No. 10-10, adopted May 18, 2010; Ord. No. 12-15, adopted June 5, 2012; and Ord. No. 13-01, adopted Jan. 8, 2013. 

Sec. 108-994. - Established. 
    The city establishes a building permit allocation system in order to limit the number of permits issued for permanent and transient units by structure type and affordability level (as shown on Table 1.0 below) to those available through the following means: 
(1)  Units generating from policy 1-1.1.1 of the comprehensive plan that have not been allocated. 
(2)  Legal mechanisms including memorandums of agreement between the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity and the City of Key West, development agreements, settlement agreements and consent final judgments. 
(3)  Units as recovered by the city which were either previously allocated and unused or which derive from units which are determined not be affected by this article per section 108-991. 
Table 1.0 Residential Structure Type Equivalent Single-Family Unit Factor (1) Single-family 1.00 (a) Accessory apt./SRO 0.78 (b) Multifamily 1.00 (c) Transient unit 0.86 (d) Nursing home, rest home, assisted living facility and convalescent home 0.10 (e)  
(1)  Pursuant to comprehensive plan policy 1-1.16.3, the equivalent single-family unit factors are based on the ratio of the average number of vehicles per unit based on the 2010 U.S. Census for the respective residential structure types divided by the vehicles per single-family units (i.e., 1.28 vehicles per unit). The computations are as follows: 
(a)  Single-family: 1.28/1.28 = 1.00 
(b)  Accessory unit, single room occupancy (SRO): 1.00/1.28 = 0.78 
(c)  Multifamily: 1.28/1.28 = 1.00 
(d)  Transient unit: 1.10/1.28 = 0.86 based on the Transportation Interface for Modeling Evacuations (TIME) Model for the Florida Keys (1.10 vehicles per transient unit in Monroe County). 
(e)  Nursing home, rest home, assisted living facility and convalescent home: 1.0/10 = 0.10 based on provisions set forth in chapter [section] 86-9, definition of terms. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 108-995. - Reporting requirements and residential allocation schedule. 
    The City of Key West building permit allocation system shall limit the number of permits issued for new permanent development, to 910 units during the period from July 2013 to July 2023, with the exception of the beneficial use permit allocations that have been reserved separately to address property rights claims. The annual allocation will not exceed ninety-one (91) single-family units or equivalent types of units based on the equivalency factors established in policy 1-1.16.3 of the comprehensive plan. The annual allocation limitation shall not apply to affordable housing allocations. No transient allocations will be made subsequent to the closure of the 2017-2018 allocation period. 
    In order to address the ongoing affordable housing shortage and affordable housing deed restrictions expected to expire, during the first three years (July 2013-July 2016) 60 percent of the units allocated shall be affordable. Between years four (4) and ten (10) (2016-2023), a minimum of 50 percent of the total allocations shall be affordable. Between years four (4) and ten (10), 80 percent of remaining (non-affordability restricted) units shall be permanent, and 20 percent may be transient. Between years six (6) and ten (10), 100 percent of the units shall be permanent. During year one (1) (July 2013-2014), 48 of the affordable units to be allocated will be dedicated for use at the Peary Court Housing complex property, being transferred from military to private sector housing, and shall meet the prerequisite standards for obtaining BPAS awards. Table 2.0 below identifies the number of units that may be allocated at a rate of 1.0 ESFU's by housing type and by year for the period from July 2013 to July 2023. 
Table 2.0 July 1, 2013 - June 30, 2014 July 1, 2014 - June 30, 2015 July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016 July 1, 2016 - June 30, 2017 July 1, 2017 - June 30, 2018 July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 July 1, 2019 - June 30, 2020 July 1, 2020 - June 30, 2021 July 1, 2021 - June 30, 2022 July 1, 2022 - June 30, 2023 48 affordable units to be allocated for Peary Court development. Minimum of 7 affordable units. Maximum of 36 market rate units. Minimum of 55 affordable units. Maximum of 36 market rate units. Minimum of 55 affordable units. Maximum of 36 market rate units. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units, of which a maximum of ten (10) units may be transient. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units, of which a maximum of ten (10) units may be transient. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units. Minimum of 45 affordable units. Maximum of 46 market rate units.  
    The city planner will provide an annual report to the planning board and the state land planning agency identifying any remaining or unused allocations, and the number of permits by building type by September 1 of each year as stipulated in the 2012 Hurricane Evacuation Clearance Time Memorandum of Understanding. The first report will be published in 2014. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-11, § 3, 4, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 108-996. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the City of Key West to create and manage a building permit allocation system that: 
(a)  Is open to all property owners who wish to participate; 
(b)  Establishes a minimum baseline standard for all new units and buildings that assures sustainability, environmental responsibility, human health and safety; and 
(c)  Is cost effective and easily administered by city staff. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Sec. 108-997. - Period of allocation and ranking/review of applications. 
(a)  Application and allocation period. The annual building permit allocation period will begin on July 1 of each year, and shall end on the 30th of June of the following year. 
(b)  Prerequisites. 
(1)  Prerequisite major construction/renovation means the minimum standards for new development, including additions to existing structures, or redevelopment constituting more than 50% of the value of the building, required in order to be eligible to receive an allocation award from the BPAS system as follows: 
a.  All new units shall be constructed in compliance with and obtain a baseline green building certification. 
b.  All new buildings shall be constructed so as to have the first habitable floor 1.5 feet above the required base flood elevation, with the exception of properties located within the historic zoning districts, where the applicant must first demonstrate that such elevation does not interfere with the essential form and integrity of properties in the neighborhood by obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. 
c.  All new buildings shall be constructed with a rainwater catchment system that will hold a minimum of 1,000 gallons of water or an amount equivalent to 100% of the new roof area in gallons whichever is greater. 
(2)  Prerequisite, minor renovation means the minimum standards for redevelopment constituting less than 50% of the value of the building, required. In order to be eligible to receive an allocation award from the BPAS system applicants must demonstrate water and energy use 15% below the Florida Building Code using recognized energy and water rating standards. All buildings with new units must meet compliance with Florida Green Building Coalition's Level 3 Green Home Retrofit standards. 
(c)  Point system. The city building permit allocation system application review and ranking process shall be administered by staff and shall be based on the point system established in the criteria listed below. The criteria shall apply to both affordable and non-affordable units proposed for construction. However, applicants for affordable unit awards shall compete only for other affordable housing unit allocations, and not for the market rate unit allocations. 
(1)  The following criteria and point system shall be utilized in the ranking of applications for development of non-transient units as follows: 
a.  Building more than 1.5 feet higher than the base flood elevation: 5 points. 
b.  Exceeding the minimum required percentage of affordable housing: 30 points. 
c.  Voluntarily providing affordable housing which exceeds the requirements of section 122-1467 at median income classification: 40 points. 
d.  Voluntarily providing affordable housing which exceeds the requirements of section 122-1467 at low income classification: 60 points. 
e.  Achieving Green Building Certification Upgrade 1: 20 points. 
f.  Achieving Green Building Certification Upgrade 2: 27 points. 
g.  Achieving Green Building Certification Upgrade 3: 40 points. 
h.  Voluntary contribution to the arts in public places fund or tree fund in the amount of $2,500.00 or more: 5 points. 
i.  Providing electrical high voltage sized conduit for future electric car charging station near parking area: 5 points. 
j.  Using light colored, high reflectivity materials for all non-roof/areas with a solar reflectance index (SRI) of at least 29: 5 points. 
k.  Providing on-site recreational amenities or exceeding the open space requirements of section 108-346 (b) of article V of chapter 108: 10 points. 
(d)  Application review process-review, ranking, initial announcement and final determination of award. Applications received by the application closing date of each year will be evaluated by staff for completeness and applicants will be notified of any deficiencies in the application and be provided a timeframe within which deficiencies can be resolved. In the event that all market rate units are not claimed or applied for, after initial staff evaluation of the applications, any remaining market rate units may be awarded for affordable housing purposes. 
    Upon ranking, in the event that two applications are determined to have the same numerical ranking score, and units are not available to provide awards to both projects, a drawing of lots will determine the awardee. Based on staff recommendation the planning board shall make the final determination of award. Applications for affordable units as minor renovations or accessory units can be received at any time during the BPAS allocation year, as long as their application meets the average application score from the prior year. If the score does not meet the average score of the prior year, the application will be held and ranked as part of the annual application cycle. 
(e)  Recovered units. Building permits shall be obtained within two years of the final award date. If a building permit is not issued within that timeframe the allocated units will revert to the city for reallocation. 
(f)  Affordable unit allocations. 
(1)  All units allocated as affordable are subject to subsections 122-1467(c), (d), (e), and (f) of the workforce housing ordinance. 
(2)  Applicant eligibility requirements are subject to subsections 122-1469(2) through (15) of the workforce housing ordinance. 
(3)  Affordable housing projects enabled by federal tax credit housing are not subject to [subsection] 122-1467(c). 
(g)  Penalty. For projects that fail to achieve the green building standard certification, as purported in the application for which the award was granted, final certificate of occupancy will not be awarded until such time that the applicant is able to establish that the green building standard has been achieved. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-4-2018; Ord. No. 18-11, § 5, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 108-998. - Compact infill development and mixed use development incentives. 
    The city recognizes the need to encourage the redevelopment of aging commercial properties located within the city in order to promote housing opportunities in proximity to existing employment centers, and alternative transportation routes. Such development shall be known as compact infill development. 
    In order to encourage urban infill projects that meet design principles and standards contained in Comprehensive Plan Policy 1-1.1.4 residential density bonuses shall be allowed as follows: 
Existing or Proposed 
Commercial Development Additional Density 
Allowed - Market Rate (MR) and Affordable Housing (AH) 1,000 s.f. of floor area 0 MR 1 AH 5,000 s.f of floor area 0 MR 2 AH 10,000 s.f of floor area 0 MR 3 AH 12,500 s.f of floor area 1 MR 3 AH 15,000 s.f of floor area 2 MR 4 AH 20,000 s.f of floor area 3 MR 5 AH 25,000 s.f of floor area 4 MR 6 AH 30,000 s.f of floor area 5 MR 6 AH  
a.  Mixed use redevelopment: For development including commercial floor area, provide secure lockable bicycle storage area. Provide a posted web address about transit options. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-11, § 6, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 108-999. - Procedures for ensuring beneficial use of private property. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that neither provisions of the comprehensive plan nor the land development regulations shall deprive a property owner of all reasonable economic use of a parcel of real property which is a lot or parcel of record as of the date of adoption of the comprehensive plan (August 10, 1993) or lots of record which have been reconfigured such that the number of minimum sized lots are not increased. An owner of real property may apply for relief from the literal application of applicable land use regulations or of this plan when such application would have the effect of denying all economically reasonable or viable use of that property unless such deprivation is known to be necessary to prevent a nuisance under state law or in the exercise of the city's police power to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. All reasonable economic use shall mean the minimum use of the property necessary to avoid a taking within a reasonable period of time as established by land use case law. 
(b)  The relief to which an owner shall be entitled may be provided through the use of one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  Granting of a permit for development which shall be deducted from the pre-existing reserve units/beneficial use pool reserved to address outstanding beneficial use claims. All units that are recaptured by the city through a waiver and release of building permit allocation for residential units lawfully existing prior to May 2, 2013 shall be recorded and dedicated for beneficial use only. Beneficial use allocations shall be valid until such time that the owner chooses to obtain building permits, so long that no changes are made to the configuration or size of the lot or parcel that affect the conditions in which the beneficial use allocation is granted as described in subsection (a) above. 
(2)  Granting the use of transfer of development rights (TDRs) consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Purchasing by the city of all or a portion of the lots or parcels upon which all beneficial use is prohibited. 
(4)  Such other relief as the city may deem appropriate and adequate. 
The relief granted shall be the minimum necessary to avoid a taking of the property under existing state and federal law. 
(c)  Development approved pursuant to a beneficial use determination shall be consistent with all other objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations unless specifically exempted from such requirements in the final beneficial use determination. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Sec. 108-1000. - Allocation of residential permits in the Truman Waterfront Redevelopment Area. 
    In order to facilitate redevelopment of the Truman Waterfront Parcel, equivalent single-family unit values and associated development rights may be transferred from anywhere within the city to land use classifications within the Truman Waterfront Parcel which allow residential development. This is not a transfer of density; rather, it pertains to the transfer of units which are recognized or vested in accordance with the building permit allocation ordinance. Any density associated with the unit host site will remain on that site; however, once the unit is transferred, the density on the host site cannot be developed until units are allocated through the building permit allocation ordinance. The planning department shall maintain records of the transfer of units under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 11-6-2013) 
Secs. 108-1001-108-1125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS 

Sec. 108-1126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conservation area means lands designated as "conservation areas" on the future land use map and in policy 1-2.4.1 of the comprehensive plan pertaining to goals, objectives, and policies. These areas are environmentally sensitive and include the following: 
(1)  Outstanding waters of the state; 
(2)  Freshwater wetlands; 
(3)  Tidal wetlands of the state; 
(4)  Mangrove; and 
(5)  Upland hammocks. 
    Density bonus means an increase in density of development that can be carried on a parcel of land, over and above the base density permitted by the comprehensive plan for the land use category in which the land is located. 
    Development rights. See section 108-1132(b). 
    Parcel means any lot or parcel or tract of land; combination of lots, parcels or tracts; or any portion of a lot, parcel or tract within the city limits. 
    Receiving area means a parcel on which a development right is used in accordance with this article. 
    Sending area means a parcel on which a development right has been severed in accordance with this article. 
    Sever means the removal or separation of some specified right or use from the bundle of rights possessed by an owner of real property. The term connotes a removal or separation in perpetuity as distinguished from a restriction or limitation which may be overridden, deleted or subject to a time limit. 
    Wetland means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does or would support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1381) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 108-1127. - Findings. 
    The city commission makes the following findings: 
(1)  The city, pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, part II, and F.A.C. ch. 9J-5, adopted a comprehensive plan as required by state law; 
(2)  The city, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202(1), is required to adopt land development regulations that are consistent with and implement the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(3)  In addition to the mandates and authority under F.S. ch. 163, part II, and F.A.C. ch. 9J-5, the department of community affairs, the state land planning agency (referred to as the "DCA"), brought an action against the city in the state division of administrative hearings (DOAH), Case No. 92-0515GM, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184(10); 
(4)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184(16), the department of community affairs and the city entered into a stipulated settlement agreement which provides remedial action to bring the city comprehensive plan into compliance with F.S. ch. 163, part II; and 
(5)  The comprehensive plan has identified the protection of environmentally sensitive areas as a primary goal and has adopted policies to achieve this goal (policies 1-2.1.1 and 1-2.4.1 of the future land use element of the comprehensive plan pertaining to goals, objectives, and policies). These policies provide for the establishment and implementation of a system for transferring development rights as a method of preserving environmentally sensitive areas. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1379) 
Sec. 108-1128. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to recognize that there are environmentally sensitive lands designated as conservation areas pursuant to the city comprehensive plan which warrant protection in their undeveloped, natural state. Further, it is the purpose and intent of this article to provide an alternative to development of these environmentally sensitive lands by providing a mechanism for owners having legal and/or equitable interest in such lands to seek economic relief from the limitations of development on their lands by encouraging the use of the transfer of development rights concept. The transfer of development rights concept is designed to direct future growth toward specific areas of the city which can accommodate new development in a manner consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 34-1380(2)) 
Sec. 108-1129. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to the city and shall regulate development rights within a specific sending area and receiving area, as defined in this article and as delineated on the city's future land use map. 
(Code 1986, § 34-1380(3)) 
Sec. 108-1130. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any section of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-15 pursuant to F.S. § 162.21. Such person also shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1386) 
Sec. 108-1131. - Description of sending and receiving areas. 
(a)  Description of sending area. For the purposes of this article, the sending area is any environmentally sensitive parcel in the Salt Pond area, which is designated as a "conservation area" on the future land use map (FLUM) and in policy 1-2.4.1 of the comprehensive plan pertaining to goals, objectives, and policies. The future land use map designations that identify parcels in the sending area are as follows: 
(1)  C-OW outstanding waters of the state; 
(2)  C-FW freshwater wetlands; 
(3)  C-TW tidal wetlands of the state; and 
(4)  CM mangrove. 
(b)  Description of receiving area. The receiving area is any parcel located within the Key West Bight (Caroline Street Corridor) Redevelopment Area, which is designated as "HRCC-2" on the future land use map. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1382) 
Sec. 108-1132. - Concepts. 
(a)  Legal concept. Transfers of development rights (TDRs) are based upon the property law concept that the right to develop real estate is one of the bundle of rights included in fee simple ownership of land. Fee simple ownership of land allows the owner to sell, lease, or trade any one or all of the bundle of rights associated with that property. A bundle of rights includes the right to use, lease, sell, or abandon the property or any of its components of ownership not retained by a previous owner such as mineral, oil, gas, air, and/or development rights. These rights or ownership are subject to the limitation and legislative powers of the local government. 
(b)  Development rights. A development right is a simple extension of the rights normally associated with land ownership. When legally established a development right has value separate from the land itself. It can be subject to reasonable regulation by the local government under the police power. The development right of one property can be transferred, sold or given by the owner to another property. The landowner may sell the development rights and still retain the title to the land; however, the right to use the surface of the land, even on a limited basis, is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Computation of units. The computation of the transfer of development rights units shall be as follows: 
(1)  Density in sending areas. Transferred development rights within sending areas are established at a ratio of one dwelling unit per acre. 
(2)  Density in receiving areas. The base density in receiving areas shall be eight units per gross acre. The density can increase to 12 units per gross acre using the transfer of development rights process and provided that the owner/developer certifies that a minimum of 40 percent of the residential units shall be constructed and maintained in perpetuity as affordable housing units. Affordable housing shall be occupied only by households meeting the criteria established in F.S. § 420.9071(3). Similarly, affordable housing units shall maintain rents and mortgage structures consistent with the provisions of F.S. § 420.9071(3). Under the transfer of development rights process, the density can be increased to 20 units per gross acre, provided that the owner/developer certifies that 100 percent of the residential units constructed shall be maintained in perpetuity as affordable housing units. 
(3)  Rounding off fractions. If there is a fractional transferred development right, it shall be converted upward to the next whole number if one-half or more, and converted downward to the nearest whole number if less than one-half. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1383) 
Sec. 108-1133. - Application. 
(a)  Any owner of land in the sending area may apply for a transfer of development rights either separately or concurrently with a site plan for their use within the receiving area as provided for in this article. 
(b)  The applicant for a transfer of development rights shall submit to the planning department the following information and data on an application, the form to be established by the planning department: 
(1)  A transfer of development rights application which includes the name and address of the owner of the property in the sending area and the name and address of the owner of the property in the receiving area. 
(2)  Legal description and survey of the parcel in the sending area from which the transfer of development rights will be severed. 
(3)  Legal description and survey of the parcel in the receiving area which will acquire the transferred development rights. 
(4)  Data supporting the computation of available development rights connected with the proposed sending area. 
(5)  Data supporting the ability of the proposed receiving area to accommodate the proposed transfer of development rights. 
(6)  A conservation easement, in a format acceptable to the city attorney, stating that the parcel in the sending area will be forever retained in its natural condition and will never be developed in any manner whatsoever by anyone. Natural conditions include minor nature-related improvements such as nature paths, elevated boardwalks and outdoor educational learning areas. The easement shall be dedicated to the city or to a trustee approved by the city. The easement shall be approved by the city commission along with the application. The easement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court of the county as a recorded restriction on the use of the subject parcel and shall be binding to all present and subsequent owners, heirs, or assigns of such parcel. Such restrictions may not be amended, deleted or otherwise altered except by an affirmative vote of all members of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1384(1)) 
Sec. 108-1134. - Review of application. 
(a)  Review by administrative official. The city planner or other city administrative official designated by the city manager shall review the application for transfer of development rights and supporting documentation for completeness and compliance with this article. The city planner's review shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Verify the legal description of all parcels cited within the application, including confirmation of their location within the respective sending or receiving area as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Verify the total number of development rights which can be transferred, and verify that the sending parcel has not previously transferred available development rights. 
(3)  Verify that the ratio of affordable housing units proposed to be constructed is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Verify the accuracy of the existing and proposed density on the specified receiving area to determine its ability to accommodate the proposed transferred development rights within the maximum density cap and to determine that it is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Review the application for compliance with the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations. 
(6)  Ensure appropriate legal instruments have been submitted to identify and preserve the required conservation easement. 
(b)  Review by city commission. If the application is found to be complete and in compliance with the comprehensive plan and this article, the city planner or other designated administrative official shall forward the application with a staff evaluation to the city commission which shall have final authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny the transfer of development rights. If the application is incomplete and/or not in compliance with this article or the comprehensive plan, the city planner shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies. The applicant may then correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. 
(c)  Recording. The applicant, upon receiving approval from the city commission, shall record the deed of transfer and the conservation easement with the clerk of circuit court of the county. The deed of transfer shall convey the transferred development rights from the property in the sending area to the property in the receiving area. No sale of any parcel that has been the object of a transfer of development rights shall be deemed legal until such transfer of development rights has approved by the city and a deed of transfer together with the conservation easement have been recorded with the county. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the city with two recorded deeds of transfer as well as the conservation easement. The city clerk and the planning department shall each receive one of the deeds of transfer and the conservation easement, respectively. 
(d)  Site plans. No development of the specified receiving area shall be approved until a site plan has been submitted by the applicant and approved by the city pursuant to the applicable land development regulations. When a site plan for a property which has received transferred development rights is submitted for review, the applicant shall include a recorded deed of transfer for each of the development rights which have been secured to the property. The planning department shall verify that the sending parcel has not transferred development rights to another parcel on a previous occasion. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1384(2)) 
Sec. 108-1135. - Monitoring. 
(a)  Method for tracking transfer of development rights. The city shall maintain a tracking system to record and monitor the transfer of development rights, which shall be maintained by the planning department. 
(b)  Records. Each parcel included within a deed transferring development rights shall have an individual record. Each record shall at a minimum include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the property owner; 
(2)  Address and legal description; 
(3)  Zoning classification and land use designation on the future land use map; 
(4)  Number of development rights transferred to or from the subject parcel; 
(5)  Area of the parcel; 
(6)  Density allowed on the property prior to the transfer of development rights and after approval of the transfer of development rights; 
(7)  Number of affordable housing units linked to the property; 
(8)  Date of city commission approval; 
(9)  Date the deed of transfer and conservation easement were recorded; 
(10)  Date of site plan approval and date of building permit issuance; and 
(11)  Each entry shall include a description of the corresponding property which received or transferred development rights to the subject parcel. 
(c)  Map. The planning department shall maintain a map indicating the parcels within the sending area that have transferred development rights as well as the parcels within the receiving area that acquired development rights. 
(Code 1986, § 34.1385) 
Chapter 109 - DOGS IN PUBLIC FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 109-1. - Dogs in public food service establishments. 
(1)  No dog shall be in a public food service establishment unless allowed by state law and the public food service establishment has received and maintains an unexpired and valid permit pursuant to this section allowing dogs in designated outdoor areas of the establishment. 
(2)  As used in this section, "public food service establishments" shall mean eating and drinking establishments, or restaurants as defined by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Key West. "Employee" or "employees" shall include, but is not limited to, the owner or owners of the public food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 109-2. - Application requirements. 
    Public food service establishments must apply for and receive a permit from the city before patrons' dogs are allowed on the premises. The city shall establish a reasonable fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of processing the initial application and renewals. The application for a permit shall require such information from the applicant as is deemed reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, but shall require, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name, location, mailing address and division issued license number of the public food service establishment. 
(2)  Name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the permit applicant. This name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the owner of the public food service establishment shall be provided if the owner is not the permit applicant. 
(3)  A diagram and description of the outdoor area which is requested to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area and of the other outdoor dining areas not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other information as is deemed necessary by the city. 
(4)  The diagram shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. A copy of the approved diagram shall be attached to the permit. 
(5)  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
(6)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall furnish the licensing official with a signed and notarized statement that the permittee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any claims for damages to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. 
(7)  Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public liability and property damage insurance providing coverage for all claims and damage to property or bodily injury, including death which may arise from the existence of a dog(s) in its establishment under this ordinance. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage respectively, per occurrence. The city shall be named as an additional insured for any property that the permittee leases from the City of Key West. All policies required under this ordinance shall provide such policies [which] may not be terminated or cancelled without 45 days' written notice sent via certified mail to the licensing official for the City of Key West. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 109-3. - Regulations. 
    Public food service establishments that receive a permit for a designated outdoor area pursuant to this section shall require that: 
(1)  Employees wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling any dog(s) and shall wash their hands before entering other parts of the public food service establishment from the designated outdoor area. 
(2)  Employees are prohibited from touching, petting or otherwise handling any dog while serving or carrying food or beverages or while handling or carrying tableware. 
(3)  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised by appropriate signage, at conspicuous locations, that they should wash their hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
(4)  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under reasonable control. 
(5)  Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved with food service operations. 
(6)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any part of a dog to be on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. Dogs must remain on the floor/ground level and shall not be permitted in the lap of the patron. 
(7)  Employees shall clean and sanitize all table and chair surfaces with an approved product between seating of patrons. 
(8)  Employees shall remove all dropped food and spilled drink from the floor or ground as soon as possible but in no event less frequently than between seating of patrons at the nearest table. 
(9)  Employees and patrons shall remove all dog waste immediately and the floor or ground shall be immediately cleaned and sanitized with an approved product. Employees shall keep a kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose near the designated outdoor area. 
(10)  Employees and patrons shall not permit dogs to be in, or to travel through, indoor or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment. 
(11)  A sign or signs notifying the public that the designated outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs shall be posted in a conspicuous manner that places the public on notice. 
(12)  A sign or signs informing patrons of these laws shall be posted on premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by the city. 
(13)  A sign or signs informing employees of these laws shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by the city. 
(14)  Ingress and egress to the designated outdoor area shall not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment. 
(15)  The public food service establishment and designated outdoor area shall comply with all permit conditions and the approved diagram. 
(16)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any dog to be in the designated outdoor areas of the public food service establishment if the public food service establishment is in violation of any of the requirements of this section, or if they do not possess a valid permit. 
(17)  Permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the designated outdoor area. 
(18)  All dogs shall wear a current license tag or rabies tag and the patron shall have a current license certificate or rabies certificate immediately available upon request. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 109-4. - Expiration and revocation. 
(1)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire automatically upon the sale of the public food service establishment and cannot be transferred to a subsequent owner. The subsequent owner may apply for a permit pursuant to this section if the subsequent owner wishes to continue to allow patrons' dogs in a designated outdoor area of the public food service establishment. 
(2)  A permit may be revoked by the city if, after notice and reasonable time in which the grounds for revocation may be corrected, the public food service establishment fails to comply with any condition of approval, fails to comply with the approved diagram, fails to maintain any required state or local license, or is found to be in violation of any provision of this section. If the ground for revocation is a failure to maintain any required state or local license, the revocation may take effect immediately upon giving notice of revocation to the permit holder by the city manager or his designee. 
(3)  If a public food service establishment's permit is revoked, no new permit may be approved for the establishment until the expiration of 90 days following the date of revocation, providing that all issues continued within the revocation have been satisfied. This includes any outstanding fines. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 109-5. - Complaints and reporting. 
(1)  Complaints may be made in writing to the code compliance department which shall accept, document, and respond to all complaints and shall timely report to all division of restaurants (the division) and hotels all complaints and the response to such complaints. 
(2)  The city shall provide the division with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued. 
(3)  All applications, permits, and other related materials shall contain the division-issued license number for the public food service establishment. 
(4)  The patron or the designated person in charge of the public food service establishment, or both, may be issued civil citations for each violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 109-6. - Penalties. 
    Citations issued for violation of any provisions of this section shall be brought forth before the code compliance special magistrate or in county court pursuant to F.S. ch. 162 or section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Key West. Each instance of a dog on the premises of a public food service establishment without a permit is a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Chapter 110 - RESOURCE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 82; performance standards, ch. 106; planning and development, ch. 108; subdivisions, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES 

Sec. 110-26. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the finding of the city commission that the city contains many areas of historical and archaeological importance to the United States and to the citizens of the city, from all periods of its history, including pre-Columbian Indian villages, the Spanish visitors, traders, explorers and wreckers, as well as the Florida Territorial period and the pre-Civil War Period. Further, in the preservation and understanding of the historical importance of the city, there is a direct relationship with the economic well-being of the city and the present and future needs, public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Archaeological area means that portion of the city which has or may reasonably be expected to yield information on local history or prehistory based upon broad prehistoric or historic settlement patterns, as designated in section 110-28. 
    Archaeological salvage means the archaeological excavating of a site prior to its destruction by excavation, boring, uncovering, construction, erosion, vandalism, or any other form of disturbance. Archaeological salvage excavations shall be concentrated only within the areas to be disturbed, in order to save site data which would be lost due to the disturbance, and the extent of the excavations may vary, depending on the significance of the site, time constraints, and the degree of evidence of artifacts, at the direction of the city archaeologist. 
    Archaeological site means a location which has yielded or may yield information on history or prehistory. Archaeological sites may be found within archaeological zones, historic sites, historic districts and other areas of the city. Archaeological sites are evidenced by the presence of artifacts or features below the ground surface indicating the past use of a location by people. 
    Artifact means objects which are a product of human modification or objects which have been transported to a site by people. In the city, artifacts over 50 years old are protected by city Ordinance No. 91-34. 
    City archaeologist means the individual charged by the city manager with coordinating the assessment of archaeological resources of the city and coordinating the monitoring, testing and salvaging excavations of these resources. The individual may be a local volunteer or a state employee designated to perform such functions. 
    Cultural resource and historic resource mean any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural or archaeological value, including but not limited to monuments, memorials, Indian habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, sunken or abandoned ships, engineering works, treasure troves, artifacts, or other objects with intrinsic historical or archaeological value or any part thereof relating to the history, government, and culture of the city, the state or the United States of America. 
    Disturbance means digging, drilling, excavating, or similar activities which may unearth artifacts. 
    Disturbance, major, means: 
(1)  Disturbance by digging, excavating, or other such activities at locations 12 inches or more below the adjacent surrounding ground surface. 
(2)  All disturbances caused by digging or compaction machinery. 
(3)  Any disturbance not defined under the term "minor disturbance." 
    Disturbance, minor, means disturbance by digging, excavating, or other such activities at locations less than 12 inches from the surface where only hand tools, such as shovels and post hole diggers, as well as jack hammers, front loaders and back hoes are used, and where less than one cubic yard of soil is removed. 
    Map means the archaeological base map of the city. 
    Monitoring means observation of construction disturbances to determine if archaeological resources exist in an area or, when such resources are known to exist, the observation, recording and incidental recovery of site features and materials to preserve a record of the affected portion of the site. Monitoring occurs in locales in which sites or features may occur but are not expected to be of such importance, size or complexity as to require lengthy work stoppage to permit appropriate archaeological salvage excavation which may take place during a monitoring operation. 
    Project cost means the estimated costs of construction, improvements or other related expenses that are provided by the applicant and used as the basis for calculation of prescribed building permit fees. 
    Testing means subsurface excavation or remote sensing techniques, to determine the type and extent of the archaeological site. Testing may include auguring and the establishment of archaeological excavation units and requires the screening of excavated material for artifact recovery. When necessary archaeological salvage excavations may take place following, or in conjunction with, testing procedures. Most artifacts are uncovered or destroyed by modern excavation techniques including the use of ditch diggers, back hoes, and drilling apparatus used by developers and city personnel during the construction, removal or repair of sewers, stormwater drainage systems, aqueduct lines, electric lines, street and sidewalk removal/repairs, and home restoration. 
    Used and occupied include the phrase "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-28. - General requirements within archaeological areas. 
(a)  Designation of archaeological area. In order to regulate and restrict subsurface disturbance as provided in this article and to determine the extent of archaeological investigation and excavations that may be required, all land within the corporate boundaries of the city, including submerged lands, is designated an archaeological area. 
(b)  Application required for major disturbance. All major disturbances requiring a city building permit, a city utility permit or a city easement or right-of-way permit shall, before such disturbances take place, be reported to the city archaeologist on an archaeological permit application provided by the city manager. The application shall be a part of the city's permitting process. Any archaeological testing or excavation by the city archaeologist, involving property adjacent to or surrounding the site of the proposed disturbance, may be conducted only with written permission of the affected property owner. 
(c)  Delay of major disturbance authorized. The city archaeologist is authorized to delay the proposed major disturbance for an initial two-week period. If more time is required, the city archaeologist may request from the city manager up to four additional two-week periods, such requests to be reviewed and ruled upon individually. The applicant shall be provided copies of these requests when they are submitted to the city manager and shall have the opportunity to provide comments to the city manager. After 12 weeks the city archaeologist may request that the city manager grant additional two-week periods, provided that written permission is granted by the property owner. During any delay periods, the city archaeologist may excavate, monitor and test the disturbance site with written permission from the property owner, in order to determine whether artifacts are present. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-29. - Excavations on city property. 
    A person using a probe, metal detector, other devices or who discovers an artifact on city property shall register the artifact with the city historic district office within one business day. No person shall conduct disturbances or construction activities in or upon properties belonging to the city, including public rights-of-way, without monitoring and such additional archaeological testing or salvage excavation as may be determined by the city archaeologist. The city archaeologist is authorized to define the extent of the archaeological work and to delay the proposed disturbance or construction activity for an initial four-week period. The city archaeologist may request that the city manager grant additional two-week periods, as required. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-30. - Fees. 
    There shall be added to the fees collected for each applicable building or other permit issued a minimum fee of one percent of the estimated project cost for which the permit is issued. If archaeological salvage, excavation or archaeological monitoring is performed by the city archaeologist, and total costs related thereto are in excess of the fee prescribed in this section, the city archaeologist shall, in conjunction with the city manager, determine the estimated costs of such additional efforts and shall request the applicant to deposit with the city a sum equal to the additional cost. Any sums not used in the conduct of such testing, excavating or monitoring efforts or the analysis, conservation, cataloging, storage and reports shall be returned to the applicant at the time of final disposition of the work by the city archaeologist. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-31. - Management of artifacts. 
(a)  Ownership; recording. All artifacts recovered or discovered during the course of any archaeological testing, excavating or monitoring, as provided in this article, shall belong to the owner of the property upon which such artifacts are found. Artifacts uncovered or discovered during testing, excavation, or monitoring of property belonging to the city shall be recorded by the city and negotiated for payment or donated as a gift to a museum with credit given to the finder. The city planner may request that the property owner allow temporary possession of artifacts by the city to ensure their proper cataloging, recording, analysis, and conservation. All artifacts are to be returned to the property owner as soon as such cataloging, recording, analysis, and conservation is completed. Individuals are strongly urged to donate artifacts from archaeological excavations to the proper agency. The removal of human skeletal remains recovered in archaeological context in all instances shall be coordinated with the local medical examiner and the city archaeologist. These remains are not subject to private ownership. Such material shall be sensitively treated and, following their analysis by a physical anthropologist, where possible, shall be appropriately reburied. If at all possible, human burials should not be removed but left undisturbed in their original position. 
(b)  Curation of artifacts. Provided that written permission is granted by the property owner, all artifacts from archaeological salvage excavations and monitoring operations will be washed, catalogued, analyzed, conserved, and stored in compliance with current curation standards. To maintain consistency in curating procedures and to keep materials from the city in a central location, the Historic Florida Keys Preservation Board may receive materials from the city archaeologist. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-32. - City archaeologist. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a city archaeologist, as defined in section 110-27, who shall meet the city's requirements and the standards for membership by the Society of Professional Archaeologists and who shall have a demonstrated background in historic and prehistoric archaeology. 
(b)  The city archaeologist shall: 
(1)  Review all applicable building, utility and right-of-way permit applications in the archaeological area; 
(2)  Conduct such testing, excavations, or monitoring as shall be required by city Ordinance No. 91-34; 
(3)  Prepare or oversee preparation of periodic reports on all projects, which reports shall meet the guidelines established for archaeological reports by the department of state, division of historical resources and records management; 
(4)  Record archaeological sites and development strategies of preservation of the archaeological resources of the city; 
(5)  Work with property owners at the planning stage of applicable projects, to minimize the potential impact on archaeological sites by any activities proposed for such sites; and 
(6)  Advise the city manager concerning archaeological issues. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq. 
Sec. 110-33. - Grievance procedure. 
    An appeal of any application of this article shall first by brought before the city manager, and then may be brought before the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-34. - Commencement of archaeological work. 
    The work period for archaeological work shall be considered to begin 48 hours after payment of fees and issuance of the permit or after the resolution of any appeal, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-35. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-10.4(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-36-110-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 110-61-110-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 110-86. - Applicability. 
    In order to promote and preserve natural hydrological conditions and to preserve water quality, natural habitats, and environmentally sensitive areas, sections 110-87 through 110-91 shall be applied to wetlands and transitional wetlands, regardless of their zoning, and to all areas designated conservation on the future land use map. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-87. - Definitions. 
    Wetlands shall be defined based on hydrology as well as hydric soil and wetland vegetation. Wetlands shall include transitional wetlands and shall include those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do or would support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The following vegetative species are wetland species commonly found in the city, although the applicable state and federal list of jurisdictional wetland vegetation shall apply: 
Common Name of Wetland Species Specific Name Black mangrove Avicennia germinas White mangrove Laguncularia racemosa Red mangrove Rhizophora mangle Buttonwood Conocarpus erectus Saltwort Batis maritima Glasswort Salicornia spp. Sea purslane Sesuvium protul 
 acastrum Sea blite Suada linearis Sea oxeye daisy Borrichia spp. Salt grass Distichlis spicata Dropseed Sporobilus virginicus Key grass Monanthochloe Fringe-rushes Fimbristylis spp. Cordgrass Spartina spartinae Sawgrass Cladium jamaicewsis Spike rush Eleocharis celluosa Cattail Typha spp.  
Wetland determinations shall be consistent with the most stringent of those of the state department of environmental protection, the South Florida Water Management District, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-88. - Wetland delineation; establishing wetland line. 
    A delineation of the upland wetland boundary shall be established based upon an on-site (field) survey by a professional biologist or registered engineer provided by the applicant and coordinated with the South Florida Water Management District, the state department of environmental protection, and/or the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. The field investigation which delineates a larger area shall be used as the upland/wetland boundary line. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-89. - Development restrictions and interpretations. 
    No development shall be permitted in wetlands, including transitional wetlands, until and unless the applicant has obtained all required permits or exemptions from state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction and has met all requirements of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-90. - Density. 
(a)  Site alteration on sites with environmentally sensitive lands, including but not limited to wetlands, shall not result in a density in excess of one dwelling unit per ten acres of environmentally sensitive land. Site alteration, including filling and/or plant removal, in these areas shall be limited to ten percent of the total site size. The determinations of site size shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations by professionals competent in: (i) identifying vegetation and soils; (ii) analyzing data; and (iii) making impact assessments, including findings regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological value and function of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(b)  The city shall coordinate with the jurisdictional agencies for purposes of rendering legal, equitable, and environmentally sensitive determinations of the development rights to be permitted on such wetlands and/or lands under the jurisdiction of the state or federal government. The developer of a parcel of environmentally sensitive land shall be responsible for obtaining permits or exemptions from the state department of environmental protection and from the army corps of engineers prior to obtaining a development order or development plan review approval from the city. Regardless of permitting by federal or state permitting agencies, the city shall reserve the right to determine the appropriate land use, density/intensity, and special mitigation measures, including but not limited to the construction of culverts or other means. 
(c)  The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in determining that development shall not adversely impact wetlands, transitional wetlands, and other environmentally fragile natural systems. Such determinations shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations by a biologist, an engineer or by an other professional competent in producing data and analysis necessary to support impact assessments. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-91. - Wetland buffer zones. 
(a)  Buffer areas. Wetlands and transitional wetlands shall be protected from impacts generated by adjacent land uses through natural upland buffer zones. The upland buffer shall be an area landward of the upland edge of a wetland (i.e., the upland/wetland jurisdictional line if applicable). The buffer area provides an undeveloped area which separates developed upland from a wetland area. The purpose of the buffer area is to ensure the continuing function of respective wetland communities, to prevent pollutants from surface water runoff from entering the wetlands, and to enhance water quality. The city shall retain the right to prohibit development within the buffer area. The boundary of an upland buffer area shall be established by field investigation and shall be consistent with South Florida Water Management District permitting standards for upland buffers adjacent to wetlands to sufficiently protect adjacent wetlands. 
(b)  Vegetative buffers. Any development adjacent to environmentally sensitive areas including wetlands and class III waters shall provide buffers of 50 feet. Buffers shall be 25 feet on lots less than five acres created prior to February 17, 1992. New and redeveloped areas and arterial roadways shall provide buffers of 50 feet. Should it be necessary to establish or replenish shoreline vegetation or littoral zones, the developer should consult section 108-518. An applicant for development may propose alternative methodology, but such methodology shall be subject to verification and must address the following: 
(1)  Erodibility of soils upland of the wetland line; 
(2)  Depth of the water table below the soil surface in the zone immediately upland of the wetland line; and 
(3)  Habitat requirements of aquatic and wetland dependent wildlife based on the following: 
a.  Habitat suitability; 
b.  Spatial requirements; 
c.  Access to upland habitat; and 
d.  Noise impacts. 
No hazardous waste shall be stored or disposed of in upland buffers. 
(c)  Required dedication of conservation easements. The city may require applicants for development plan review approval or for subdivision development approval to include the dedication of conservation easements or reservations where the city finds that the dedication is reasonable in order to protect the value and function of a wetland and upland buffers. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-92. - Hazardous waste storage and disposal. 
    No hazardous wastes shall be stored or disposed of on wetlands or transitional wetlands. Similarly, no hazardous wastes shall be stored or disposed of on upland buffers pursuant to this article and articles IV, V, VII and VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.8), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-93-110-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 110-121. - Applicability. 
    In order to prevent both soil erosion and sedimentation, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required as a part of an application for development plan review whenever a development will involve any clearing, removal of native or protected vegetation, grading, or other form of disturbing land by the movement of earth. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Erodible slope means all slopes with inclines in excess of four percent unless modified by the city engineer based on consideration of specific soil conditions. 
    Large flat surface area (unpaved) means an area which is flat or whose slope is less than four percent and which consists of more than 1,000 square feet of exposed soil. 
    Sedimentation means the settling out of the soil particles which are transported by water or wind. Sedimentation occurs when the velocity of water or wind in which soil particles are suspended is slowed to a sufficient degree and for a sufficient period of time to allow the particles to settle out of suspension or when the degree of slope is lessened to achieve the same result. 
    Soil erosion means any removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water, gravity, or wind. Erosion includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-123. - Erosion control measures. 
    All measures necessary to minimize soil erosion and to control sedimentation in the disturbed land area shall be implemented. The following protection shall be provided for all disturbed areas: 
(1)  Minimize velocities of water runoff; 
(2)  Maximize protection of disturbed areas from stormwater runoff; and 
(3)  Prevent or retain sedimentation within the development site as early as possible following disturbances. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-124. - Erosion control materials. 
(a)  Appropriate measures shall be taken during land clearing and building operations to ensure that exposed, destabilized or otherwise altered soil is expeditiously covered with an acceptable erosion control material. The provision shall be applicable to the act of subdividing and installation of related improvements as well as during the development review process including the period during which improvements may occur as well as the length of time soil may be exposed to the environment. 
(b)  The tree and native vegetation protection ordinance shall be applicable to all clearing and grading activities and shall include specifications for management principles guiding the removal or placement of vegetation and landscaping design. Regulations shall also require developers to take precautionary measures, where necessary, to avert destruction or damage to native vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-125-110-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FRESHWATER LENS PROTECTION 

Sec. 110-151. - Scope; compliance; contents of development plan. 
(a)  The city shall regulate development for purposes of protecting the freshwater lens. The applicant or owner or developer of any proposed development shall be required to comply with the open space requirements established in division 3 of article V of chapter 122 pertaining to size and dimension criteria. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, development plans shall contain improvements designed to preserve the quality and quantity of water resources within the freshwater lens. This shall be accomplished by ensuring against pollutants entering the freshwater lens. Typical pollutants contributing to the degradation of the freshwater lens include saltwater intrusion, septic tanks, mosquito spraying, oils from lobster traps, and leakage from sewer lines. In order to accomplish this objective, the city shall coordinate with the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority for purposes of discouraging or preventing, to the extent lawful, withdrawal of water from the freshwater lens for domestic purposes. The city shall coordinate related site plan review activities with the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.3), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-152-110-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COASTAL RESOURCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Waterways, ch. 82. 

Sec. 110-181. - Coastal shoreline impact. 
(a)  Applicants for development along the Salt Ponds, Riviera Canal, Atlantic Ocean, Gulf of Mexico, or other coastal shorelines shall be required to submit, as part of the permitting process, plans which demonstrate how the development shall incorporate features designed to protect against potential adverse impacts to the following: 
(1)  Shoreline vegetation and stabilization; 
(2)  Water quality; 
(3)  Native habitat, including reef systems, seagrass beds, and coastal nontidal wetland habitats; 
(4)  Living marine resources; and 
(5)  Shoreline access. 
(b)  No shoreline development shall be approved until the applicant has demonstrated that potentially adverse impacts shall be prevented or that compensatory mitigation shall occur. The criteria in this article shall be enforced at plan review. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-182. - Shoreline vegetation and stability. 
(a)  No vegetation shall be removed from a shoreline without a duly authorized permit. No mangroves shall be removed except to the extent necessary to allow for ten-percent disturbance of a conservation designated site. The applicant shall be required to revegetate, stabilize, and enhance damaged shorelines by planting native vegetation, including mangrove and/or appropriate native plant species which: 
(1)  Contribute to marine productivity and water quality; 
(2)  Offer protection from erosion and flooding; and 
(3)  Contribute to the natural soil building process. 
(b)  Whenever vegetation is removed, the applicant/developer must provide mitigation plan ensuring that revegetation shall occur at a ratio three to ten times the affected habitat. The mitigation plan shall be subject to review by the planning board and by the appropriate federal and/or state agencies having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Hardening of the shoreline with riprap, bulkheads or other similar devices shall not be allowed unless erosion constitutes a critical peril to upland property and the use of vegetation has failed to stabilize the shoreline. In such case, riprap shall be the first alternative. Such shoreline hardening structures shall generally not be vertical seawalls or bulkheads. The specific location and design of such structures shall: 
(1)  Comply with the best management principles and practices and be accomplished by use of the least environmentally damaging methods and designs possible; 
(2)  Avoid a vertical slope which generates erosive tendencies, especially to adjacent unprotected shoreline properties. Pervious interlocking tile systems, filter mats, and similar stabilization methods shall be used in lieu of vertical walls whenever feasible; 
(3)  Not be located waterward of the mean high water line except when it is shown to be in the public interest; 
(4)  First be approved by other public agencies having jurisdiction; and 
(5)  Incorporate a program of shoreline vegetation or revegetation in order to build, enhance, and stabilize a natural shoreline. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-183. - Living marine resources. 
(a)  Development along the coastal shoreline or within an area extending 600 feet into the tidal water adjacent to the corporate city limits shall avoid adverse impacts of development on benthic communities within tidal waters, including seagrass beds, algal beds, and other live bottom communities, reef systems as well as adverse impacts on the coastal nontidal wetland habitats. Since these areas are sensitive to increased turbidity and other forms of pollution, water runoff and introduction of nutrients, these forms of pollution shall be regulated through effective water quality management criteria. Plans for development impacting marine resources shall be coordinated with state agencies having jurisdiction prior to the city granting development plan approval and/or prior to release of any permit for construction. Compensatory mitigation may be permitted in cases of overriding public benefit where both the city and the state and federal agencies having jurisdiction approve the mitigation measures proposed by the developer. Any such development shall ensure continuance and maintenance of essentially natural conditions in order to further propagation of fish and wildlife as well as public recreation opportunities. 
(b)  All applicants proposing development activities along the coastal shoreline or within submerged areas shall be required to submit a development plan pursuant to development plan review regulations. Such development plan shall provide information describing marine life potentially impacted by proposed land uses as well as related construction activity. The plan shall stipulate assurances that the proposed project shall not adversely impact marine life or water quality. For instance, water quality control techniques such as the use of weirs for purposes of managing turbidity may be required by the city. In addition, the city shall require surveys of existing conditions, specifications of planned site improvements, and techniques to be used during construction as well as in operating and maintaining the land use in order to prevent damage to living marine organisms. 
(c)  Any proposed development which may impact known sea turtle nesting areas, such as along the sandy beach at Fort Zachary Taylor, shall include a mitigation plan which avoids the disturbance of nests. Site and building plans for construction of single-family or multifamily dwellings, parking lots, dune walkovers or any other lighted structures within the direct line of sight of such beaches shall incorporate the following: 
(1)  Low-profile and low-density lighting will be used in parking lots, and such lighting shall be positioned so that the source of light is not visible from the beach. 
(2)  All lights on balconies will be shielded from the beach. 
(3)  Floodlights on buildings or adjacent to the beach shall be positioned so that the source of light is not visible from the beach or, if required for safety, positioned in such a manner as to minimize impacts on turtles. 
(4)  Where lights are used, low-profile and low-intensity shielded lights will be used on dune walkovers. 
(d)  Any planned beach renourishment project shall protect sea turtle nesting areas by ceasing development activity during the nesting season (May 1 through October 31), or by collecting eggs from the nests, incubating them, and relocating the hatchlings. 
(e)  Coral reefs shall not be destroyed by development activities. The city shall assist reef relief in distributing educational material concerning the coral reef, including information on boating practices which are harmful to the coral reef. Wastewater system improvements identified in the comprehensive plan capital improvement schedule shall also be carried out to reduce potential adverse impacts on the coral reef. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-184. - Water-related and water-dependent uses. 
(a)  All water-related uses shall be built on uplands landward of the high velocity hurricane storm surge zone (V zone) and the coastal construction control zone established by the state department of environmental protection and enacted as the Florida Keys Coastal Management Act of 1974, excepting structures approved by the state department of environmental protection. Within the coastal building zone all construction activities shall be predicated on plans compliant with applicable state and local building codes. Dredging and filling of wetlands or open water in order to accommodate water-related uses shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Along the coastal, nearshore or estuarine shoreline seaward of the high velocity storm surge zone, no development shall be permitted other than water-dependent structures, native shoreline vegetation, elevated accessways of wood or other material which allow light to pass through and air and/or water to circulate underneath and to support plant life, subject to the approval of the state or federal agencies having jurisdiction. Hardening of the shoreline shall not be permitted unless the upland property is critically imperiled and the use of vegetation has failed to stabilize the shoreline. The design specifications of any shoreline hardening structure shall: 
(1)  Comply with best management principles and practices consistent with state and federal standards and be accomplished by use of the least environmentally damaging methods and designs possible; 
(2)  Avoid a vertical slope which generates erosive tendencies, especially to adjacent unprotected shoreline properties. Use natural rock boulders, pervious interlocking tile systems with filter fabric on the landward side, or similar stabilization methods, all of which must be approved by public agencies having jurisdiction; 
(3)  Not be located waterward of the mean high water line except when it is shown to be in the overriding public interest; 
(4)  First be approved by other public agencies having jurisdiction; and 
(5)  Incorporate a program of shoreline vegetation or revegetation in order to build, enhance, and stabilize a restored shoreline. 
(c)  No non-water-dependent uses shall be permitted on submerged lands or wetlands. Development on uplands adjacent to wetlands shall preserve a buffer measured from the nearest upland/wetland boundary. The buffer area shall be coordinated with South Florida Water Management District permitting guidelines. Within the buffer area all exotic vegetation shall be removed, and native plants shall be planted. The purpose of the buffer area is to protect ambient water quality and to prevent degradation of water quality from pollutants from surface water runoff within coastal waters. Similarly, no structures which constrict water circulation shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-185. - Impacts of coastal development on tidal flushing and circulation patterns. 
    Tidal flushing and circulation patterns generally shall not be altered by development activities. No development shall produce changes in the tidal flushing and circulation patterns unless the applicant for development clearly demonstrates that no adverse environmental impacts shall be occasioned by the proposed changes in tidal flushing and circulation patterns. Additionally, no alteration in tidal flow shall be permitted which causes stagnation or siltation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-186. - Marinas and dock facilities. 
    Docks or marina improvements shall not be approved by the city until the applicant demonstrates compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and administrative rules as well as applicable policies of regional agencies. Development plans shall include an environmental impact component for all docks and marinas which adequately address marina siting criteria cited in this section. These plans must demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the facilities shall not adversely impact living marine resources, including but not limited to seagrasses, hardbottom communities, nearshore waters, manatees and other living marine organisms. The plans shall comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The plan shall indicate location of the site relative to all potentially impacted natural marine resources, including specific location and characteristics. New marinas shall not be allowed in or immediately adjacent to the following sensitive areas: 
a.  Aquatic preserves; 
b.  Class II waters approved by the state department of environmental protection for shellfish harvesting; 
c.  Outstanding Florida waters; 
d.  Marine sanctuaries; 
e.  Estuarine sanctuaries; and 
f.  Areas of essential manatee habitat, as determined by the state department of environmental protection. 
(2)  Marinas must have sufficient upland area for all non-water-dependent uses. Dredging and filling of wetlands or open water in order to accommodate uses which are not water dependent shall not be allowed. Exceptions may be granted in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Cumulative effects of several marinas and/or boatramps in one area shall be considered in the review of proposed marina projects. 
(4)  All new and expanded marinas shall provide a demonstration of compliance with state water quality standards by maintaining a water quality monitoring program approved by the state department of environmental protection. 
(5)  Grassbeds and other submerged habitat deemed valuable by the state department of environmental protection will be subject to protection regardless of their size. The state department of environmental protection frequently determines its jurisdiction based on size and connection to other wetlands, so this may be contradictory. 
(6)  In reviewing applications for new or expanded docking facilities, ways to improve, mitigate, or restore adverse environmental impacts caused by previous activities shall be explored. This may include shallowing dredged areas, restoring wetland or submerged vegetation, or marking navigational channels. Such mitigation or restoration may be a condition of approval of new, renewed, or expanded facilities. 
(7)  Immediate access (ingress and egress) points shall be delineated by channel markers, indicating speed limits, manatee area warnings, and any other applicable regulations. 
(8)  All new or expanded marinas must provide treatment of stormwater runoff from upland areas to the extent necessary to ensure that state water quality standards are met at the point of discharge to waters of the state. In addition, all requirements of the water management district and the state department of environmental protection shall be met. 
(9)  Boat maintenance activities in new or expanded marina facilities shall be located as far as possible from open waterbodies in order to reduce contamination of waterbodies by toxic substances common to boat maintenance. Runoff from boat maintenance must be collected and treated prior to discharge. 
(10)  Open wet slips will be preferred to covered wet slips in marina design to reduce shading of waterbodies which result in lowered biological productivity. 
(11)  Marina design shall incorporate natural wetland vegetative buffers whenever possible near docking areas and in access areas for erosion and sedimentation control, runoff purification and habitat purposes. 
(12)  The West Indian manatee shall be afforded protection from boating activities which may have an adverse impact upon the species. The following criteria apply in the implementation of this policy: 
a.  Marina operators shall undertake the following manatee protection measures in areas where manatees are known to occur: 
1.  Implement and maintain a manatee public awareness program which will include posting signs to advise boat users that manatees are an endangered specie which frequents the waters of the region's estuaries and lagoon; 
2.  Declare the waters in and around marinas as "idle speed" zones; and 
3.  Post phone numbers to report an injured manatee. 
b.  Local manatee protection plans shall be included as part of the coastal management and conservation elements of the comprehensive plan. The plan should: 
1.  Assess the occurrence of manatee activity within the jurisdiction; 
2.  Document the number of manatee accidents and deaths; 
3.  Identify manatee habitats; 
4.  Determine the potential for adverse impacts to the manatee population from various activities and identify the level of protection necessary to ensure least possible interference; and 
5.  Recommend local mitigative actions to be undertaken in support of the regional policy. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(F)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 6, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 110-187. - Ocean, gulf and nearshore water quality. 
    In order to protect the water quality of the Atlantic Ocean, the Florida Bay, and the Gulf of Mexico, no new point-source pollution shall be permitted to discharge into these waters or into ditches or canals flowing into these waters. In addition, in order to reduce non-point-source pollutants the city shall require the following: 
(1)  Surface water management systems shall be consistent with the city's adopted drainage level of service (reference comprehensive plan policy 4-1.1.1) and applicable federal, state, and regional standards. 
(2)  A vegetated pond with sloping wetland buffers shall be established and maintained as part of the surface water management requirements. Prior to construction of the surface water management system for any phase of a project, the developer shall prepare a design and management plan for the wetland/littoral zone that will be developed as part of these systems. The plan should: 
a.  Include typical cross sections of the surface water management system showing the average groundwater elevation and the minus three-foot contour (i.e., below average elevation) or a 75-foot distance from the wetland buffer, whichever is greater; 
b.  Specify how vegetation is to be established within this zone, including the extent, method, type and timing of any planting to be provided; 
c.  Include the removal of all exotic vegetation; and 
d.  Provide a description of any management procedures to be followed in order to ensure the continued viability and health of the stormwater management system. The wetlands as established shall consist entirely of native aquatic vegetation and shall be maintained permanently as part of the water management system. As a minimum, ten square feet of vegetated littoral zone per linear foot of wetland shoreline should be established as part of the water management plan. The developer's vegetated/littoral zone management plan shall include a plan acceptable to the city for the longterm management and maintenance of stormwater, aquatic vegetation, and shoreline stabilization. The burden for perpetual maintenance rests with the property owner. If the city establishes a citywide utility district, the city may implement a city management strategy to be funded through an equitable assessment of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-188. - Restrictions in coastal high hazard area. 
(a)  The city shall enforce the land use controls within the coastal high hazard area, within the LDR-C and MDR-C districts, including but not limited to enforcing: 
(1)  Density requirements for development within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodprone map V zone. 
(2)  Regulations which mandate that all development and redevelopment within the Federal Emergency Management Agency floodprone area V zone areas comply with the following regulatory techniques for hazard mitigation: 
a.  State and local regulations establish coastal construction control lines, as well as applicable state and local construction codes regulating construction activity in coastal areas. 
b.  Surface water management improvements which mitigate against loss of floodplain and comply with adopted surface water management level of service standards for drainage cited in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. 
c.  No development or redevelopment within the Federal Emergency Management Agency floodprone map V zone shall occur on septic tanks. 
d.  Publicly funded infrastructure shall not be built within the Federal Emergency Management Agency floodprone map V zone unless the facility is for the protection of public health and safety. 
e.  Development plans shall comply with wetland and transitional wetland preservation regulations in sections 110-86 through 110-91. 
(b)  A multiagency development plan review process shall be initiated by the city for all proposed development or redevelopment having potential adverse impacts on water quality, wetlands, shoreline stabilization, natural habitats, fish or wildlife, hurricane evacuation, or other adverse impacts on coastal resources. The development plan review for such developments shall be coordinated with state, county, federal, or regional agencies having jurisdiction. A primary function of this review process shall be to effectively reconcile hazard mitigation issues prior to issuance of any development orders. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-189. - Shoreline access and protection of natural shoreline and limited beach/dune system. 
(a)  Shoreline access to the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico shall be required in order to maintain accessways at approximately one-half mile intervals along the shoreline of the natural and renourished beach in order to enforce the 1985 Coastal Zone Protection Act for beach and shoreline access. 
(b)  The city shall not allow any construction of manmade structures on the city's beach, excepting beach access structures compliant with construction standards of the state division of beaches and shores. In addition, water-dependent structures such as lifeguard stands or beach renourishment approved by the division may be constructed if such structures meet the construction standards of federal and state agencies having jurisdiction. Any such construction activity must include measures to restore the beach and vegetation pursuant to a plan approved by the federal and/or state agencies having appropriate jurisdiction. 
(c)  No native vegetation shall be removed unless the revegetation shall occur at a ratio three to ten times the affected vegetated areas. Exotic vegetation shall be replaced by native vegetation. The revegetation ratio plan including the threshold for revegetation shall be subject to review and approval by the city as well as being subject to the federal and/or state agencies having jurisdiction. The city shall require beach and dune system restoration where development is proposed on the adjacent upland and breaches in the adjacent dune system are apparent. 
(d)  The coastal construction control line (CCCL) established in section 122-1148 shall not be distributed and shall be maintained in its natural state as open space. The city shall coordinate the development review process for projects impacting the coastal construction control line by forwarding all applications for construction seaward of the coastal construction control line to the state department of environmental protection for jurisdictional action. The applicant shall be responsible for receiving permits from all other public agencies having jurisdiction. In addition, such activities shall comply with applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(e)  To protect natural rock outcrops which form most of the city's shoreline as well as the limited beach, shoreline development and access shall continue to be restricted in order to preserve the shoreline and the limited beach. Rigid shore protection structures are not permitted, except when used as part of a comprehensive plan for beach restoration and when nonstructural alternatives are not acceptable. When beach renourishment projects are needed, the dune system should be restored, as necessary, utilizing natural, indigenous vegetation. 
(f)  Motorized vehicles are prohibited upon or over the city's incorporated portion of the beach adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean, excepting mechanical beach cleaning equipment, public safety and emergency vehicles, and vehicles permitted by the state department of environmental protection. Beach cleaners shall be required to obtain a coastal construction control line (CCCL) permit for operations beyond the control line. The method of operations and equipment shall be approved by the state department of environmental protection and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as may be applicable as part of the special conditions of the coastal construction control line permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-190. - Multiagency review of coastal management issues. 
    As part of the staff analysis and evaluation of development plans, the city planner shall coordinate with members of a multiagency technical review committee comprised of the following agencies: the U.S. Coast Guard; the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; the state department of environmental protection; the South Florida Water Management District; the South Florida Regional Planning Council; the county; and other federal, state, and regional agencies as may be appropriate in managing the following activities: 
(1)  The city shall coordinate all development and resource conservation measures impacting the waters of the Atlantic Ocean and Florida Bay with such agencies as well as other applicable public agencies. These activities shall include but not be limited to review of proposed development potentially impacting natural resources, including development petitions for docks, shoreline stabilization, dredging, or other alteration of natural resources under federal or state jurisdiction. 
(2)  All applications for development activity impacting waters of the state as well as tidally influenced salt ponds or other lands under the jurisdiction of the state shall be coordinated with agencies having appropriate jurisdiction. 
(3)  The city shall coordinate with technical staff within the state department of environmental protection and the South Florida Water Management District in order to ensure implementation of sound principles and practices of coastal resource management during the development review process as well as in the formulation of policies impacting coastal resource management. 
(4)  The city shall coordinate with the South Florida Water Management District, the state department of environmental protection, as well as other appropriate state agencies in matters surrounding stormwater management, drainage, water quality and quantity, and consumptive use permitting. 
(5)  The city shall ensure that all issues surrounding development impacts on wetlands or other resources under federal and/or state jurisdiction are managed based on timely coordination, exchange of information, and appropriate followup by the city and all agencies having jurisdiction over the issue. The city shall request jurisdictional determinations from all appropriate agencies prior to the issuance of development orders or building permits for all sites within the city. 
(6)  The city shall coordinate with the county on issues surrounding hurricane evacuation, stormwater management on county roadways, public access, and other coastal issues of mutual concern. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-191. - Impacts of development on coastal waters. 
    Development plans shall comply with the following performance criteria: 
(1)  Surface water management systems shall be consistent with the city's adopted drainage level of service (reference comprehensive plan policy 4-1.1.1) and applicable federal, state, and regional standards. 
(2)  A vegetated pond with sloping wetland buffers shall be established and maintained as part of the surface water management requirements. Prior to construction of the surface water management system for any phase of a project, the developer shall prepare a design and management plan for the vegetated/littoral zone that will be developed as part of these systems. The plan should: 
a.  Include typical cross sections of the surface water management system showing the average groundwater elevation and the minus three-foot contour (i.e., below average elevation) or a 75-foot distance from the wetland buffer, whichever is greater; 
b.  Specify how vegetation is to be established within this zone, including the extent, method, type and timing of any planting to be provided; 
c.  Include the removal of all exotic vegetation; and 
d.  Provide a description of any management procedures to be followed in order to ensure the continued viability and health of the stormwater management system. The wetland zone as established shall consist entirely of native aquatic vegetation and should be maintained permanently as part of the water management system. As a minimum, ten square feet of vegetated wetland zone per linear foot of wetland shoreline shall be established as part of the water management plan. The developer's vegetated/littoral zone management plan shall include a plan acceptable to the city for the longterm management and maintenance of stormwater, lake and lakefront shoreline. The burden for perpetual maintenance rests with the property owner. If the city establishes a citywide utility district, the city may implement a city management strategy to be funded through an equitable assessment of property owners. Should it be necessary to establish or replenish shoreline vegetation or littoral zones, the developer should use plants that are highly salt tolerant as part of the aquascape. Aquatic planting that is necessary shall be illustrated on the required landscape plan submittal for development plan review as provided in section 108-243(c) and (d). 
(3)  Outstanding Florida waters and class III waters shall be protected by incorporating the following into the city's land development regulations: 
a.  Dredging and filling activities shall be limited to the state department of environmental protection, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the South Florida Water Management District and any other applicable agency approved dredging. 
b.  Ensure good water quality by coordinating with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, the state department of environmental protection, and the South Florida Water Management District in monitoring the quality of stormwater runoff and all discharge processes where these agencies have jurisdiction. The city shall notify the appropriate agency with jurisdiction as potential issues or problems are identified by the city. The city's amended land development regulations shall provide performance criteria designed to ensure that new development provides effective and adequate stormwater management improvements concurrent with the impacts of new development. All new development shall comply with drainage level of service criteria. 
c.  Prohibit the use of these waters for water-dependent activities that are contrary to the public interest and do not satisfy a community need. Upon adoption of the comprehensive plan, all marinas within the city shall be retrofitted with pumpout stations. Use of pumpout facilities shall be mandatory for all vessels and liveaboard units. An implementing regulatory program shall require participation by the state and county since the vessels and liveaboards are located on waters of the state. 
d.  Prohibit modification of marine grassbeds unless required by an overriding public interest, and the activity is approved by federal, state, and/or regional agencies having jurisdiction. 
e.  Where modification of grassbeds is permitted by agencies having jurisdiction, the city shall ensure that: 
1.  A determination of overriding public interest has been demonstrated prior to modification of grassbeds. 
2.  Project runoff and nutrient introduction shall be controlled to prevent an increase in water turbidity. 
3.  Projects damaging grassbeds during construction shall incorporate mitigative techniques which reestablish benthic conditions favorable to natural regeneration. Mitigation should only be allowed at a 3:1 or 4:1 ratio as recommended by the marine resources division of the state department of environmental protection. 
4.  Special attention shall be given to stipulations cited in subsections (3)e.1 through (3)e.3 of this section during the development review process. The city shall coordinate closely with state and federal agencies during the permitting processes to ensure that the intent of these policies is carried out. 
f.  Protect aquatic and wetland wildlife and vegetative species. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-192. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities shall be exempt from the coastal resource protection regulations in this article: 
(1)  Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas. 
(2)  Clearing of shoreline vegetation to create walking trails having no structural components, not to exceed four feet in width. The city reserves the power to restrict the number and design of walking trails. 
(3)  Timber catwalks, docks, and trail bridges that are less than four feet wide, provided that no filling, flooding, dredging, draining, ditching, tiling or excavation is done, except limited filling and excavating necessary for the installation of pilings. 
(4)  Recreational fishing and temporary blinds. 
(5)  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required and where navigational access will not be impaired by construction of the fence. 
(b)  Notwithstanding, any permitted development shall provide a plan acceptable to the city which ensures maintenance of water quality and coastal resource integrity in perpetuity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.4(L)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-193-110-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WILDLIFE HABITAT PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF FLORA AND FAUNA 

Sec. 110-221. - Scope. 
(a)  Vegetative communities and wildlife habitats, particularly those identified as primary habitat for endangered or threatened species or species of special concern, which are deemed environmentally significant shall be protected from adverse impacts associated with development. Table VI-7 entitled "Endangered and Potentially Endangered Flora Species Indigenous to Habitats Identified in the City of Key West" and table VI-8 entitled "Endangered and Potentially Endangered Fauna Species Indigenous to Habitats Identified in the City of Key West," are contained within the comprehensive plan conservation element data inventory and analysis. These tables identify essential breeding, feeding or habitat sites for endangered or potentially endangered flora or fauna which shall be protected pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Applicants for development within any areas identified as refuge, breeding, feeding, or habitat areas of endangered or threatened species or species of special concern shall prepare a habitat management plan which shall as a minimum comply with sections 110-222 through 110-224. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-222. - Critical habitat management plan required. 
    Development plans and preliminary plats shall include a critical habitat management plan prepared by a professional biologist, ecologist, or other related professional. The plan shall ensure the protection of endangered and threatened flora and fauna as determined by the state or federal government. As a minimum standard this plan shall analyze the following issues: 
(1)  Identify the occurrences of designated species by a qualified ecologist. 
(2)  Land needs to support continued on-site presence of the species. 
(3)  Impacts of proposed development which will disturb the species. 
(4)  Management plans and measures necessary to protect the subject species. 
(5)  Cost to developer to implement the recommended management plan as approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-223. - Criteria for reviewing critical habitat plan. 
(a)  Development activities which have an adverse effect upon a designated species shall require mitigation acceptable to the city or shall not be permitted. Viable (i.e., capable of living) habitat for endangered or threatened species or species of special concern occurring on a site shall be identified on the management plans as preservation areas. All development activities shall be prohibited within these preservation areas with the exception of recreational and educational uses where such uses shall not adversely affect such species. 
(b)  The city staff shall review the critical habitat management plan as well as the federal and/or state agencies having jurisdiction. The final development plan shall comply with directives of the federal and/or state or local agencies having jurisdiction, and the most restrictive shall apply. If a hardwood hammock is found not to warrant classification of a critical habitat, notwithstanding, at least 90 percent of the subject hardwood hammock must be preserved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-224. - Incentives for reservation of conservation easements. 
(a)  The applicant and the city may negotiate a development agreement which ensures the preservation of habitats. Where the applicant agrees to dedicate a conservation easement embracing the identified habitats, the city reserves the right to provide for a transfer of density or intensity to adjacent lands under common ownership which are unencumbered by environmentally sensitive ecosystems. 
(b)  The city may require payment of a fee in lieu of the mandatory habitat preservation. However, any payment allowed in lieu of preservation must be in sufficient amounts to purchase equally sensitive habitat of equal or greater size. Such cash payment may be in the form of an impact fee in lieu of habitat preservation to be accumulated from development for the purchase of upland habitat preservation off site rather than on site. Where mitigation is applied, the program should require a minimum 2:1 ratio to enhance survivability. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-225-110-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREE PROTECTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Landscaping, § 108-381 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-251. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city commission finds that trees on privately and publicly owned property within the city are economic and aesthetic assets to the citizens of the city, because of their important and meaningful contribution to a healthy, beautiful, and safer community, attributable to their carbon dioxide absorption, oxygen production, dust filtration, wind and noise reduction, soil erosion prevention and surface drainage improvement. Therefore, the health and economic welfare of the citizens can be served through protection of the health and growth of the trees and through encouragement of additional tree plantings. The city commission further finds that this public purpose can best be achieved through a city agency having authority and responsibility to accomplish these goals. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.1), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute which has published standards for tree, shrub and woody plant care and maintenance. 
    Caliper means a trunk measurement for diameter measured 6 inches from the ground for trees up to 4 inches caliper and 12 inches from ground for larger trees. 
    Canopy means the leaves, branches, and stems of a tree above the ground or water, accounting for the ecology with the exception of confirmed dead branches by the urban forester. 
    Champion tree means a tree determined by the tree commission to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public due to its size, age, historic association or ecological value; or any tree designated as a Florida State Champion, United States Champion or World Champion by the American Forestry Association. 
    Coconut palm means an individual plant, of whatever size or dimensions, of the species Cocos nucifera. 
    Diameter means the width of a tree. 
    Diameter at standard height and DSH mean the diameter of a tree's main trunk measured four and one-half (41/2) feet above the ground surface. When a tree grows with multiple trunks, DSH shall be equal to the sum or aggregate of the individual stem diameters measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade. 
    Dicot means a dicotyledonous angiospermous plant, having two cotyledon or seed leaves and usually net veination, as in many long-lived trees and higher plants. 
    Dripline means the natural 360-degree outside end of the branches of a tree or shrub projected vertically to the ground. 
    Florida #1 means a certain standard for structurally sound trees and shrubs, developed by the International Society of Arboriculture, Florida Chapter. 
    Harm means actions which reduce the overall health of a tree, but not including minor maintenance. 
    Hatracking means pollarding or flat-cutting a tree such that the leaders are severed, or such that the total canopy spread is reduced by one-third or more during any three hundred and sixty-five (365)-day period (except for fruit trees such as mango and avocado trees). 
    Heritage tree means a non-native tree whose species is historically significant to Key West. Heritage trees include, but are not limited to, Sapodilla, Royal Poinciana, and Spanish Lime. 
    Horizontal plane means a plane or line parallel to the horizon or ground. 
    Hurricane cut means major trimming of live palm fronds above the horizontal plane. 
    Major maintenance means actions reducing the length of a tree or the breadth of its crown spread by one-third or more during any three hundred and sixty-five (365)-day period and conforming to the American National Safety Standards A-300 (1995). 
    Minor maintenance means pruning or diminishing a tree without reducing its length or crown spread by one-third or more during any three hundred and sixty-five (365)-day period, and without reducing its overall health. 
    Monocot means a monocotyledonous angiospermous plant, having a single cotyledon or seed leaf, and usually having parallel veination as in grasses and palms. 
    Removal means a change in location of a tree, including transplanting; or a temporary change of location and return to the same location; or damage to a tree above or below ground, to the extent sufficient to kill the tree or cause a potential hazardous condition. 
    Shade tree means a self-supporting woody plant or species normally growing to a natural height of at least fifteen (15) feet and a mature spread of at least fifteen (15) feet. Clusters of more than one tree may be used as a shade tree, when it is demonstrated to the tree commission that the cluster will, at maturity, pass the fifteen (15)-foot spread requirement. 
    Terminal bud means the primary bud on the principal leader of a tree. 
    Tree means a woody or fibrous perennial plant, which normally grows to a minimum overall height of fifteen (15) feet and an average mature crown spread greater than fifteen (15) feet. 
    Urban forestry manager is the city employee responsible for administering the requirements of the city tree protection ordinance for the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.2), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 1, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 5, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-253. - Specially protected trees. 
    The following species of trees are afforded special protection by this article. Trees can be added to this section upon successful passage of a resolution of the city commission for the City of Key West: 
Common Name Scientific Name Autograph tree Clusia rosea Avocado tree Persea americana Bay cedar Suriana maritima Blackbead Pithecellobium guadalupense/keyense Black calabash Amphitecna latifolia Black ironwood Krugiodendron ferreum Black mangrove Avicennia germinans Blolly Guapira discolor Brittle/Key thatch palm Thrinax morrisii Buttonwood Conocarpus erectus Cabbage palm Sabal palmetto Calabash tree Crescentia cujete Cats claw Pithecellobium unguis-cati Cherry/Buccaneer palm Pseudophoenix sargentii Cinnamon bark/Wild 
cinnamon Canella winterana Cinnecord Acacia choriophylla Coconut palm Cocos nucifera Coral bean Erythrina herbacea Crabwood Ateramnus lucidus Cupania Cupania glabra Darling plum Reynosia septentrionalis Dahoon holly Ilex cassine False boxwood Gyminda latifolia Fiddlewood Citharexylum fruticosum Florida boxwood Schaefferia frutescens Florida privet Forestiera segregata Florida royal palm Roystonea elata Florida thatch palm Thrinax radiata Geiger tree Cordia sebestena Golden dew drop Duranta repens Guava Psidium guajava Guiana plum Drypetes lateriflora Gumbo limbo Bursea simaruba Inkwood Exothea paniculata Jamaica caper Capparis cynophallophora Jamaica dogwood Piscidia piscipula Joewood Jacquinia keyensis Lancewood Nectandra coriacea Lignum vitae Guaiacum sanctum Limber caper Capparis flexuosa Live oak Quercus virginiana Locustberry Byrsonima lucida Long spine acacia Acacia macracantha Mahogany Swietenia mahagoni Mango tree Mangifera indica Marlberry Ardisia escallonioides Mastic Mastichodendron 
foetidissimum Milkbark Drypetes diversifolia Myrsine Myrsine floridana Myrtle-of-the-river Calyptranthes zuzygium Paradise tree Simarouba glauca Paurotis palm Acoelorrhaphe wrightii Pigeon plum Coccoloba diversifolia Pine acacia Acacia pinetorum Pisonia Pisonia rotundata Poisonwood Metopium toxiferum Pond apple Annona glabra Princewood Exostema caribaeum Randia Randia aculeata Redberry stopper Eugenia confusa Red mangrove Rhizophora mangle Red stopper Eugenia rhombea Rhacoma Crossopetalum rhacoma Rough strongbark Bourreria radula Rough velvetseed Guettarda scabra Royal poinciana Delonix regia Saffon plum Bumelia celastrina Sapodilla Manilkara zapota Satinleaf Chrysophyllum oliviforme Sea-grape Coccoloba uvifera Seven-year apple Casasia clusiifolia Shortleaf fig Ficus citrifolia Silver palm Cocothrinax argentata Smooth strongbark Bourreria cassinifolia Soapberry Sapindus saponaria Soldierwood Colubrina elliptica South Florida slash pine Pinus elliottii var. densa Spanish lime Melicoccus bijugatus Spanish stopper Eugenia foetida Spicewood Calyptranthes pallens Strangler fig Ficus aurea Strongbark Bourreria ovata Sweet acacia Acacia farnesiana Torchwood Amyris elemifera Velvetseed Guettarda elliptica Wax myrtle Myrica cerifera White ironwood Hypelate trifoliata White mangrove Languncularia racemosa White stopper Eugenia axillaris Wild coffee Colubrina arborescens Wild dilly Manilkara bahamensis Wild tamarind Lysiloma latisiliquum Willow bustic Bumelia salicifolia Yellowheart/Satinwood Zanthoxylum flavum  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.3), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 2, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 6, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-254. - Unprotected trees. 
    This article shall not be applicable to trees determined by the urban forestry manager to have died of natural causes. The following species of trees may be acted upon without permit from the tree commission (see also section 110-322, regarding Ficus species): 
Common Name Scientific Name Areca palm Dypsis lutescens Australian pine Casuarina equisetifolia Beefwood/Brazilian oak Casuarina glauca Benjamin fig/Weeping fig Ficus benjamina Black olive* Bucidia beceras* Brazilian pepper/Florida holly Schinus terebinthifolia Carrotwood Cupaniopsis anacardioides Cork tree/Seaside mahoe Thespesia populnea Fig trees** Ficus sp.** Fishtail palm Caryota sp. Latherleaf Colubrina asiatica Lead tree Leucaena leucocephala Mahoe Hibiscus tiliaceus/Taliparti tiliaceus Melaleuca/Cajeput/Punk tree Melaleuca quinquenervia Norfolk Island pine Araucaria excelfa 
/Heterophylla Pink shower tree/Tabebuia* Tabebuia heterophylla* Orchid tree* Bauhinia sp.* Queensland umbrella Schefflera actinothylla Traveler's palm Ravenala sp. Tropical almond* Terminalia catappa* Yellow elder* Tecoma stans Woman's tongue* Albizia lebbeck*  
* If tree is more than two (2) feet in diameter at standard height (DSH) then permit is required. ** See also section 110-322.  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.4), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 3, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 7, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-255. - Removal of portions of coconut palm trees; permit required for sale. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. No person shall cause the removal of one or more fronds, nuts, or fruit of or any portion of the trunk or root system of or otherwise deface or damage any coconut palm located upon city-owned property, city streets, or city rights-of-way. No person shall cause the removal of any frond that is located within 45 degrees of the center of the tree trunk located on private property. Hurricane cuts (above the horizontal plane) are prohibited. 
(b)  Sale or distribution. Any person who intends to sell or distribute coconut palm tree fronds or coconuts in any form on city streets, sidewalks or other public areas shall apply to the licensing division for a permit in accordance with the rules and regulations contained in sections 6-1 through 6-9 of the Key West Code of Ordinances. The permit holder shall display the permit at all times while doing business on city property. The permit holder shall also maintain on a daily basis, on a form provided by the city, a statement of the source of the palm fronds and/or coconuts, and a name and phone number of the private property owner who provided that source. There shall be a limit of five permits given per permit period as defined in section 6-2, and the city manager shall develop a lottery system for applicants. No permit shall be given to an applicant who intends to use or has been found in violation of removing fronds or coconuts from city-owned trees or trees located on city property. The city manager may revoke a permit upon evidence provided at a hearing of a permit holder's violation of this section or any provision of sections 6-1 through 6-9. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to work conducted for a city purpose by contractors or by city employees or to Monroe County, state and federal agencies performing planting, maintenance, or removal functions with proper authorization. 
(d)  Enforcement; penalty. An alleged violation of this section shall be referred directly to the code enforcement special master. When the special master cannot secure compliance, the penalties provided by section 1-15 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.5(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 4, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 8, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-256. - Tree abuse. 
(a)  Generally. Tree abuse is prohibited, and abused trees shall not be counted toward fulfilling landscape requirements. The city may require the abused trees to be replaced. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. A tree shall be considered abused if a person takes an action so that one of the following occurs: 
(1)  Significant damage has been inflicted upon any part of a tree, including the root system, by machinery, storage of materials, soil compaction, excavation, vehicle accidents, chemical application or change to the natural grade. 
(2)  Damage inflicted to or cutting upon a tree which permits infection or pest infestation. 
(3)  Cutting upon any tree which permanently reduces the function of the tree or causes it to go into irreversible decline. 
(4)  Cutting upon a tree which destroys its natural shape. 
(5)  Hatracking as defined in section 110-252. 
(6)  An excessive amount (more than 50%) of bark has been removed. 
(7)  Tears and splitting of limb ends or peeling and stripping of bark. 
(8)  Use of climbing spikes, or cutting into the tree for the purposes of climbing on any species of tree for any purpose other than: 
(i)  Total removal of a tree that has an approved tree removal permit; or 
(ii)  Trimming of a palm tree that has an approved maintenance trimming permit as defined in section 110-402(e). 
(9)  Girdling a tree with the use of wires (e.g., use of weedeater, mower damage). 
(c)  Additional prohibitions. 
(1)  No private property owner or agent shall damage, cut, or carve any tree or tree root located on the owner's property; or allow any liquid, solid or biological substance that is harmful to trees to be placed within the dripline. 
(2)  No person shall cut or otherwise damage a root or roots of a tree located on public property without first obtaining a permit from the tree commission. 
(3)  If a root or roots of a tree on private property migrates into another property, the owner of the tree must consult with the urban forestry manager before commencing any work that will result in severing the root. 
(4)  Trenching of any kind shall not be done within the dripline of any tree. Only mechanical- or auger-type equipment shall be used to place conduit under a tree root system. 
(5)  Attachments to trees; excessive cut or fill. 
(i)  Attachments to trees prohibited. It shall be unlawful to attach anything to a tree trunk or stem having a diameter of six inches or more, other than protective wires, braces or other similar noninjurious materials. 
(ii)  Excessive cut and/or fill. It shall be unlawful to remove any material or ground within the dripline of a tree which is necessary for the growth of the subject tree. 
(d)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section are as follows: 
(1)  Any trees listed on the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plan Council Invasive Plant List and not found on the City of Key West section 110-253 specially protected trees list are not protected by this section. 
(2)  Utility line clearing in conformance with ANSI A-300 and ANSI Z133.1 safety standards and National Electrical Safety Code clearances does not constitute tree abuse. 
(3)  No action in removing a lightning damaged tree or trees. 
(4)  Trees severely damaged by hurricane, windstorm, flood or like event declared a city emergency by the mayor on behalf of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.5(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 9, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-257. - Ficus trees. 
    No species of Ficus tree, except for the shortleaf fig (Ficus citrifolia) shall be planted on city property. Owners of private property are hereby discouraged from the planting of any tree Ficus species. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 110-258. - Emergencies. 
    In emergencies presenting imminent threat to person or property, any person may cause the removal of or major maintenance to a tree, provided that the city urban forestry manager, within three (3) business days, recommends approval, and this action is reasonably calculated to dissipate the threat. 
(a)  Within three (3) business days of such action, such person shall file an application to the tree commission for an after-the-fact tree permit for its replacement to include photos of three sides of the tree prior to removal or trimming. 
(b)  The applicant shall comply with all reasonable remedial actions prescribed by the tree commission, which remedy shall be in the form described in section 110-327(4) through (6), unless the tree can be saved in its present location. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.10), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-259. - Duty of private property owner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person or entity owning or occupying private real property bordering on any street, upon which private property there is a tree or trees, to maintain such trees in a manner that such trees will not obstruct the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, rights-of-way, roadways, obstruct vision of traffic signs or traffic lights, obstruct views of any street or alley intersection or grow into utility wires. All landscaping shall be trimmed at least 80 inches above a walking surface and a minimum width of 36 inches for clear passage, or the width of the sidewalk. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person or entity owning or occupying private real property bordering on any street, park or other public land, upon which private property there is a tree or trees that is diseased or infested, to treat or remove (with permit, as applicable) such tree or trees in a manner that they will not infect or damage nearby public vegetation or otherwise cause harm to the community or its citizens. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 110-288, a code enforcement officer may take an alleged violation of subsection (a), hereof, directly through the code enforcement process described in chapter 2, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 10, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-260. - Champion trees. 
(a)  The tree commission shall designate and maintain a census of champion trees in Key West. The urban forestry manager shall update the census every five years or after a major hurricane. After a tree is designated a champion tree, the urban forestry manager shall notify the property owner within sixty (60) days of the designation. 
(b)  The tree commission's designation of champion status shall require a supermajority vote. In the event of an appeal to the city commission on the designation or lack of designation of a tree as a champion, the commission's decision shall be by supermajority vote. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 11, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 08-04, § 21, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Secs. 110-261-110-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 110-286. - Personnel. 
    As provided by the annual city budget, the city manager shall provide appropriate staff to enable the tree commission to fulfill its duties and shall cause the minutes of all meetings to be recorded, transcribed in summary from and submitted to the tree commission for its approval. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the tree commission in all matters. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-287. - Funds. 
    The city manager shall establish within the city's operating budget a special account which shall include all funds donated to the work of the tree commission by any person, all funds donated to the city pursuant to section 110-327(7), all funds received from compliance settlement agreements as established in section 110-291, all funds received by the city from fines imposed in enforcement of this article by the code enforcement special master, and any other compensation paid to the city for damage to trees belonging to the city. Funds in the special account shall be spent only as requested by the urban forestry manager and approved by the tree commission and approved by the city commission and shall be used to finance education about city tree programs and to finance protection, replacement, or additional plantings of trees in the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-288. - Hearings on violations. 
    When the urban forestry manager or a code enforcement officer determines that a tree has been damaged or destroyed in violation of this article, the urban forestry manager may schedule a hearing before the tree commission. The hearing may occur at a regular or a special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-289. - Required notice of hearing. 
    Written notice of the hearing held pursuant to this division shall be provided to the alleged violator either by hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Notice shall be mailed or delivered by the city at least ten (10) days before the hearing. The notice shall state the alleged violation. The tree commission may entertain a request for a continuance of the hearing to a later date. If the urban forestry manager determines that the alleged violation presents an immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the urban forestry manager may forward the case directly to the code enforcement special master as prescribed in article VI of chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-290. - Hearing procedure. 
    A hearing before the tree commission on a violation of this article shall be informal and need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence. All relevant evidence shall be admitted. All testimony shall be under oath and recorded pursuant to Florida law by written minutes. The alleged violator shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If the alleged violator is absent and notice of the hearing has been provided sufficiently, the tree commission may conduct the hearing and render a decision. At the conclusion of the hearing, the tree commission shall issue findings to support its decision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-291. - Compliance settlement agreements. 
    The tree commission may enter into a compliance settlement agreement with any person who admits to or is found to be in violation of this article, in lieu of being prosecuted for an alleged violation hereunder. Conditions contained in a compliance settlement agreement may include any one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  A restitution payment to the city based on the value of the damaged or destroyed tree (value to be determined by appraisal of the urban forestry manager; provided, however, that the property owner may offer an alternate value to the tree commission for its consideration); 
(2)  A donation of a Florida #1 tree or trees to the city or a non-profit organization, as determined and approved by the tree commission (based on replacement value); 
(3)  A replanting of an approved tree, preferably a Florida #1 tree or trees on the subject property; 
(4)  Time limits of performance by the person; 
(5)  A performance bond in an amount to secure compliance with a settlement agreement hereunder, and to be dissolved upon compliance with all terms of that settlement agreement; and 
(6)  Require the homeowner to hire an arborist to make corrective cuts on regrowth of an unauthorized trimmed tree after a determined amount of time. 
    If a property is sold prior to the completion of compliance with a settlement agreement, then the new owner shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the compliance settlement agreement. It shall be the duty of the selling property owner within ten (10) days of the effective date of the sales contract to provide the buyer with a copy of the compliance settlement agreement. The urban forestry manager shall issue a letter to the property owner when compliance is achieved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 12, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-292. - Failure to achieve a compliance agreement. 
    If the alleged violator declines to enter into a compliance settlement agreement as provided in section 110-291, the tree commission shall forward the case to the code enforcement special master for further hearing and penalty. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(4)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 13, 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 110-293. - Fine recommended by tree commission. 
    The tree commission shall issue a recommendation of a fine to the code enforcement special master based on its findings at the hearing on a violation of this article. If the tree commission finds that the damage to the tree is irreparable or irreversible, the tree commission may recommend that the special master impose a one-time fine of up to $5,000.00 per violation pursuant to F.S. 162.09(2)(a). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(4)(a)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 14, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-294. - Notice of tree commission's final decision. 
    When a person found to be in violation of this article by the tree commission opts not to enter into a compliance settlement agreement, the tree commission shall provide written notice of its final decision and its intention to forward the case to the code enforcement special master. Notice shall be sent either by hand or by mail, return receipt requested, or confirmed electronic mail or fax, within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(4)(b)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-295. - Authority of special master. 
    The code enforcement special master shall have the authority to enforce compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.11(C)(4)(c)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-296-110-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 110-321. - Required. 
(a)  Unless a tree removal permit approved by the tree commission and issued by the urban forestry manager has been obtained, no person, whether on publicly or privately owned land, shall cause tree abuse or other harm, or major maintenance to, hatracking, transplanting, topping or removal of the following: 
(1)  Any tree listed as "specially protected" in section 110-253; or 
(2)  Any monocot/palm tree which is ten (10) feet or more in height measured to the terminal bud. Palm tree counts are determined by root ball; or 
(3)  Any dicot/canopy tree which is four (4) inches or more in diameter at standard height (DSH); or 
(4)  Any maintenance to (major or minor) or transplanting of a tree recognized as being a champion tree. 
(5)  The use of climbing spikes for the purpose of maintenance trimming of a palm tree that cannot be accessed by a bucket truck. 
(b)  If there is an alleged violation of this section, the tree commission may conduct a hearing to determine a violation in accordance with procedures set forth in sections 110-288 through 110-295. 
(c)  The urban forestry manager shall be authorized to approve permits for the removal of non-native palms, for maintenance trimming of palm trees using spikes, for major maintenance of all dicot trees, transplantations, root trimming of trees, and construction activities near trees. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 15, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-322. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No permit shall be required for the removal of trees listed in section 110-254. In addition, all species of Ficus that have a diameter at standard height (DSH) of two (2) feet or smaller may be removed without permit; provided, however, that permits for removal of a strangler fig (Ficus aurea) or a shortleaf fig (Ficus citrofolia) shall in all instances be required. 
(b)  A tree may be transplanted from one location to another location, either on the same site or to a different site, only with a permit; however, no permit is required when a tree is moved or transplanted from a holding area. For the purposes of this subsection, a holding area is deemed to be the area on the same site where a tree is held for not longer than thirty (30) days and held with the property owner's intent to move or transplant it. The holding area shall be irrigated, and trees shall be staked properly for structural support. 
(c)  No permit shall be required for the removal of a tree or trees located entirely within an interior courtyard, when that courtyard is enclosed on its four sides by a residence or commercial building; provided, however, that a permit is required if the tree has been designated as a champion. 
(d)  A permit is not required for the trimming of a dicot tree if; less than 1/3 of the tree and/or canopy is being removed; as defined in section 110-252 as minor maintenance, and the trimming does not impact the overall shape of the tree; branches being removed are not a primary, structural branches and are less than 6 inches in diameter; and the work is done according to ANSI A-300 standards. A permit is required for the removal of large, structural branches and if the tree is being reduced in size and density by more than 1/3 as defined in section 110-252 as major maintenance. A tree trimming permit will include a condition that requires the tree to be monitored for one year to ensure the health of the tree. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 5, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 16, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-323. - Application. 
    All applications for a tree removal permit shall be made to the urban forestry manager. The application shall include an inventory of all existing trees in the area of proposed construction impact, including ingress to and egress from this area. The inventory shall state size, diameter and species of each tree. In order for the application to be acted upon, it must be signed by the property owner, or a notarized letter from the property owner must be attached to the application designating an authorized agent. The applicant shall be responsible for clearly marking the subject trees on the site with flagging tape. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 17, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-324. - Determination by urban forestry manager. 
    After receiving an application for a tree removal permit, the urban forestry manager within 45 days of receipt of the application shall conduct a site visit and prepare an application evaluation report ("AER"). The AER shall contain an evaluation of the tree, its species, size and condition. The AER shall determine a replacement value on an inch-by-inch basis; or an equivalent value on a monetary basis. An equivalency determination shall include, but not be limited to, an evaluation of species, condition, and location. The urban forestry manager shall then forward the AER to the tree commission (copy to the applicant) for consideration during permit review. If the site visit is not concluded and the AER not issued within the prescribed 45 days, then the urban forestry manager shall issue the permit forthwith. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-08, § 5, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-20, § 18, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-325. - Review and action by tree commission. 
    Review and action by the tree commission on the application for a tree removal permit shall be as provided in sections 110-326 through 110-330. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-326. - Public meetings. 
    The tree commission, within 30 days of receiving the application evaluation report (AER) set forth in section 110-324, shall hold a public meeting to review and act on all applications for tree removal, including development plans involving tree removal and landscaping. The planning board shall not review a development plan until the plan has been reviewed by the tree commission, unless the urban forestry manager renders a finding that the subject development plan is compliant with all criteria of article VI of chapter 108 and this article. Notice of the date of the tree commission meeting shall be provided to the applicant. The applicant shall be given reasonable opportunity to be heard at the public meeting prior to the tree commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 19, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-327. - Approval criteria. 
    The tree commission shall consider its finding of one or more of the following facts as grounds supporting approval of a tree removal permit application: 
(1)  The tree is a hazard to traffic, public utilities, buildings or structures; 
(2)  The tree is injured, diseased or insect infested such that it is a hazard to people, structures or other trees; 
(3)  The tree prevents access to a lot or parcel; 
(4)  The tree will be properly transplanted to another location in the city by the property owner with the consent of the owner of the new location. Transplanting shall take place following ANSI A-300 standards. The new owner shall maintain the tree. If it dies, then the new owner shall replace it with one or more trees of equal value, as approved by the tree commission; 
(5)  The tree will be replaced with an equivalent tree planted in a location suitable for healthy growth on the same lot or parcel. Sufficient space shall be provided on site to allow replacement tree(s) to establish a mature canopy spread, based on typical growth characteristics. The tree commission shall have the ability, at the request of the applicant, to allow the replacement of dicot trees with native palm trees and the replacement of palm trees with dicot trees in areas due to unique placement challenges or existing landscape without losing overall canopy where possible; 
(6)  The tree will be replaced with an equivalent tree that is: 
(a)  Donated to a non-profit organization approved by the tree commission; and 
(b)  Guaranteed by the applicant for a minimum of one year after planting; or 
(7)  Funds equivalent to the cost of a Florida #1 canopy tree or palm, (determined by the tree commission using the City Code minimum tree size specified in section 108-382, then divided by the City Code specified diameter of two and one-half (21/2) inches (DSH) will be donated by the applicant to the city for use as provided by section 110-287. 
(a)  The current amount of the standard donation, approved by the tree commission, is $150.00 per caliper inch for a canopy tree. For palms the approved amount is $250.00 per palm removed. Rates may be adjusted by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  In those instances including emergencies pursuant to section 110-258, where an applicant cannot pay for the replanting of trees on their property or cannot afford to make the standard donation, or the size of the property does not allow for suitable replanting, the tree commission shall make a reasonable effort to reduce the mitigation requirements if evidence can be shown that the hardship exists. In all other cases, the replanting of trees or standard donation is required. The tree commission shall consider the following factors when determining if a hardship exists: 
i.  For an individual, either the current receipt of assistance through the mayor's revolving loan fund, rental rehabilitation program, or other program which is income-indexed and which provides for physical improvements to the subject property; or the current receipt of fixed income benefits such as social security, AFDC, or private pension benefits, and the applicant's total income is below 80 percent of the median income for the city, all as evidenced by income tax return or affidavit; or 
ii.  For a corporation, current tax-exempt status as a nonprofit corporation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)(2)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 20, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-328. - Findings of disapproval. 
    The tree commission shall consider its finding of one or more of the following facts as grounds supporting disapproval of a tree removal permit application: 
(1)  The species, size, champion tree status, historical importance and/or condition of the tree make it a unique or rare specimen; or 
(2)  The size or location of the tree makes it substantial in and easily accessible to public view. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 21, 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 110-329. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 22 of Ord. No 04-20, adopted Nov. 3, 2004, repealed § 110-329, which pertained to additional requirements and derived from Ord. No 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-330. - Application of criteria. 
    The tree commission shall determine whether to approve each tree removal permit application by weighing its findings made pursuant to sections 110-327 and 110-328. Except for trees meeting the criteria of either section 110-327(1) or (2), no permit for tree removal shall be issued unless the tree commission makes an affirmative finding under section 110-327(4), (5), (6) or (7) and weighs such finding as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(E)(5)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 23, 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 110-331. - Issuance. 
(1)  Each approval of a tree removal permit shall be signed by the chairperson of the tree commission. Notice of its approval shall be given by the tree commission to the urban forestry manager which shall issue a permit. 
(2)  Permits will be finalized within five (5) business days of the tree commission approval of the permit. Final, signed permits will be held in office for one week then mailed to the applicant and representative. 
(3)  Compliance. 
(a)  Replacement palms shall be native palm trees, 4 feet tall in total height from ground to frond. 
(b)  Replacement dicot trees shall be measured by caliper and shall be Florida #1 grade native trees or trees listed in section 110-253. 
(c)  A credit of 2:1 shall be given to the homeowner/applicant for using state listed threatened or endangered plant species on replacement values for dicot trees. 
(d)  A credit of 4:1 shall be given to the homeowner/Applicant for using (Bursera simaruba) Gumbo Limbo, (Ficus aurea) Strangler Fig, (Ficus citrifolia) Shortleaf Fig, (Manilkara zapota) Sapodilla, (Melicoccus bijugatus) Spanish Lime, (Piscidia piscipula) Jamaica Dogwood, and (Swietenia mahagoni) Mahogany trees on replacement values for dicot trees. 
(e)  A credit of 4.25:1 shall be given to the homeowner/applicant for using (Delonix regia) Royal Poinciana trees on replacement values for dicot trees. 
(4)  If a permit holder fails to fulfill the terms of the tree removal permit as provided in chapter 110, article VI, division 3, the Tree Commission shall forward the case to the code enforcement special master for further hearing and penalty. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(F)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 24, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013; Ord. No. 18-19, § 1, 9-5-2018; Ord. No. 18-20, § 1, 9-5-2018) 
Sec. 110-332. - Disapproval. 
    If the application for a tree removal permit is disapproved, the applicant may modify and resubmit the application only after six (6) months from the date of denial and in accordance with tree commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(G)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 25, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-333. - Posting. 
    The applicant for the tree removal permit shall keep the permit posted upon the tree during the work. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-334. - Expiration. 
    All tree removal permits shall expire six (6) months after the date of issuance. If work to be done pursuant to the permit is not complete, then the property owner must apply to the tree commission for renewal of the permit. The urban forestry manager shall grant one six (6) month renewal as of right and may grant a summary administrative approval of future renewal applications. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(I)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 26, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-335. - Exemptions. 
    The tree commission shall have the option of granting an open-ended tree removal permit to Keys Energy Services. Such permit shall be subject to periodic reviews to ensure compliance with ANSI A-300 standards. Permits for the removal of trees requested by Keys Energy Service do not require replacements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(J)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 27, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-336. - Pruning or heavy maintenance. 
(1)  Pruning of trees shall be performed following pruning standards set by ANSI A-300 standards, as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(2)  A permit is not required for the trimming of a dicot tree if: less than 1/3 of the tree and/or canopy is being removed as defined in section 110-252 as minor maintenance, and the trimming does not impact the overall shape of the tree; branches being removed are not primary, structural branches and are less than 6 inches in diameter; and the work is done according to ANSI A-300 standards. 
(3)  A permit is required for the removal of large, structural branches and if the tree is being reduced in size or overall shape and density by more than 1/3 as defined in section 110-252 as major maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.6(K)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 28, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-337. - Appeals. 
    Appeals of the tree commission's permit decisions may be taken to the city commission as provided in section 90-429. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.9), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 22, 5-20-2008) 
Secs. 110-338-110-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROTECTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 110-366. - Protective barricades; performance bond. 
    All trees on a site shall be protectively barricaded before and during construction activities. The minimum barricading shall be subject to review by the city urban forestry manager. Upon a vote of the tree commission, a performance bond in addition to a protective barricade may be required from the agent or owner for any tree protection, removal or transplanting to guarantee protection of a tree or to ensure restoration of an equivalency. The amount of such bond shall be based on the equivalent value of the tree specifically covered. Any bond required for a protected tree shall be four times the equivalent value for that tree, but in no event shall exceed $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.8(A)(1)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 29, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-367. - Fences and walls. 
    The root systems of existing trees shall be taken into consideration when installing fences and walls. Post holes and trenches located close to trees shall be dug by hand and adjusted as necessary to avoid damage to major roots. Continuous footers for masonry walls shall be ended at the point larger roots are encountered and the roots bridged. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.8(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-368. - Failure to comply. 
    Any owner, tenant, contractor or agent thereof who fails to provide tree protection as stated in this division shall be guilty of tree abuse. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.8(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-369. - Tree cutting standards. 
    All trees shall be cut pursuant to division 5 of this article pertaining to pruning standards. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.8(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-370-110-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRUNING STANDARDS 

Sec. 110-396. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arborist means a professional who possesses the technical competence through experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of trees and other woody plants in the residential, commercial and public landscape. 
    Boundary reaction zone means a separating boundary between wood present at the time of wounding and wood that continues to form after wounding. 
    Branch and limb mean a secondary shoot or stem arising from one of the main axes (i.e., trunk or leader) of a tree. 
    Branch bark ridge means the raised area of bark in the branch crotch that marks where the branch wood and trunk wood meet. 
    Branch collar means trunk tissue that forms around the base of a branch between the main stem and the branch. As a branch decreases in vigor or begins to die, the branch collar becomes more pronounced. 
    Callus tissue means undifferentiated tissue formed by the cambium layer around a wound. 
    Cambium means the dividing layer of plant cells that forms sapwood (xylem) to the inside and bark (phloem) to the outside. 
    Canopy means the upper portion of the tree consisting of limbs, branches, and leaves. 
    Certified arborist means a professional arborist who is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture and has a valid certificate number. 
    Clean cuts means cuts made using a sharp tool, with no nicks or tears on the branch collar or the trunk. 
    Climbing spurs means sharp, pointed devices affixed to the climber's legs used to assist in climbing trees (a.k.a. gaffs, hooks, spurs, spikers and climbers). 
    Closure means the process of woundwood covering a cut or other tree injury. 
    Crotch means the angle formed at the attachment between a branch and another branch, leader or trunk of a woody plant. 
    Crown, technically, means the juncture of the trunk above the roots, but in common usage it refers to the foliage comprising the uppermost branch structure. 
    Crown cleaning means the removal of dead, dying, diseased, crowded, weakly attached, or low-vigor branches and watersprouts from a tree's crown. 
    Crown raising means the removal of the lower branches of a tree in order to provide clearance. 
    Cut means the exposed wood area resulting from the removal of a branch or portion thereof. 
    Decay means the degradation of plant tissue, including wood, by pathogens such as fungus organisms. Wood decay can reduce the structural integrity of a tree or its individual limbs. 
    Dormant means a state of inactivity, or no growth. Deciduous trees are considered to be dormant from the time the leaves fall until new foliage begins to appear. 
    Drop crotch pruning means the specific cutting back of a branch or leader to a lateral branch at least one-third to one-half the diameter of the cut being made. 
    Espalier means pruning that is a combination of cutting and training branches which are oriented in one plane, formally or informally arranged and usually supported on a wall, fence or trellis. The patterns can be simple or complex but the cutting and training is precise. Ties should be replaced every few years to prevent girdling the branches at the attachment site. 
    Girdling roots means roots located above or below the ground level whose circular growth around the base of the trunk or over individual roots applies pressure to the bark area, ultimately restricting sap flow and trunk/root growth, frequently resulting in reduced vitality and/or stability of the plant. 
    Heading means cutting a currently growing or one-year-old shoot back to a bud, or cutting an older branch or stem back to a stub or lateral branch not sufficiently large enough to assume the terminal role. Heading should rarely be used on mature trees. 
    Heartwood means the inactive xylem (wood) toward the center of a stem or root that provides structural support. 
    Lateral means a branch or twig growing from a parent branch or stem. 
    Leader means the primary terminal shoot or trunk of a tree. 
    Line clearance means pruning for the safe operation and maintenance of uninterrupted electric service. 
    Parent branch or stem means the tree trunk; or a large limb from which lateral branches grow. 
    Phloem means inner bark tissue through which primarily carbohydrates and other organic compounds move from regions of high concentration to low. 
    Photosynthesis means the process by which green plants manufacture food (carbohydrates) in cells containing chlorophyll, utilizing sunlight for energy. 
    Pollarding means a training system used on some large-growing deciduous trees that are severely headed annually or every few years to hold them to modest size or to give them and the landscape a formal appearance. Pollarding is not synonymous with topping, lopping, or stubbing. Pollarding is severely heading some and removing the other vigorous watersprouts back to a definite head or knob of latent buds at the branch ends. 
    Precut and precutting mean the removal of the branch far enough beyond the finished cut so as to prevent splitting into the parent stem. The branch is first undercut, then cut from the top before the final cut. 
    Pruning means the removal of plant parts, dead or alive, in a careful and systematic manner so as to not damage other parts of the plant. 
    Qualified line clearance tree trimmer means a tree worker who, through related training and on-the-job experience, is familiar with the techniques in line clearance and has demonstrated his ability in the performance of the special techniques involved. This qualified person may or may not be currently employed by a line clearance contractor. 
    Qualified line clearance tree trimmer trainee means any worker undergoing line clearance tree trimming training who, in the course of such training, is familiar with the techniques in line clearance and has demonstrated his ability in the performance of the special techniques involved. Such trainees shall be under the direct supervision of qualified personnel. 
    Qualified person or personnel means workers who, through related training and/or on-the-job experience, are familiar with the techniques and hazards of arboriculture work including training, trimming, maintaining, repairing or removing trees, and the equipment used in such operations. 
    Qualified tree worker, person or personnel means a person who, through related training and on-the-job experience, is familiar with the hazards of pruning, trimming, maintaining, repairing or removing trees and with the equipment used in such operations and has demonstrated ability in the performance of the special techniques involved. 
    Qualified tree worker trainee means any worker undergoing on-the-job training who, in the course of such training, is familiar with the hazards of pruning, trimming, maintaining, repairing or removing trees and with the equipment used in such operations and has demonstrated ability in the performance of the special techniques involved. Such trainees shall be under the direct supervision of qualified personnel. 
    Sap flow means the course assumed by sap in its movement through a tree. 
    Sapwood means the active xylem (wood) that stores water and carbohydrates and transports water and nutrients; a wood layer of variable thickness found immediately inside the cambium, comprised of water-conducting vessels or tracheids and living plant cells. 
    Scars and injuries mean natural or manmade lesions of the bark in which wood is exposed. 
    Shall denotes a mandatory requirement. 
    Should denotes an advisory requirement. 
    Stub means an undesirable short length or a branch remaining after a break or incorrect pruning cut is made. 
    Sucker means a vigorous shoot arising at or below the graft union. See Watersprout. 
    Sunburn means bark injury caused by extreme heat from the sun. 
    Sunscald means bark splitting or injury caused by temperature extremes or sudden temperature fluctuation. 
    Target means a person, structure or object which could sustain damage from the failure of a tree or portion of a tree. 
    Terminal role means a branch that assumes the dominant vertical position on the top of a tree. 
    Thinning means the removal of branches where they arise in order to let in light, reduce wind resistance, remove unwanted branches, or to retain a tree's natural shape. 
    Topiary means trees sheared or pruned carefully in a formal shape. 
    Topping describes a generally undesirable pruning practice, but more often refers to the severe cutting back of branches with very little regard for the shape of the tree. 
    Tracing means careful removal of the loose or damaged bark along the edges of a wound to encourage closure. 
    Trimming means the same as the definition of Pruning. 
    Underclearance means the removal of lower tree limbs to allow clearance beneath the tree crown. 
    Watersprout means a vigorous shoot arising from the aboveground portion of the tree or above the graft union. 
    Wound means the opening that is created any time the tree's protective bark covering is penetrated, cut, or removed, injuring or destroying living tissue. Pruning a live branch creates a wound, even when the cut is properly made. 
    Xylem means wood tissue; active xylem is called sapwood, and inactive xylem is called heartwood. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.1), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-397. - Class I pruning. 
    Fine pruning of trees is recommended for premium quality work with an emphasis on aesthetic considerations in addition to structural integrity. Fine pruning shall consist of the removal of dead, dying, diseased, decayed, interfering, objectionable, obstructing, and weak branches, as well as selective thinning to lessen wind resistance. The removal of such described branches is to include those on the main trunks, as well as those inside the leaf area. An occasional undesirable branch, up to one-half inch (1.25 cm) in diameter, as described in this section, may remain within the main leaf area to its full length when it is not practical to remove it. All of the following specifications apply to class I fine pruning: 
(1)  All cuts shall be made as close as possible to the trunk or parent limb, without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub (see diagram A). Bark at the edge of all pruning cuts should remain firmly attached. 

(2)  All branches too large to support with one hand shall be precut to avoid splitting or tearing of the bark (see diagram B). Where necessary, ropes or other equipment should be used to lower large branches or stubs to the ground. 

(3)  Treatment of cuts and wounds with wound dressing or paints has not been shown to be effective in preventing or reducing decay and is not generally recommended for that reason. Wound dressing over infected wood may stimulate the decay process. If wounds are painted for cosmetic or other reasons, materials nontoxic to the cambium layer of meristematic tissue must be used. Care must be taken to apply a thin coating of the material only to the exposed wood. 
(4)  Old injuries are to be inspected. Those not closing properly and where the callus growth is not already completely established should be bark traced if the bark appears loose or damaged. Such tracing shall not penetrate the sapwood, and margins shall be kept rounded. 
(5)  Equipment that will damage the bark and cambium layer should not be used on or in the tree. For example, the use of climbing spurs, hooks, or irons is not an acceptable work practice for pruning operations on live trees. Sharp tools shall be used so that clean cuts will be made at all times. 
(6)  All cut limbs shall be removed from the crown upon completion of the pruning. 
(7)  Trees susceptible to serious infectious diseases should not be pruned at the time of year during which the pathogens causing the diseases or the insect vectors are most active. Similarly, if pruning wounds may attract harmful insects, pruning should be timed so as to avoid insect infestation. 
(8)  Remove the weaker or less desirable of crossed or rubbing branches. Such removal, if possible, should not leave large open spaces in the general outline of the tree. 
(9)  Where practical, all visible girdling roots shall be treated as follows: 
a.  Either cut the root at one end or sever the root in the center with a chisel in order to allow the growing tree to push the root away; and 
b.  Remove the section of the root. 
(10)  The presence of any disease condition, fungus fruit bodies, decayed trunk or branches, split crotches or branches, cracks, or other structural weakness shall be reported in writing to a supervisor and/or the owner and corrective measures recommended. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-398. - Class II pruning. 
    Standard pruning of trees is recommended for where aesthetic considerations are secondary to structural integrity and tree health concerns. Standard pruning shall consist of the removal of dead, dying, diseased, decayed, interfering, objectionable, obstructing, and weak branches, as well as selective thinning to lessen wind resistance. The removal of such described branches is to include those on the main trunks, as well as those inside the leaf area. An occasional branch, up to one inch (2.5 cm) in diameter, may remain within the main leaf area where it is not practical to remove it. All of the following specifications apply to class II standard pruning: 
(1)  All cuts shall be made as close as possible to the trunk or parent limb, without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub (see diagram A). Bark at the edge of all pruning cuts should remain firmly attached. 
(2)  All branches too large to support with one hand shall be precut to avoid splitting or tearing of the bark (see diagram B). Where necessary, ropes or other equipment should be used to lower large branches or stubs to the ground. 
(3)  Treatment of cuts and wounds with wound dressing or paints has not been shown to be effective in preventing or reducing decay and is not generally recommended for that reason. Wound dressing over infected wood may stimulate the decay process. If wounds are painted for cosmetic or other reasons, materials nontoxic to the cambium layer of meristematic tissue must be used. Care must be taken to apply a thin coating of the material only to the exposed wood. 
(4)  Old injuries are to be inspected. Those not closing properly and where the callus growth is not already completely established should be bark traced if the bark appears loose or damaged. Such tracing shall not penetrate the sapwood, and margins shall be kept rounded. 
(5)  Equipment that will damage the bark and cambium layer should not be used on or in the tree. For example, the use of climbing spurs, hooks, or irons is not an acceptable work practice for pruning operations on live trees. Sharp tools shall be used so that clean cuts will be made at all times. 
(6)  All cut limbs shall be removed from the crown upon completion of the pruning. 
(7)  Trees susceptible to serious infectious diseases should not be pruned at the time of year during which the pathogens causing the diseases or the insect vectors are most active. Similarly, if pruning wounds may attract harmful insects, pruning should be timed so as to avoid insect infestation. 
(8)  All visible girdling roots are to be reported to a supervisor and/or the owner. 
(9)  The presence of any disease condition, fungus fruit bodies, decayed trunk or branches, split crotches or branches, cracks, or other structural weakness shall be reported in writing to a supervisor and/or the owner and corrective measures recommended. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-399. - Class III pruning. 
    Hazard pruning of trees is recommended where safety considerations are paramount. Hazard pruning shall consist of the removal of dead, diseased, decayed, and obviously weak branches, two inches (five cm) in diameter or greater. All of the following specifications apply to class III hazard pruning: 
(1)  All cuts shall be made as close as possible to the trunk or parent limb, without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub (see diagram A). Bark at the edge of all pruning cuts should remain firmly attached. 
(2)  All branches too large to support with one hand shall be precut to avoid splitting or tearing of the bark (see diagram B). Where necessary, ropes or other equipment should be used to lower large branches or stubs to the ground. 
(3)  Treatment of cuts and wounds with wound dressing or paints has not been shown to be effective in preventing or reducing decay and is not generally recommended for that reason. Wound dressing over infected wood may stimulate the decay process. If wounds are painted for cosmetic or other reasons, materials nontoxic to the cambium layer of meristematic tissue must be used. Care must be taken to apply a thin coating of the material only to the exposed wood. 
(4)  Old injuries are to be inspected. Those not closing properly and where the callus growth is not already completely established should be bark traced if the bark appears loose or damaged. Such tracing shall not penetrate the sapwood, and margins shall be kept rounded. 
(5)  Equipment that will damage the bark and cambium layer should not be used on or in the tree. For example, the use of climbing spurs, hooks, or irons is not an acceptable work practice for pruning operations on live trees. Sharp tools shall be used so that clean cuts will be made at all times. 
(6)  All cut limbs shall be removed from the crown upon completion of the pruning. 
(7)  Trees susceptible to serious infectious diseases should not be pruned at the time of year during which the pathogens causing the diseases or the insect vectors are most active. Similarly, if pruning wounds may attract harmful insects, pruning should be timed so as to avoid insect infestation. 
(8)  All visible girdling roots are to be reported to a supervisor and/or the owner. 
(9)  The presence of any disease condition, fungus fruit bodies, decayed trunk or branches, split crotches or branches, cracks, or other structural weakness shall be reported in writing to a supervisor and/or the owner and corrective measures recommended. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-400. - Class IV pruning generally. 
    Crown reduction pruning of trees shall consist of the reduction of tops, sides, or individual limbs. The terms "cutting back" and "drop crotch pruning" are sometimes used interchangeably with the term "crown reduction pruning." By contrast, the term "topping" is used to refer to a generally unacceptable arboricultural practice. The correct technique for crown reduction involves removal of a parent limb or dominant leader at the point of attachment of a lateral branch (see diagram C). This practice is to be undertaken only for the following reasons: 
(1)  In situations where branches interfere with utility lines; 
(2)  When there has been significant crown dieback; 
(3)  When it is necessary to achieve specific topiary training or dwarfing; and 
(4)  When, due to storm damage or prior incorrect pruning, it is appropriate to prune for safety and aesthetic reasons. 

(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-401. - Class IV crown reducing pruning. 
    The following the specifications are for class IV crown reducing pruning: 
(1)  All branches too large to support with one hand shall be precut to avoid splitting or tearing of the bark (see diagram B). Where necessary, ropes or other equipment should be used to lower large branches or stubs to the ground. 
(2)  Treatment of cuts and wounds with wound dressing or paints has not been shown to be effective in preventing or reducing decay and is not generally recommended for that reason. Wound dressing over infected wood may stimulate the decay process. If wounds are painted for cosmetic or other reasons, materials nontoxic to the cambium layer of meristematic tissue must be used. Care must be taken to apply a thin coating of the material only to the exposed wood. 
(3)  Old injuries are to be inspected. Those not closing properly and where the callus growth is not already completely established should be bark traced if the bark appears loose or damaged. Such tracing shall not penetrate the sapwood, and margins shall be kept rounded. 
(4)  Equipment that will damage the bark and cambium layer should not be used on or in the tree. For example, the use of climbing spurs, hooks, or irons is not an acceptable work practice for pruning operations on live trees. Sharp tools shall be used so that clean cuts will be made at all times. 
(5)  All cut limbs shall be removed from the crown upon completion of the pruning. 
(6)  Trees susceptible to serious infectious diseases should not be pruned at the time of year during which the pathogens causing the diseases or the insect vectors are most active. Similarly, if pruning wounds may attract harmful insects, pruning should be timed so as to avoid insect infestation. 
(7)  When removing a parent leader or limb to a lateral branch, the final cut should be made as close to parallel as possible with the branch bark ridge and the lateral limb. The cut should be made as close to the bark ridge as possible without cutting into it. Care should be taken to avoid damaging the lateral limb when the final cut is made. 
(8)  Remove the weaker or less desirable of crossed or rubbing branches. Such removal should not leave large open spaces in the general outline of the tree. 
(9)  Generally, in crown reduction pruning, not more than one-third of the total area should be reduced at a single operation. Every effort should be made to cut back to a lateral at least one-third to one-half the diameter of the parent limb or leader that is being removed. Cuts not made to a suitable lateral, sometimes called topping cuts, shall not be permitted. 
(10)  Before a branch is cut back, the ratio of live wood in the branch to leaf surface area in the branch should be considered carefully. The leaves must supply sufficient carbohydrates (food) to maintain the wood in the branch as well as send excess carbohydrates to the trunk and roots for storage and later use. Generally, not more than one-third the total leaf surface area should be removed at any one time. 
(11)  Trees should be pruned to a shape typical of their species. 
(12)  To prevent sunburn on thin-barked trees, just enough limbs shall be removed to get the desired effect without admitting too much sunlight to the trunk of the tree or the top of large branches. The damage may be minimized by doing work on susceptible species during the dormant season. 
(13)  When removing the lower branches of trees for crown elevation or underclearance, care should be taken to maintain a symmetrical appearance, and cuts should not be made so large or so numerous that they will prevent normal sap flow. 
(14)  Periodic crown reduction for certain species such as silver maple, the true poplars, and other trees with brittle and soft wood is an established arboricultural practice. This procedure has proven beneficial in maintaining safety over long periods of time. In all cases, it is preferable to make cuts when branches are small so as to avoid developing stem decay and to begin training these trees when they are young and prune them regularly thereafter so as to avoid removing an excessive amount of leaf surface in one operation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-402. - Palms. 
(a)  Palm pruning should be performed when fronds, fruit, or loose petioles may create a dangerous condition. 
(b)  Live healthy fronds, should not be removed above the level horizontal plane initiating at the heart of the tree. 
(c)  Fronds removed should be severed close to the petiole base without damaging living trunk tissues. 
(d)  Palm peeling (shaving) should consist of the removal of the dead frond bases only, at the point they make contact with the trunk without damaging living trunk tissue. 
(e)  Climbing spurs shall not be used to trim palms unless: 
(1)  A total tree removal permit is approved according to section 110-321; or 
(2)  A permit for maintenance trimming has been approved by the tree commission and satisfies the following criteria: 
i.  The palm tree cannot be accessed by a bucket truck. 
ii.  The work is being done by a certified arborist. 
iii.  The tree is of a height that safety of the arborist is an issue. 
(f)  Hurricane cuts are not approved methods of palm pruning. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14A.6), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Secs. 110-403-110-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REPLACEMENT 

Sec. 110-431. - Failure to obtain permit. 
    In the event a property owner removes a tree without a permit first having been approved by the tree commission; subject to section 110-258, and issued by the city, the property owner shall be subject to a hearing under this article and, upon a finding of violation without settlement, then code enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.7(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-20, § 30, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-432. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 31 of Ord. No 04-20, adopted Nov. 3, 2004, repealed § 110-432, which pertained to failure to comply, and derived from Ord. No 97-10, adopted July 3, 1997. 
Sec. 110-433. - Moving of landscaping. 
    Whenever a median cut is permitted or an access apron (driveway) is permitted to any city-maintained road, the tree commission shall evaluate the value of any landscaping that would be lost as a result of such access. The tree commission may decide that the landscape that would be lost should be moved to another publicly owned location specified by the city urban forestry manager. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of moving the landscaping as well as the actual root pruning and removal of such landscape materials under the direction of the city urban forestry manager. All landscaping so removed shall be deemed to be part of any landscape approval of the applicant's site plan and shall be fully guaranteed in its new location. If the landscape is not found to have survived the move to such a new location, it shall be replaced within one year or by the date of the final certificate of occupancy on the development then under construction, whichever date should occur first. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.7(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-434. - City maintenance of landscaping. 
    Any landscaping maintained by the city, either by formal agreement or by casual permit, on any road within the city which is functionally classified as either a county or state-maintained road which would be lost by virtue of the authorization of median cuts or access approach aprons (driveways) to the private property being developed shall be evaluated by the city urban forestry manager as to the current value of such landscaping materials and cost involved in root pruning and removing the materials to another publicly owned site. The developer shall be advised of such cost and shall be given the opportunity of either paying such costs for the planting of comparable growth of similar quality and maturity where designated by the city urban forestry manager or, alternatively, of root pruning and moving such landscaping. The moving of landscaping shall meet the requirements of section 110-433. However, the city urban forestry manager shall add a 25-percent increment to the cost estimate for any new landscape material to be planted at the developer's expense as a replacement allowance for landscape material which might not survive when planted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.7(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 9-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-435. - Landscaping on county-maintained or state-maintained roads to be relocated or value paid. 
    All landscaping on county-maintained or state-maintained roads which is to be relocated or the value thereof paid as provided in this division shall also be deemed part and parcel of the landscape plan for the developer's properties then under development permit, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued thereon until the city is fully repaid for the lost landscaping plus the replacement allowance or, alternatively, the landscaping is root pruned, replanted and those found dead replaced prior to the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-14.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-436-110-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 34. 

Sec. 110-461. - Applicability. 
    In addition to article II of chapter 34 pertaining to flood damage prevention, this article, together with the provisions pertaining to surface water management in article VIII of chapter 108 shall apply to all construction within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-462. - Functions of floodplains. 
    Floodplains serve the following important functions in the hydrologic cycle: 
(1)  Floodplains provide natural storage and conveyance of floodwaters; 
(2)  The water on flooded lands may provide recharges to groundwater and is a basic source of flow to rivers, streams and estuaries; 
(3)  Temporary storage of surface waters on floodplains regulates flood elevations and the timing, velocity and rate of flood discharges; 
(4)  Floodplains maintain water quality by reducing erosion, removing nutrients and other pollutants and allowing sediment to settle; and 
(5)  Natural floodplains export detritus and other food sources to open waterbodies and are vital habitat for fish, birds, wildlife and native plant communities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-463. - Objectives. 
    Regulation of development within floodplains is necessary in order to: 
(1)  Minimize the potential for property damage and personal injury from flooding; 
(2)  Restrict adverse interference with the normal movement of surface waters; 
(3)  Maintain the optimum storage capacity of watersheds; 
(4)  Maintain desirable groundwater levels; 
(5)  Maintain the natural hydrological and ecological functions of wetlands and other floodprone lands; 
(6)  Prevent increased erosion and sedimentation; and 
(7)  Maintain water quality. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-464. - Development within uplands of the flood zone. 
    This article regulates the uplands within the 100-year flood zone. Wetlands, on the other hand, are regulated pursuant to sections 110-86 through 110-91 pertaining to preservation of wetlands and transitional wetlands. Land outside wetlands but situated within the 100-year flood zone, as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's federal insurance rate maps are referred to as "uplands of the flood zone." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-465. - Required techniques. 
    Applicants for development and redevelopment shall be required to position structures and impervious surfaces to areas outside the floodplain zone to the extent lawful and pursuant to section 110-466. Where development occurs within the flood zone to maintain reasonable use of land and to avoid a taking without just compensation, compensatory mitigation shall be required to maintain minimal loss of its natural flow regime as stipulated in this article. The 100-year flood zone is delineated within the comprehensive plan future land use map series, and its demarcations are determined by most recent flood insurance maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-466. - Limitations and restrictions applicable to all development allowed within undisturbed flood zone areas. 
    The following limitations and restrictions shall apply to all development allowed within undisturbed flood zone areas: 
(1)  Compensatory mitigation. Where the applicant chooses to develop on uplands of the 100-year floodplain, compensatory storage shall be provided through excavation of a volume of uplands equivalent to the loss of storage within the 100-year flood zone caused by the placement of fill or the construction of impervious surface. Whenever possible adjacent uplands outside the flood zone are eligible to be excavated. 
(2)  Additional open space requirements. Open space requirements shall be increased by five percent above stipulated requirements when alteration to uplands of the flood zone occurs through compensatory storage. Open space shall be located within flood zone areas to the maximum extent possible. 
(3)  Impervious surface principles. If compensatory mitigation occurs, maximum impervious surface area principles shall be reduced by five percent. 
(4)  Stormwater facilities. Drainage facilities shall be in place and functional concurrent with deadlines established in the concurrency management system. Such drainage facilities shall be designed to: 
a.  Comply with the city's established level of service standards and state stormwater facility standards cited in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. 
b.  Maintain the natural flow regime and function of the floodplain. 
c.  Support and further regional stormwater policies prepared by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 110-467. - FEMA and wildlife service endangered species requirements. 
    Inclusion of United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) Recommendations and Conditions in Final Development Permit Determinations and Implementation Certifications. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of section 110-467 to implement regulations that will assure, consistent with the 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, state and city regulations, proper record retention, coordination, and notification of FEMA and FWS regarding permit applications filed with or issued by the City of Key West, inclusive of FEMA/FWS requirements agreed to by the applicant. 
(b)  Lands to which this section apply. FEMA and FWS have provided the Species Focus Area Maps (SFAMs) and a listing of real estate numbers of parcels (RE list) that are within the SFAMS identified by the Service in accordance with the Biological Opinion, mailed to the City of Key West and dated April 30, 2010, are hereby declared to be a part of these regulations. The SFAMs and RE list are on file at the City of Key West clerk's office and the City of Key West planning department. 
(c)  Rules for interpreting SFAMs. The boundaries of the flood hazard areas shown on the FEMA SFAMs may be determined by scaling distances. Required interpretations of those maps for precise locations of such boundaries shall be made by the city planning director or his/her designee. 
(d)  Administration of development approval in species focus areas. 
(1)  SFA review required. For parcels or lots shown within the SFAMs in which an application for development permit has been made, if the SFAM indicates the parcel or lot contains only unsuitable habitat for any of the following species: Key Tree-Cactus, Eastern Indigo Snake, and Stock Island Tree Snail, and the parcel or lot is not listed on the RE list, the planning director or his/her designee shall provide for a notation in the development application permit files that indicates: 
i.  The name of the official that made the determination; 
ii.  The date of the determination; 
iii.  The date of the SFAM and RE list used to make the determination. 
Once the determination has been made that a parcel or lot contains unsuitable habitat, action may be taken on the permit application by City of Key West staff. 
(2)  Species assessment guides and FWS comment or recommendations or approval. The Species Assessment Guides provided by the service, dated May 20, 2012, for the City of Key West are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance. The assessment guides are on file with the city clerk and the city planning department. For parcels or lots shown within the SFAMs in which an application for development permit has been made, if the SFAM indicates the parcel or lot contains suitable habitat for any of the following species: Key Tree-Cactus, Eastern Indigo Snake, and Stock Island Tree Snail, and the parcel or lot is listed on the RE list and maps, the planning director or his/her designee shall provide the approved applications to the Service for review with a condition clearly stating that in accordance with F.S. § 166.033 that any applicable FWS permit, recommendations and/or conditions be obtained before a notice to proceed or commencement of development authorized by the city issued permit. Further, the city permit shall state that the issuance of the city permit does not in any way create any right on the part of the applicant to obtain a permit from FWS, and does not create any liability on the part of the City of Key West for issuance of the permit if the applicant fails to obtain the requisite FWS approval or fulfill the obligations imposed by FWS or undertakes actions that result in a violation of federal law and shall require the following: 
i.  Once the property owner has received from the FWS a letter or other written communication stating the results of the FWS review, the letter shall be submitted to the city. 
ii.  Based on the requirements, recommendations or conditions contained in the FWS letter or communication, the city shall require the owner of the property to sign an acceptance agreement form to the FWS conditions, recommendations or requirements and the city shall maintain the acknowledgement form in the permit file. The acceptance form shall be signed by the permit applicant and the planning director or his/her designee. 
iii.  The city shall, based on the acknowledgement form from the property owner, incorporate the FWS letter conditions, recommendations or requirements into the notice of commencement, requirements of a City of Key West certificate of occupancy or final inspection certificate issuance to avoid and/or to minimize possible impacts on federally listed threatened or endangered species and their habitat. 
iv.  If the property owner does not agree to the FWS conditions, the city shall not provide a certificate of occupancy or certificate of final inspection. 
(3)  Enforcement. Violation of this section, including any development constructed not in accordance with the owner acknowledged FWS conditions, are hereby deemed to be violations of the City Code and may be enforced as follows: 
i.  The city may utilize the administrative enforcement procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article VI, Code Enforcement, City of Key West Code of Ordinances; 
ii.  The city may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking damages as well as injunctive and/or equitable relief; and/or 
iii.  Knowing violations of this section may be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted in the name of the State in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Secs. 110-468-110-495. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WELLFIELD PROTECTION 

Sec. 110-496. - Purpose; enforcement; plan. 
(a)  The city is committed to the protection of its resources and its permitted development. 
(b)  The city shall enforce the permitting procedures in this article to mitigate potential adverse impacts on land use caused by the construction of irrigation wells. 
(c)  Any proposed irrigation well shall require submission of a plan which demonstrates compliance with the regulatory criteria cited in this article and shall include information required pursuant to section 108-515. No additional wells will be authorized by the city until the city completes a study as provided for in the comprehensive plan to determine freshwater impacts. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.11), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 7, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 110-497. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Irrigation wells means wells constructed for obtaining groundwater for the irrigation of lawns and landscaping, and whose size or capacity are below the thresholds for regulations by state agencies. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.11), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-498. - Criteria for compliance. 
    All irrigation wells shall comply with section 74-337 and the following criteria: 
(1)  A permit shall be required for the construction of irrigation wells within the city. Application shall be made to the building department. 
(2)  All irrigation wells shall be constructed by a water well contractor licensed under F.A.C. ch. 17-531 to engage in the business of construction, repair, or abandonment of wells. 
(3)  All irrigation wells shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable state regulations and good engineering practices. The provisions of F.A.C. 17-532.500 are incorporated in this subsection by reference. 
(4)  The permittee shall demonstrate to the city that the issuance of a permit for an irrigation well will not cause adverse impacts on adjacent land use, as exemplified by but not limited to the following: 
a.  Significant reduction in water levels in an adjacent waterbody or wetland; or 
b.  Significant potential for land collapse or subsidence caused by a reduction in groundwater levels. 
(5)  In this regard, all irrigation wells shall be constructed such that the water-bearing zone from which the well obtains its water is either connected to the freshwater lens or other water-bearing zones so connected. Proof of such shall be provided prior to approval. 
(6)  Within 30 days after completion of the construction of any irrigation well as permitted in this article, a written report containing geophysical logs, geologic samples and logs, and well pumping tests shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(7)  Use of an irrigation well shall not be permitted until approved, as evidence by a written release for the use of the irrigation well by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-11.11), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 114 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 54; planning and development, ch. 108; site plans for signs, § 108-285. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Banner sign means any sign having the characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, vinyl, paper, or the like with only such material for a backing. "Banner" shall include any animated rotating and or fluttering devices, fringe and pennant string streamer. 
    Facade sign means any sign erected parallel to the facade of a building and mounted on the outside wall thereof, or mounted between the posts, columns, or other similar structural component or the building's porch or portico. 
    Flat sign means any sign erected parallel to and mounted on a wall, which wall is an integral part of the landscape design of the site, such as a wall screening off-street parking, bounding the site or lot, or serving as a principal landscape feature, and which wall is clearly not intended for the sole purpose of sign display. 
    Historic marker means any sign or placard approved by the historic architectural review commission that explains by word or symbol the historical significance of the building, site or structure to which it is affixed. 
    Horizontal projecting sign means any sign projecting at any angle from the outside wall of any building and which has its greatest dimension in a horizontal plane. 
    Marquee sign means any sign that is intrinsic to a marquee and contains the business name, as well as advertisement of the business. 
    Marquee means a structure projecting from, and supported by, a building when such covered structure extends beyond the building line. 
    Pole sign means any sign erected on a pole and which is wholly or partially independent of any building for support. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over the roof of any building and supported solely or partially on the roof structure. 
    Sign means any display of characters, letters, illustrations or any ornamentations or the complete structure on which any such characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations are supported or applied, except that guys or their anchorages or the poles of pole signs will not be considered to be any part of a sign. 
    Sign erector means all individuals, firms, or corporations engaged in the construction or erection of any sign having a structural frame, using electric power or requiring a scaffold for its application. 
    Sign writer means any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the painting or application of signs on windows, doors, walls, awnings, etc., where no framework is required for the sign or scaffolding for its application. 
    Vertical projecting sign means any sign projecting at any angle from the outside wall of any building and which has a vertical dimension equal to or exceeding the horizontal dimension. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-2. - Posting notices, signs or advertising matter on trees, poles or public property. 
    No notice, sign or any advertising matter shall be posted on any tree or telegraph or telephone pole erected on the city streets nor on the walls of any city building nor on any property of the city, without the written approval of the city manager, except that legal, election and similar notices may be posted on bulletin boards. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74. 
Sec. 114-3. - Posting advertisement on unoccupied buildings or temporary structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post advertising matter on any unoccupied building or any temporary structure in the city. This chapter shall not apply to any owner or to any person acting under the authority of the owner of such building. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 114-4. - Placing signs on surface of streets or sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stencil, write, paint, erect or place advertising signs or notes upon the surface of any street or sidewalk, except signs or decorations placed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 
Sec. 114-5. - Destroying lawful posters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person when the advertisement or bill is lawfully posted and put up and during the time such sign or advertisement shall be of value. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.1(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 114-6-114-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-31. - General requirements for construction or reconstruction. 
    No sign shall be erected, constructed or reconstructed within the city limits which does not conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Single-family districts. No sign shall be erected in any single-family district, except that signs in connection with new construction work will be permitted without any area restrictions only during such time as the actual construction work is in progress. 
(2)  Property which is advertised only. No sign of any kind shall be displayed or erected except in connection with the advertisement of the particular building or property on which the sign is located or of some merchandise or service dispensed or rendered on the same premises on which the sign is located. 
(3)  Obstruction of doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign shall be constructed in such a manner as to obstruct any door, window or fire escape on any building. 
(4)  Signs having structural framework. Signs, having a structural framework, will be considered an addition and will not be permitted on buildings which are nonconforming for any reason. 
(5)  Proximity to electrical conductor. No sign shall be erected closer than five feet to any overhead electrical conductor, where the difference in potential between any two conductors or between any one conductor and ground exceeds 750 volts. 
(6)  Projecting or pole-mounted signs. Projecting or pole-mounted signs over public right-of-way shall be erected or repaired by a licensed sign erection contractor or general contractor. Electrical work associated with erection or repair shall be performed by a licensed electrical contractor. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-32. - Permission of property owner required for construction. 
    Permission of the owner or lessee of the property on which any sign is to be located shall be indicated either by letter or signature on the plans, such signed letter or plans to be filed with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-33. - Stress calculations. 
    All stress calculations for a sign may be required at the discretion of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-34. - Hazardous signs; appeals from decisions of building official. 
    No permit will be issued for a sign which, in the opinion of the building official, will constitute a hazard of any kind. Appeals from the decisions of the building official shall be to the city commission, whose decision in the matter shall be final. The city reserves the right, after 48 hours notice, to remove any sign which is not properly maintained, which shows neglect, which becomes dilapidated or which is, in the opinion of the building official, unsafe or hazardous in any way. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-35. - Banner signs. 
    No sign of any character shall be suspended across any public street, avenue or alley nor shall any sign of any description be painted, pasted, printed or nailed on any curb or sidewalk or upon any tree, light standard, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, or any structures, other than an awning, within the city limits, except with the permission of the city commission. No sign of any kind shall be attached to any private wall, window, door, gate, fence or to any other private structure except with the written permission of the owner or lessee as restricted otherwise in division 2 of article II of chapter 106 and this chapter. Such written permission shall be filed with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-36. - Flat and facade signs. 
    Flat and facade signs shall not be restricted as to area, except that in the historic zoning districts they shall be restricted to ten percent of front building facade area, but they shall not project more than four inches from the face of the building, nor shall they extend above the top of the adjoining parapet wall on a building with a flat roof or above the adjoining eave line on a building with a pitched roof. No portion of any such sign which extends over city property shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk grade of any street or avenue or 15 feet above the crown grade where such sign is located parallel to and abutting on any alley. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-37. - Horizontal projecting signs. 
    Horizontal projecting signs shall have no more than 24 square feet of horizontally projected areas as calculated from any angle. There shall not be over 12 inches of clear space adjacent to the building wall, and such signs shall not extend or project from the face of the building wall more than seven feet. No part of such sign shall extend above the top of the adjoining parapet wall on a building with a flat roof or above the adjoining eave line on a building with a pitched roof. No horizontal projecting sign, except a marquee sign, or where located in the historic zoning districts shall be constructed or erected so as to extend or project over any portion of any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way or any public property. Where such signs are allowed, no portion which extends over city property shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or grade. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-38. - Vertical projecting signs. 
    Vertical projecting signs shall have no more than 40 square feet of horizontally projected area, as calculated from any angle, and shall not project more than four feet from the building to which they are attached, nor shall the vertical height of such sign exceed 18 feet. No part of such sign shall extend more than five feet above the top of the adjoining parapet wall on a building with a flat roof nor more than five feet above the adjoining eave line on a building with a pitched roof. No vertical projecting sign, except where located in the historic zoning districts, shall be constructed or erected so as to extend or project over any portion of any sidewalk, street, alley or other public way or public property. Where such signs are allowed, no portion which extends over city property shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or grade. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-39. - Roof signs. 
    Roof signs shall have no more than 224 square feet of horizontally projected area, as calculated from any angle. The overall height above the roof shall not exceed 14 feet, and such signs shall be so arranged as to provide a minimum of six feet vertical clear space immediately above the roof over not less than 75 percent of its length. Roof signs shall be so placed that the least distance from any building line measured perpendicular to the face of the sign shall not be less the total height above the roof. No roof sign shall extend horizontally past the building lines at the roof. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-40. - Pole signs. 
    Pole signs shall have no more than 30 square feet of horizontally projected area, as calculated from any angle. No pole sign, except where located in the historic zoning districts, shall be constructed or erected so as to extend or project over any portion of any sidewalk, street, alley or other public way or public property. Where such signs are allowed, no portion which extends over city property shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or grade. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(L)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-41. - Marquee signs. 
    Marquee signs shall have an overall height of not more than six feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(M)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-42. - Signs on construction walls. 
    When an opaque, solid wall is required by the city during construction of a project, 20 percent of the wall area fronting a public street may be used for unlighted signs for construction and professional firms associated with the project and for marketing the development. In addition, the walls may be used for public art as coordinated with the city's Art in Public Places Board. 
(Ord. No. 05-28, § 1, 11-2-2005) 
Sec. 114-43. - Exception for historical markers. 
    Historic markers shall be exempt from regulation in this article and shall not be deemed a sign as defined in article I nor shall it be considered in the allotment of signs for a property provided only one historic marker exists per property placed by a private entity. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 114-44-114-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 114-71. - Sign requirements. 
    In single-family districts all signs shall be set back at least 12 feet from all property and right-of-way lines. In residential districts signs shall be restricted to the signs listed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-72. - Nonilluminated nameplates or professional nameplates in single-family districts. 
    A nonilluminated nameplate or professional nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted in the single-family districts. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-73. - Nonilluminated projecting or pole signs in conjunction with permitted public and semipublic uses. 
    Nonilluminated projecting or pole signs not exceeding five square feet in area in conjunction with permitted public and semipublic uses are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(B)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-74. - Identification of building containing multiple-family dwellings in multiple-family residential districts. 
    In multiple-family residential districts, a nonilluminated sign not exceeding six square feet in area only for purposes of identifying a building containing multiple-family dwellings is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(B)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-75. - For sale, for lease, open for inspection or similar signs. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in the land development regulations inconsistent with this division, there shall not be displayed, constructed, reconstructed, situated, maintained or erected upon any lot or parcel of land or upon the premises located thereon, which lot or parcel of land or premises is or may be zoned for residential purposes only, whether such residential purposes be single-family, duplex or multifamily, any for sale, for lease, open for inspection, or kindred sign, unless such sign shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  No such sign shall be displayed, constructed, reconstructed, situated, maintained or erected by anyone other than the owner or lessee of the lot, parcel of land or premises, and then only on the lot or premises as set forth in this section. 
(2)  There may be only one such sign on the lot or parcel of land or on the improvements thereon, regardless of the size of such lot, parcel or improvements, and such sign may contain only one of the following designations: for lease, for sale, for sale or lease, open for inspection, furnished room for rent, for rent. No name, address or telephone number other than that of the owner or lessee shall appear on such sign; provided, however, that the telephone number of a registered real estate broker may be contained or placed thereon, upon written request of the owner or lessee duly filed with the building official. 
(3)  Such temporary real estate signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area for each quarter acre in the lot or tract, provided that no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(4)  Permits for such signs may be issued by the building official upon application by the owner or lessee, in person and giving proof of such ownership or tenancy, and all such permits shall automatically expire within six months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.2(B)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 114-76-114-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 114-100. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to develop sign regulations, which encourages designs that reflect the historic character of the historic zoning districts. This article promotes sign designs that harmonize with the architectural scale, aesthetic quality, and predominantly pedestrian character found throughout the historic district. 
    The intended regulations promote signs that are subordinate to, and in aesthetic harmony with, their location on buildings and their surrounding environment and to eliminate the dangers of visual clutter along public streets and rights-of-way and to define requirements that fulfill the identification and advertisement of businesses on a high degree of design and appropriate scale quality and sensible to the historic character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 114-101. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in section 114-1 shall be applicable to this division. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "A"-frame sign means a rigid portable sign in a form of an inverted "V". 
    Abandoned sign means any display or sign remaining in place for two (2) years, which no longer identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the premises where the display or sign is located or where the building, business, or establishment to which the display or sign is related has ceased operation. Signs that are recognized as historic or iconic will be exempted of this definition. 
    Alteration means any non-content base change to a sign, including, but not limited to dimensions, illumination, size or shape, and excluding ordinary maintenance. 
    Animated sign means any sign or part of a sign that uses motion, or that displays flashing, oscillating, sequential, or intermittent lights, or gives the appearance of movement or rotation, other than time or temperature. Any type of electronic or digital screen, including, but not limited to computer screens, tablets, or electronic interactive devices shall also be deemed an animated sign. ATM machines are exempt from this definition. 
    Awning sign means any sign painted on or sewn, or attached in any way, applied to a roof-like covering of canvas or the like designed to wholly or partially protect one from the elements. 
    Backlit sign means freestanding letters, logo, or box with a solid and opaque face and sides that incorporates a source of light within the sign. Also, refer as halo effect sign. 
    Billboard sign means an outdoor advertising sign erected and maintained by an advertising business or service or owner, upon which advertising may be displayed and which generally advertises firms and organizations that along with their goods and services, are not located on the same premises as the sign; and whose surface is sold, rented or leased for display of advertising material. 
    Booth means a stall, table, desk, carrel or stand, with or without a roof, used for the sale of retail, goods, services and or beverages. A booth is not permanently attached to the ground or to any floor or wall. Freestanding booths for the sole purpose of containing interactive and or electronic screens are excluded from this definition. 
    Brand sign means any device that contains letters, symbols or a logo that identifies and differentiates a specific product or is made from other products. 
    Bus bench sign means any sign painted on or attached to a bench or to a shelter for persons awaiting public transportation. 
    Business identification sign means the main sign of a business that informs potential clients the name and or type of business, which may include the business logo. 
    Carts means a small wheeled vehicle typically pushed by hand and used for the sale of retail, goods, services, food and or beverages. 
    Chalk or marker board means a board used to display daily menu specials only for restaurants and bars that are wall mounted, with no identification or other signage attached to or painted on, not exceeding 1 (one) per business and not more than two and a half (2.5) square feet per each sign and located on the same façade as the primary street frontage or entrance. A chalkboard will not be counted towards the allowed square footage of signs on a restaurant or bar. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign on which message copy is changed manually in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols, paper, and other similar characters or changeable or removable panels. 
    Channel letter sign means a sign comprising of individual letters, symbols, or logo that are hollow and can be independently mounted to a wall or other surface. 
    Clear sight triangle means a triangular shaped area at any corner where public streets intersects in which nothing taller than two (2) feet is allowed to be erected or placed in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sights of motorists or pedestrians as adopted under section 108-452 of the Land Development Regulations. 
    Construction sign means temporary signs erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the time period of such construction, indicating the name of the architect, engineer, landscape architect, contractor, planner, or similar professionals involved in the project. (See also Section 114-42) 
    Copy means the text or graphic representations of a sign that depict the name of an establishment, products, services, or other messages, whether in permanent or removable form. 
    Digitally printed sign means any sign made of or in part with the printed output from a computer. Signs may be printed over vinyl, paper, fabric, or plastics. 
    Directional sign means sign that contains any illustration or words that provide direction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic for an on premise feature, specific for an entrance to the building or for parking purposes on private property. 
    Directory sign means a sign listing two or more commercial or business establishments that share a common area provided for the comfort and use of all occupants, owners, tenants or users of one or more units or buildings, or that share common entrance and that are located in the same building but may not have exposure to the front façade of the building, like a storefront or a first floor window, or a regularly traveled street. Directory signs can include arrows that can provide direction to users. 
    Display sign means an object that is freestanding or attached to a building in any way that promotes the retail, goods, or services that an on-site business offers. These objects can be life size or a large-scale figure of any element that is sold or service that is offered in the establishment but the object itself is not for sale. 
    Door sign means any sign or device affixed to, painted to or in contact with a door, and which it is intended to be seen from the exterior. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign with two (2) faces, which are usually, but not necessary, parallel. 
    Erect means, in context of signage, to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, or paint a sign. 
    Face of sign means the planes of a sign on which copy could be placed, including trim and background. 
    Flag sign means any sign constructed on fabric, canvas, or similar material bearing information relating to or identifying a business, that is intended to be mounted on a pole and to fly freely in the wind. When an establishment displays a flag that contains the name, logo or symbols related to the business the flag would be deemed a sign. Flags with "open", "welcome", or any similar wording are not allowed. 
    Flashing light means an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. 
    Floor sign means any display of characters, letters, illustrations, or any ornamentations applied or written on a floor that attracts to or promotes the business to which it is displayed. 
    Fluorescent light means an electric-discharge lamp, usually tubular in shape, containing a metallic vapor, which becomes luminous on the passing of the current and energizes a layer of fluorescent material coating the tube. 
    Freestanding or ground sign means a sign supported by a sign structure secured in the ground and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle, or object other than the sign structure for support. 
    Frontage means the length of street surface that the building faces. 
(1)  Primary frontage means the street surface that the building's main entrance faces. 
(2)  Secondary frontage means any street surface that a building is adjacent to, other than primary frontage. 
    Frontage, business means the horizontal linear distance measured along the façade of an individual business. Also referred to as "business frontage". 
    Ghost sign means an old advertising signage that has been preserved on a building, either exposed or under non-original materials. 
    Hanging sign means a double or single-face sign that hangs from a bracket or support and projects from a building, pole, or awning. If a "hanging" sign is located over a city right-of-way the bottom part of it must have a clearance of at least eight (8) feet and cannot extend more than forty eight (48) inches from the face of the building. Signs proposed over city's right-of-way must obtain the necessary permission from the city. 
    Historic sign means a sign that is fifty (50) or more years old and is a significant addition to the Key West historic district due to its design quality, its community memory value, and its outstanding craftsmanship, or artistry that represents its time, or a determination as historic sign has been made as set forth in the HARC Guidelines. 
    Iconic sign means a sign that is distinctive to its location due to its design and its significance to the community, or a determination as iconic sign has been made as set forth in the HARC Guidelines. An iconic sign does not necessarily need to be historic. 
    Illuminance means the amount of light falling upon a surface, commonly called "light level" or "illumination". Measured in foot-candles (lumens per square foot) in the English system. 
    Interior illuminated sign means any sign having translucent characters, letters, designs, logos, or outlines illuminated by electric lights located within the sign or having luminous tubes designed for that purpose. Halo effect and exposed neon or LED tube signs are not considered interior illuminated signs. 
    Informational or descriptive sign means a sign indicating by words, photos, drawings or symbols the type of services available at the location or events occurring thereon. Menu boxes are not consider informational signs. Electronic signs, including but not limited to tablets or monitors of any kind are not considered informational signs. 
    Kiosk means a small structure, affixed to the ground or floor, with an affixed roof, in which one or more persons can stand or sit inside, with one or more openings used for the sale of retail, goods, services, food and or beverages. A kiosk may have electric conduits and/or plumbing affixed to it with a connection to public utilities. A kiosk may be a stand-alone structure or may be attached to an existing building or structure. 
    LED light means an electric light-emitting diode fixture that when a suitable voltage is applied the color of the light is determined by the energy band gap of the semiconductor. LED light fixtures can be individual or mounted on a string. 
    Legal-nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the regulations of this article but complied fully with all applicable regulations and received all required approvals at the time of its installation, or a determination as legal non-conforming has been made as set forth in the HARC Guidelines. 
    Menu boxes means an auxiliary business sign display case containing a menu used for advertising menus and daily menu specials only for restaurants or bars, no larger than two and a half (2.5) square feet and located on the same façade as the primary street frontage or entrance. On cases where the building is recessed from the city's right-of-way, menu boxes may be attached to a pole installed for such purpose on private property. 
    Miniature light means a light or light-emitting device employing a bulb two inches or less in length and normally found strung together in multiples. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign, generally having a low profile that is detached from a building and having a support that is a solid-appearing base constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block or brick. All other freestanding sign types not meeting the definition of a monument sign shall be either a pole sign or a pylon sign. 
    Neon light means a lamp, usually tubular in shape, employing the element neon (Ne) or other luminous gases. 
    Neon sign means an arrangement of luminous or gaseous tubes to form letters or numbers or an abstract or representational element or both, specifically including advertising logos, punctuation marks, emblems, and registered trademarks, or that is installed inside of exposed channel letters, logos, designs, borders, or numbers. 
    Off-site sign means a sign identifying, advertising or directing the public to a business, merchandise, service, institution, entertainment or activity which is located, sold, rented, based, produced, manufactured, furnished or taking place at a location other than on the property on which the sign is located. 
    On-site development sign means a sign identifying the developer, architect, and / or contractors located on a property upon which there is active construction. 
    Open and hours of operation signs means any device or letters that are intended to communicate to the public that the business is open and the hours of operations. "Open", "Closed" and hours of operation signs cannot include any brand, logo, or business sign in order to qualify as an exempt sign from percentage signs on the premises. 
    Painted sign means a sign that is painted completely over a glass pane of a window or door or is painted on a surface that will be installed on a building or directly painted on a wall or any other surface of a building. 
    Pennant means a series of small flag-like pieces of cloth, plastic or similar type of material attached and strung between two or more points. 
    Plastic sign means any sign that is made in part or completely with any plastic or synthetic material that has a polymeric structure such as PVC, vinyl, polyethylene, polyurethane, corflute and oilcloth, among others. 
    Pole sign means any sign erected on one or several vertical elements, made of wood or metal, and which is wholly or partially independent of any building for support. A pole erected for a sign cannot be taller than six (6) feet. 
    Political sign means a sign erected by a political candidate, group, or agent thereof, for the purpose of advertising a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the city shall vote. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure or any sign designed to be transported. Portable signs shall include but not be limited to signs designed to be transported by wheels; skid-mounted signs; chalkboard signs converted to "A" frame; menu and sandwich signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked for the purpose of providing advertising, close to or on the public right-of-way, unless such vehicle is used in the ordinary day-to-day operations of the business. Portable signs also include signs with attached wheels or casters, search light stands and air, hot air or gas filled elements. 
    Premises means a lot, building site, lease of a building or lot, or other independent entity by one (1) business. Each of the multiple tenants in one building or lot constitutes a separate premise for the purpose of this article. 
    Projecting sign means any sign which is affixed to any building, wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or structure. If a "projecting" sign is located over a City right-of-way the bottom, part of it must have a clearance of at least eight (8) feet from the right-of-way. 
    Real estate sign means any sign that are used to offer for sale lease or rent a property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over the roof of any building and supported solely or partially on the roof structure. 
    Seasonal/holiday sign means a sign or other holiday decorations, used for emphasizing the celebration of a historic American holiday or other national holiday. As used herein the term "a historic American holiday" shall refer to any day made a public holiday by laws of Florida, the laws of the United States or by resolution of the City Commission. 
    Seasonal or holiday lighting means a series of clear, white, or colored lights, either bare or shielded within an enclosure. 
    Sign means any device designated to inform or attract persons not on the premises. 
    Sign, area of, means the total surface of a sign, including the background, frame, and ornamentation, but not including structural supporting elements outside of its frame. 
    Sign face means the area or portion of a sign on which copy is intended to be placed. 
    Special event sign means a sign which carries a message regarding a special event or function which is of general interest to the community and which is of temporary nature. 
    Snipe sign means a sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, walls, trash receptacles or fences or to other objects. Legal notices required by law are exempted. 
    Surface graphics means any sign painted directly on any exterior building wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass area. 
    Stylized letters means any letter that has decorative strokes or serif. 
    Three-dimensional sign means a sign that is carved and have low bas-relief or a sign that is composed of many layers of the same or different materials. 
    Time and temperature sign means any sign mechanically, electronically or electrically controlled to display time and temperature only. 
    Traffic sign means a sign that functions primarily to provide for the efficient, safe, and orderly flow of traffic and erected by city, state, or federal governments. 
    Vehicle sign means any sign on any type of vehicles, which are conspicuously parked on or near the proximity of the premises of the use being advertised and used in such a way as to advertise, identify, or draw attention to such use of passing motorists, passengers, and pedestrians. For the purpose of this definition vehicle sign includes but is not limited to any decals, wraps, painted or attached signs to a vehicle. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached and parallel to the façade of a structure, which is attached and supported throughout its entire length by the façade and not extending above the building, ground floor, railings, windows, parapets, or the eave of the roof. 
    Window sign means any sign affixed to, painted to or in contact with a window, or located within one (1) foot of any window surface facing the outside and which it is intended to be seen from the exterior, but excluding window displays of merchandise and informational material incidental to the display of merchandise. 
    Window sign, temporary, means a window sign of a temporary nature used to direct attention to the sale of merchandise or a change in the status of a business, but excluding window displays of merchandise and informational material incidental to the display of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-102. - Adoption of Historic District Signage Corridors Overlay Map. 
    The Key West historic district contains diverse commercial corridors and mixed-use areas that contribute to its urban diversity. Due to its intensity in use and type of commercial enterprises, the city created the Historic District Signage Overlay map that reflects three specific commercial corridors; the Entertainment Corridor zone, the Traditional Commercial Corridor zone, and Peripheral Commercial- Residential Corridor zone. The Commercial Overlay Districts Map is hereby adopted by Ordinance 16-XX. A copy of the map shall be kept on file at the Clerk's office and in the Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, adopted April 21, 2016, repealed and replaced § 114-102 in its entirety. Former § 114-102 pertained to "Restrictions," and was derived from Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(B)), adopted July 3, 1997 and Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, adopted November 8, 2006. 
Sec. 114-103. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following signs are not appropriate to any building or site within the historic district, therefore their use is prohibited: 
(1)  Animated signs within one (1) foot of a building facade facing any right-of-way and including vacant lots or parking areas. 
(2)  Bus bench signs. 
(3)  Digitally printed signs, with the exception of printed letters, symbols, or logos attached to high relief surfaces of three dimensional, carved, or sand blasted panels. The use of corrugated PVC and molded plastic is prohibited, with exception of matte finished painted plastic letters. 
(4)  Portable signs, with the exception of "A" frame signs deemed appropriate by the historic architectural review commission. 
(5)  Roof signs. 
(6)  Signs painted directly on the exterior wall or directly on the roof surface of a building, unless deemed historically appropriate by the historic architectural review commission. 
(7)  Snipe signs. 
(8)  Temporary store window signs, including going out of business signs, when their square footage cause a violation of section 114-104; provided, however, that menus and public notice signs are not included in this prohibition. A public notice sign means a sign advertising an arts event, a political event or candidate, a community event, or such other event open to the public. 
(9)  Posterboard signs. 
(10)  Billboards 
(11)  Animated rotating and or fluttering devices, fringe, and pennant string streamer. 
(12)  Off-premises signs. 
(13)  Signs that are placed on public sidewalks or public property, including but not limited to hydrant, utility pole, tree, or public fence. 
(14)  Interior illuminated signs. 
(b)  If a flag advertises or promotes the business or a product sold by that business, then it shall be deemed a sign and is subject to the permitted square footage pursuant to section 114-104 and the Historic Architectural Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-20, § 2, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 114-104. - Calculation of permittedsignage. 
    Permitted signage will be based on the amount of a business frontage, as defined under section 114-101. Calculation of signage will be one and a quarter (1.25) square feet of signage per linear foot of the building frontage of a business. Where the expressed formula does not work due to any small linear frontage occupied by a business, a sign cannot be smaller than three (3) square feet. The maximum allowed square footage for a business frontage is eighty (80) square feet for each frontage but square footage cannot be combined. For purpose of this regulation, stories above the first floor will not count as business frontage. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, adopted April 21, 2016, repealed and replaced § 114-104 in its entirety. Former § 114-104 pertained to "Restriction on number of signs permitted," and was derived from Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(D)), adopted July 3, 1997; Ord. No. 02-20, § 3, adopted August 6, 2002 and Res. No. 06-292, § 1, adopted September 6, 2006. 
Sec. 114-105. - Authority to adopt additional provisions. 
    The historic architectural review commission shall have the authority to adopt in its design guidelines additional provisions related to permitted signs in the historic districts, so long as they do not conflict with the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 114-106. - Amortization of illegal signs. 
    Illegal signs shall be removed within the first year, 365 days, of the effective date of the ordinance and adopted guidelines from which this section derives. Legal nonconforming signs will be exempt from this section if they existed as of 2005. Historic and iconic signs are exempt from this definition. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, adopted April 21, 2016, repealed and replaced § 114-106 in its entirety. Former § 114-106 pertained to "Amortization of legal nonconforming signs," and was derived from Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.3(F)), adopted July 3, 1997. 
Sec. 114-107. - Abandonment of legal nonconforming signs. 
    Abandonment of a legal nonconforming sign shall immediately terminate its nonconforming status. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 114-108. - Maintenance of all signs. 
    All signs, together with their supports, braces, and anchors, shall be maintained in a secure and safe condition, pursuant to section 114-34. Signs shall be kept free of excessive rust, decay, peeling, and deterioration, and shall be maintained to be functional as its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Secs. 114-109-114-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CERTAIN BOULEVARDS 

Sec. 114-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard means any portion of the pavements, sidewalks, and entire rights-of-way of North and South Roosevelt Boulevards, Kennedy Drive, and the four-lane portion of Flagler Avenue, which is located within the New Town commercial district. 
    Boulevard appearance zone means an area comprised of all lots or parcels containing or contiguous to the boulevard safety zone and all lots or parcels contiguous to such lots or parcels and located within the New Town commercial district, but not including the boulevard safety zone. 
    Boulevard safety zone means an area comprised of all real property which is situated within 12 feet of the North or South Roosevelt Boulevard pavement edges or within ten feet of the pavement edges of Kennedy Drive or the four-lane portion of Flagler Avenue. 
    Facade sign means a sign painted on, or mounted flat against, the surface of a side or front wall of a building. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign which: 
(1)  Is secured by a permanent sign structure secured in the ground, and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle or object, other than the sign structure, for support; 
(2)  Has no single side or sign face which is greater than 32 square feet in area, and has a sign area (aggregate) of no more than 64 square feet, except as otherwise specifically provided in this division; 
(3)  Has the lowest edge of any sign surface elevated a minimum of eight feet above the nearest curb elevation; 
(4)  Has no portion of any sign surface or sign structure more than 20 feet above the nearest curb elevation; and 
(5)  Is supported by a sign structure which does not affect traffic safety, as by obstructing vision. 
    Mobile sign means a movable sign not affixed to the premises or to any structure and having any single sign surface of four square feet or more. 
    New Town commercial district means an area coterminous with CL, CG, CT zoning districts, together with the following properties: the site of the Naval Hospital located east of South Roosevelt Boulevard Parkway, and all properties fronting on that segment of the South Roosevelt Parkway extending south from the Riviera Canal to Bertha Street; and all properties lying south of Atlantic Boulevard. 
    Objects means manufactured materials, vegetation, and inanimate materials, except those which are a fixed part of the natural terrain. 
    Political sign means a temporary sign erected by a political candidate, group or agent thereof, for the purpose of advertising a candidate, or of stating a position regarding an issue upon which the city voters shall vote. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner of real property or his agent which advertises for rent, lease, or sale the real property upon which the sign is located. 
    Shared occupancy means all businesses sharing the same structure, or sharing occupancy of adjacent structures having a common landlord or management agency, or advertising a common location. 
    Sign means as defined in section 86-9, but not including signs meeting standards published in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices. 
    Sign area means the aggregate square-foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign faces, with each face contributing to the aggregate area. 
    Sign structure means a structure affixed to the premises, having as its primary purpose the support or display of a sign. 
    Temporary sign means a sign pertaining to a specific event and utilized no more than 120 days during any 12 consecutive calendar months and displayed without lighting having a primary purpose or effect of illuminating the sign. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-137. - Boulevard safety zone. 
(a)  Signs. No signs of any type whatever shall be within any boulevard safety zone, except freestanding signs as provided by section 114-138(a)(1), which otherwise conforms with local and state law, provided that such signs shall be supported by sign structures no greater than 12 inches in diameter, and except permitted facade signs. 
(b)  Vegetation. No vegetation 36 inches or more in height above the nearest curb elevation and which is within 150 feet of any intersection, driveway, or other way of vehicle ingress/egress on the same side of the boulevard shall be within any boulevard safety zone. However, any tree which has no leaves below a height of eight feet above the nearest curb elevation and which is capable of growing to a height of 20 feet may be maintained so long as it does not affect traffic safety, as by obstructing vision. 
(c)  Objects. No objects 36 inches or more in height above the nearest curb elevation shall be within any boulevard safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-138. - Boulevard appearance zone. 
(a)  Signs. Signs within the boulevard appearance zone shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Except as provided in this division, no more than one freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained on any single lot or parcel of real property within the boulevard appearance zone. For purposes of this subsection, all businesses in a shared occupancy shall be considered as sharing a single lot or parcel of real property. The shared occupancy as a whole shall be entitled to one additional freestanding sign, being a total of two freestanding signs for the lot or parcel, or shall be entitled to a single freestanding sign having no single side or other single sign surface greater than 64 square feet in area. 
b.  Any single lot or parcel having more than 200 linear feet of frontage on a boulevard may have one additional freestanding sign or may augment each single sign surface of one otherwise authorized freestanding sign by an additional 0.16 square foot per foot of such frontage in excess of 200 feet, up to 32 square feet (64 square feet aggregate additional sign area if two or more surfaces are augmented); this entitlement is in addition to those previously described in this subsection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no single sign surface shall exceed 64 square feet in area; no sign area (aggregate) shall exceed 128 square feet. 
(2)  Exempted signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the terms of subsection (a)(1) of this section: temporary signs, political signs, and real estate signs, having a sign area (aggregate) no greater than 32 square feet. 
(3)  Mobile signs. No mobile signs shall be displayed in the boulevard appearance zone. 
(b)  Vegetation. Any trees which are required to be planted in the boulevard appearance zone shall be of a height of at least 50 percent of, and capable of growing to a height exceeding, the height of the tallest freestanding sign located within 100 yards of the tree. If no sign is so located, the tree shall be at least ten feet tall and capable of exceeding 20 feet in height. 
(c)  Subordinate section. This section shall be subordinate to, and shall not modify the terms of section 114-137. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-139. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Signs in place on the effective date of the land development regulations which are not in compliance with the terms of section 114-137 or 114-138 shall be removed or brought into full compliance with such sections as follows: 
(1)  Within 45 calendar days after the effective date of the land development regulations, temporary signs and signs not permanently fixed in place shall be removed or shall be brought into full compliance with section 114-137 or 114-138; and 
(2)  Any sign not subject to subsection (1) of this section in existence as of April 18, 1988, shall not be subject to the terms of this subsection except as provided for in article II of chapter 122 pertaining to nonconformities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 114-140. - Variances. 
(a)  Limitations. Upon application and after notice as provided by sections 90-392 and 90-393, the planning board may grant variances from this division with terms and conditions for periods not to exceed 60 calendar months. Variances may be granted for historic, aesthetic, or other reasonable cause, including financial hardship, which cause shall be stated upon the record, and no variance shall be granted until after consideration of its impact on public safety. 
(b)  Additional requirements. No person shall maintain on any one property more than one sign not in strict compliance with sections 114-137 and 114-138 and shall maintain such one sign only pursuant to the terms of sections 114-137 and 114-138 or subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 23, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 114-141. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Responsibilities of landowner and/or leaseholder. Landowners and/or authorized leaseholders shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining their owned/leased property in full compliance with the terms of this division. For purposes of this subsection, an authorized leaseholder shall be any person whose authority over the subject property, whether expressly derived from a lease agreement or conferred by operation of law, includes the right or responsibility to cause the property to be brought into compliance with law. 
(b)  Code enforcement procedures. This division shall be enforced by the code enforcement procedure. However, apparent violations certified by the special master or the city manager as not being susceptible to effective resolution by the special master procedure, whether due to the emergency nature of the violation or whether due to limitations inherent in the statutory processes and enforcement capabilities of the special master, shall be referred to the state attorney for prosecution and penalty or shall be referred to a code enforcement officer for citation for civil infraction and penalty, as provided by article VI of chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(3-16.4(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 118 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; compliance with subdivision regulations, § 107-6; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to assist implementation of the city comprehensive plan by establishing procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of real estate within the city, in an effort to, among other things: 
(1)  Provide proper legal description, identification, installation of monuments and recording of real estate boundaries; 
(2)  Aid in the coordination of land development in the city in accordance with orderly physical patterns; 
(3)  Discourage haphazard, premature, uneconomic or scattered land development; 
(4)  Provide safe and convenient traffic control; 
(5)  Encourage development of an economically stable and healthful community; 
(6)  Develop adequate utilities; 
(7)  Alleviate impacts of periodic and seasonal flooding by providing protective flood control and drainage facilities; 
(8)  Protect environmentally sensitive areas; 
(9)  Provide for management and/or protection of water resources; 
(10)  Provide public open spaces for recreation; 
(11)  Require the installation of adequate and necessary physical improvements and provide that the purchaser of land in a subdivision has access to necessary improvements of lasting quality; 
(12)  Avoid impacts and costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land and the lack of authority to require installation by the applicant of adequate and necessary physical improvements; 
(13)  Require development in keeping with the topography and other site conditions; 
(14)  Encourage aesthetically acceptable development; and 
(15)  Protect privacy. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-2. - Conformance required. 
    No subdivision of a tract of land anywhere in the incorporated area of the city shall be created except in conformance with this chapter. No subdivision shall be platted or recorded and no lot shall be sold from such plat nor shall any building permit be issued unless the subdivision meets all the applicable laws of the state and has been approved in accordance with the requirements of the city as established in this chapter. Proposed subdivisions within any historic district shall comply with the historic district regulations of this subpart B as well as historic architectural review commission (HARC) design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-3. - Definitions; major and minor subdivisions and lot splits. 
    All future subdivisions of land within the corporate city limits shall be classified as being a "major subdivision" or "minor subdivision," as defined in this section, and shall be subject to the land development regulations of this subpart B as they apply. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lot splits means any change in the lot lines or boundaries defining land configurations which does not increase the number of lots and requires no extension of off-site improvements. 
    Major subdivision means any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision. 
    Minor subdivision means any residential subdivision of land meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  Having four lots or less on a public way; or 
(2)  Does not require an extension of any off-site improvements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-4. - Recording of plats, lot splits or other change in lot lines or boundaries defining land configuration. 
    No final plat of any subdivision, lot split, or other change in lot lines or boundaries intended to define land configuration shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county until the subdivision or other subject change shall have been duly approved by the city in the manner prescribed in this chapter. Any such plat, lot split, or other record of change in land configuration must clearly display a written certification demonstrating city approval prior to being duly recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-5. - Unlawful sale or transfer of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land in the city to transfer, sell, agree to sell, convey, or negotiate to sell such land by reference to, exhibition of or other use of a plat of a minor or major subdivision of such land without having recorded an approved subdivision plat as required in this chapter. If such unlawful use is made of a plat before it is properly approved and recorded, the owner or agent of the owner of such land shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-6. - Building permits subject to final plat approval and recording. 
    No building permit shall be issued nor shall any city services be rendered until a final plat for such impacted land has been approved and recorded pursuant to requirements stipulated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-7. - Creation of subdivision by joint owners of land. 
    Where it may subsequently become evident that a subdivision is being created by the recording of deeds by metes and bounds description of tracts of land, the city may, at its discretion, require all the owners involved to jointly file a plat of the subdivision being so created or require all owners of record to jointly conform to the applicable sections of this chapter as are requisite for the issuance of building permits or the furnishing of any city service. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-8. - Effect on previously platted subdivisions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any land forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, but it shall apply to any resubdividing of each prior subdivision and any new subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-9. - Effect on active subdivision development. 
    Developments which have received preliminary plat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives and are recorded within a timeframe, which shall be established by resolution, following adoption shall be exempt from the requirements for subdivision approval as stated in this chapter. Such developments not having received preliminary plat approval shall be subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-10. - Relationship of deeds, covenants and other private restrictions to subdivision of land. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or private agreement, except that where this chapter imposes higher standards than imposed by such deeds, covenants, or private agreements, this chapter shall apply. The city shall not be responsible for enforcement of such deeds, covenants, or agreements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-11. - Disapproval of plan. 
    Upon disapproval of any plan, the city commission shall indicate those sections, subsections, and/or paragraphs of this chapter with which the plan does not comply. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(L)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-12-118-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 118-41-118-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WAIVER OR MODIFICATION 

Sec. 118-66. - Request generally. 
    Any applicant may request a waiver or modification from strict compliance with subdivision requirements. Such request for waiver or modification shall comply with the requirements and procedures set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-67. - Application to administrative official. 
(a)  Applications for requests for waiver or modification from strict compliance with subdivision requirements shall be submitted to the administrative official. The administrative official shall have the authority to require that submittal of such application be submitted with the related application required in this chapter. The form of the request shall be acceptable to the administrative official and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The request shall be in written form. 
(2)  The request shall accompany the proposed plan in question. 
(3)  The request shall identify the requirement or section that is proposed to be modified or waived and shall fully explain the reasons that such waiver or modification should be permitted. 
(b)  The administrative official has the authority to accept or reject such request based on reasonableness. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-68. - Criteria for consideration. 
    Before any waiver or modification from strict compliance with subdivision requirements may be granted, the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  General criteria. General criteria shall be as follows: 
a.  Consistency with purpose and intent and comprehensive plan. The waiver or modification is consistent with the stated purpose and intent of this chapter and with the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Impact on public interest, adjacent property. The waiver or modification would not have a significant adverse impact on the public interest, or on adjacent property. 
c.  Not discriminatory. The waiver or modification is not discriminatory, considering similar situations in the general area and in past subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Specific standards. No waiver or modification may be granted unless the developer clearly shows the existence of one or more of the following: 
a.  Superior alternatives. The development will provide an alternative which will achieve the purposes of the requirement through clearly superior design, efficiency, or performance. 
b.  Protection of significant features. The waiver or modification is necessary to preserve or enhance significant existing environmental or cultural features, such as trees, scenic areas, historic sites or public facilities, related to the development site. 
c.  Deprivation of reasonable use. Strict application of the requirement would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the land to be subdivided, due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions, or location, provided that: 
1.  Such effect upon the owner is not outweighed by a valid public purpose in imposing the requirement in this case; and 
2.  The unusual conditions involved are not the result of actions of the developer or property owner which occurred after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
d.  Technical impracticality. Strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical in terms of engineering, design, or construction practices, due to the unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location, of the land or due to improved efficiency, performance, safety, or construction practices which will be realized by deferral of the installation of required improvement, provided that: 
1.  The development will provide an alternative adequate to achieve the purposes of the requirement, including security for the current construction cost, adjusted for inflation, of any required improvements which may be deferred; and 
2.  Any unusual conditions creating the impracticality are not the result of the actions of the developer or property owner which occurred after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
e.  Relationship to proposed development or its impacts. Where all or any part of the regulation has no relationship to the needs of the development or to the impact of the development on the public facilities, land use, traffic, or environment of the neighborhood and the general community, due to the location, scale, or type of development involved, provided that any specific waiver or modification requirements set forth in this division are met. 
f.  Planned developments. If the subdivision concerns a planned residential or mixed use project and the waiver is not inconsistent with an approved conceptual, preliminary, or final development plan for the planned development. 
g.  Nonresidential subdivisions. If the subdivision concerns a nonresidential development and the subdivision requirement is clearly applicable only to residential subdivisions in view of their unique needs, impacts, and characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-69. - Conditions for approval. 
    Reasonable conditions and additional or alternative requirements, including but not limited to those relating to the provision of adequate security to ensure compliance, the dedication or reservation of land, or the provision of funds in lieu of installation of improvements or dedication or reservation of land, may be imposed in connection with the approval or any waiver or modification of any requirements under this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-70. - Resolution of technical issues by administrative official. 
(a)  Upon acceptance of a request by an applicant as set forth in this division, the administrative official or designated city staff shall have the authority to act upon a request for waiver or modification from strict compliance with subdivision requirements when such request is primarily of a technical nature. Such request must involve a technical specification or requirement such as but not limited to the type of materials, type or manner of application of materials, installation sequence, material performance, construction technique or requirement for specific construction feature. Further, the waiver or modification must not constitute a policy question. 
(b)  In granting such request for waiver or modification, the development review committee must make specific affirmative findings respecting each of the matters specified in section 118-68 and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, including requirements in excess of those otherwise required by this division, which shall become a part of the terms of subdivision approval. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-71. - Administrative official action and referral of policy issues to city commission. 
    If the request of a waiver or modification from strict compliance with subdivision requirements regards a requirement or provision that is not determined to be a technical requirement by the administrative official, such a request for waiver or modification shall be regarded as a policy issue. The administrative official shall have the authority to refer requests for a waiver or modification regarding a policy issue to the city commission for action. The city commission shall render decisions regarding such waivers or modifications based on findings pursuant to criteria cited in section 118-68. In granting such waiver or modification, the city commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, including requirements in excess of those otherwise required by the land development regulations, which shall become a part of the terms under which the subdivision is approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.1(D)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-72-118-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REVIEW PROCEDURE 

Sec. 118-101. - Staff administrative review responsibility. 
    The administrative official and other designates acting under the direction of the city commission shall administer this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-102. - General responsibility of planning board and mandated compliance with comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
    Prior to the approval of any proposed subdivision, the area to be subdivided shall be determined by the planning board to be consistent and in compliance with the comprehensive plan and land development regulations applicable to the land and use under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-103. - Burden of proof and other general responsibilities of applicant. 
    The burden of proof of all applications, plans, plats, reports, tests, compliances, dedications, existence of agreements, liens, mortgages, surety, and other pertinent documents and instruments required under this chapter shall rest with and be the responsibility of the applicant or his duly authorized agent as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-104. - Liability; indemnification. 
    The applicant shall furnish to the city commission a waiver, release and hold harmless from all liability and responsibility including provisions for indemnification for any and all damages or losses caused directly or indirectly by the breakdown, collapse or failure to any buildings, installations or structures constructed or installed in connection with the applicable development or project. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-105. - Enforcement. 
    The city commission or any aggrieved person may have recourse to any remedies in law and equity that may be necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person violating this chapter and any rules and regulations adopted in this chapter. The court, upon proof of the violation of this chapter, shall have the duty to forthwith issue those temporary and permanent injunctions that are necessary to prevent the violation of this chapter. The city commission, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent a violation or attempted violation; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; or to prevent any act which would constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-106. - Notification procedures. 
    Prior to taking any action pursuant to this chapter, the planning board and the city commission, respectively, shall be required to notify the public in accordance with division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.4(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-107-118-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATS AND PLANS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-136. - Required supplementary documents. 
    Supplementary documents that are required under this chapter are as follows: 
REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENTS 
Development Stage Major Subdivision or PRD Item # Description Minor 
Subdivision Preapplication Preliminary Plat Final Plat I. Project - Plat Information 1. Owner/applicant identification: a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner of record, mortgage holder or any other person having a legal equitable or beneficial interest in the land. X X X X b. A statement from such owner or others that will have an interest in the land that they will join in the dedication of the proposed subdivision. X X X 2. Written statement: Copies of a written statement generally describing the condition of the site and the proposed development of the entire subdivision, including but not necessarily limited to data on existing covenants, location of utility facilities, general soil characteristics and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of units, lot dimensions and areas, public areas, anticipated utility source and any other information considered pertinent. X X 3. Cover sheet (page 1): 1 If more than one sheet is required for the map, the plat shall contain an index sheet on page 1, showing the entire subdivision on the sheet indexing the area shown on each succeeding sheet, and each sheet shall contain an index delineating that portion of the subdivision shown on that sheet in relation to the entire subdivision. X X X X 4. Title block: Title blocks shall be printed in bold legible letters and denote the following information: date of original preparation and subsequent revisions; name of subdivision 2 ; name of city, county, and state; the section, township and range as applicable or if a land grant, so stated; type of application; tax map sheet; block and lot and street location. X X X X 5. Vicinity map: 3 Appearing on the cover sheet at a scale no smaller than 1? = 2000', the vicinity map shall illustrate the following information: location of land to be subdivided relative to nearest major thoroughfare and the section, township and range and tie-in to the nearest section corner; approximate acreage; natural features such as low or wetland areas; streams or canals; identification of adjacent lands; owner's name; date; north arrow; general lot and block layout; and all adjoining streets; X X X X 6. Legal description: A full and legal description of the land within the plat shall be lettered or printed on the plat. The description shall show the section, township and range in which the lands are situated or if a land grant, so stated, and must be so completed that from it, without reference to the map, the starting point can be determined and the boundaries run. X X X X 7. Zoning district requirements: a. Comprehensive plan map designation and zoning classification of the tract. 4 X b. The city's policy on size and dimension criteria with regards to the intended use planned for the subdivision including lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard requirements, setbacks, building coverage, open space, and off-street parking (reference article VII of chapter 108, sections 118-296 and 118-297 and articles IV and V of chapter 122). X X 8. Location of structures: The location of all temporary structures 5 or permanent structures having a temporary use. Permanent structures having a temporary use shall contain a statement outlining temporary use. X X X 9 Certifications: a. Clerk of the circuit court. On each sheet of the plat a three-inch by five-inch space in the upper righthand corner to be used by the clerk of the circuit court for recording information and each sheet shall reserve three inches on the left margin and a half inch margin on all remaining sides. X X b. Surveyor/engineer. 6 The name, business address, telephone number, signature, registration number and official seal of the land surveyor, certifying that the plat is a true representation of the land surveyed under his responsible direction and supervision. X X X X c. Mortgagee's consent and approval. 7 Verification notarized in the presence of two witnesses. X X d. Certification of title. 8 From an acceptable abstract company certifying that the parties executing plats are owners of the land included in the plats; all recorded mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances; taxes and assessments have been paid to date; the description shown on the plat is correct. X X e. Signature blocks. The city engineer, city attorney, mayor and administrative official shall certify that the plan meets all the city's requirements and shall sign in India ink, within the signature blocks provided, on all prints of the original plat being submitted. X X f. State board of health. Certification that the designs and plans of water and sewer systems are acceptable and meet current regulations. X X g. Certification of payment. Acknowledging that development charges for subdivisions in areas indicated by the city engineer to have critical drainage or other development matters significantly affecting adopted overall comprehensive plans have been paid. X X h. City commission certificate. Statement and signatures of approval shall be on the page of record containing the drawing. X X 10. Schedule of development phases: 9 Clearly indicate initial and subsequent phases of development. The phases shall be of such a size and design and be scheduled so that all portions completed at any time can exist independently as a subdivision in complete conformity with the requirements of this chapter. X X 11. Monumentation: Certify that permanent reference monuments 10 (PRM) have been set in compliance with city ordinances and F.S. ch. 177, as amended, as well as the location and description of the permanent reference monuments and the permanent control points (PCP) will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within one year from the date the plat was recorded. X X X 12. Development boundaries: All existing and proposed property lines, easements and ROW's, their purpose, their effect on the property to be subdivided, and the proposed layout of lots and blocks 11 , showing all bearings and dimensions as determined by an accurate survey in the field, including any stage development and planned platting for the future recording of the tract in phases. X X X 13. Deed restrictions or covenants: 12 Copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed subdivision deed restrictions or protective covenants. X X X 14. Dedications, rights-of-way, and easements: 13 a. Indicate names, locations, and dimensions of any areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision as well as areas reserved for public use, including but not limited to parks; rights-of-way for roads, streets or alleys; and utility or drainage easements or rights-of-way. The plat shall contain a statement that "no buildings or any kind of construction or trees or shrubs shall be placed on easements or dedications without written approval of the City Commission. X X b. Sites proposed for parks, recreational areas, and schools. X X X 15. Drainage district facilities: Locate and describe all existing drainage facilities and their ultimate right-of-way requirements as they affect the property to be subdivided. Refer to sections 118-300, 118-394 and 118-458, for guidelines required by the city. X X 16. Permits: List of required regulatory approvals or permits. X X 17. Variances: List of variances required or requested. X X 18. Payment of application fees: A check made payable to the city to cover administrative review costs. X X X 19. Plat recording payment: A check made payable to the clerk of the circuit court of the county for recording the plat in the amount established by that office. X X II. Setting - Environmental Information 20. Adjacent parcel information: The names of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and the property owners and property lines of all parcels within 300 feet identified on the most recent tax map sheet together with plat book and page reference number. X X X 21. Vehicular circulation: a. The name 14 , alignment, and width of all existing and proposed streets 15 , alleys, ROW's, or easements, adjacent to or within 300 feet of the tract including name, ROW width, street or pavement width and established centerline elevation. Existing streets shall be dimensioned to the tract boundary. X X X b. Access points to collector and arterial streets showing their compliance to the access requirements established by this chapter. X X X 22. Survey requirements: a. Contour map 16 X X X b. Topographic conditions 17 X X X c. Results of borings or general description of soils generally to be found on the tract. X X d. Describe the site's construction capacity and suitability for the development being considered (i.e., septic tanks, foundation excavations, dwellings with basements, etc.) X X X e. All intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be joined by the long chord of minimum radius of 25 feet and all dimensions shall be shown. X X 23. Environmental survey: 18 a. Using a map and narrative show the location and describe the vegetative communities present including specimen and or endangered flora. X X X b. Locate and describe existing wildlife habitats on the site especially those of threatened or endangered species X X c. Discuss construction methods used to preserve vegetative and wildlife communities as well as aquifer recharge areas and other environmentally sensitive areas. X X 24. Shoreline protection: For properties bordering public waters, the applicant shall establish the mean high water line and so delineate it on the plat. The applicant shall consider shoreline stabilization acceptable to the state department of environmental protection and the city. A transitional zone along the shoreline shall also be designated together with plans for preserving native indigenous plant communities within the zone transition. X X X 25. Not-included parcels: 19 Not-included or excepted parcels must be marked "not part of this plat" and must have sufficient easements or rights-of-way for access, utilities, and drainage. X X III. Improvements and Construction Information 26. Utilities: a. Indicate all existing utility (telephone, electric, water, gas, cable television, sewer, street lighting, etc.) providers for the land to be subdivided and for abutting parcels. Reference sections 118-391, 118-392, 118-393 and 118-394 for specific improvement requirements. X X b. Existing or proposed water treatment plants and sewage treatment plants. X X c. Submit a statement verifying that all utilities are available and all providers have been contacted. X X 27. Soil erosion and sediment control plan: Applicants must comply with all requirements of division 3 of article IV of this chapter and standards contained in article II of chapter 108 pertaining to site plan review procedures. X X 28. On-site wastewater disposal data: When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the suitability of the soil to support on-site disposal shall be determined by the state board of health and a report of its findings shall be submitted to all reviewing bodies. 20 X 29. Surface water management: A master stormwater management plan outlining the primary and secondary drainage facilities needed for the proper development of the subdivision application. 21 X X 30. Traffic impact analysis: The analysis shall comply with article II of chapter 108 pertaining to site plan review procedures and shall adequately address concurrency management criteria for roadways identified in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management 22 and sections 118-460 through 118-479 X 31. Required parkland and/or facility improvements: All preliminary plats shall comply with the parkland and recreation facility standards of division 5 of article IV of this chapter and criteria and procedures identified in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. X X 32. Required potable water improvements: All preliminary plats shall comply with the potable water supply and improvement requirements of section 118-392 and criteria and procedures identified in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. X X 33. Required wastewater improvements: All preliminary plats shall comply with the wastewater improvements requirements of section 118-393 and criteria and procedures identified in chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management. X X 34. Required wetlands protection: The plan shall comply with wetland protection requirements in article III of chapter 110 and division 3 of article IV of this chapter. X X 35. Reference to required specifications: Design specifications for all required improvements, as they are to be incorporated, shall be submitted and shall be subject to the standards set forth in sections 118-522 and 118-523 pertaining to construction standards. X X 36. Traverse sheets: 23 Worksheets showing the calculated closure and limits or error of the exterior boundaries and major irregular blocks or parcels within the subdivision. X X X 37. Construction plans, specifications, and cost estimates referenced to required specifications: 24 Construction plans, specifications, and cost estimates for all required improvements including streets, street and traffic control devices, street markings, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities 25 , water supply and distribution facilities 26 , sewage collection and treatment facilities, and plans for excavating, filling, and grading lands, prepared by a state-registered engineer with his professional seal on the plans. X 38. Maintenance guarantee: A maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the surety completion bond payable to the city guaranteeing the performance of required subdivision improvements for one year after the date of completion and acceptance by the city, executed and enforceable in the same manner as the surety completion bond described above. X 39. Landscaping: Applicants must comply with the requirements outlined in section 118-294 and article VI of chapter 108 regarding landscaping and buffer requirements. X X X 40. Performance guarantee: 27 A guarantee from the applicant who chooses not to install the required improvements prior to final plat approval providing performance guarantees to ensure the proper installation of required street, utility, and other improvements, if the applicant defaults. The guarantee shall be in the form of a cash deposit, personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit, or surety completion bond. All these shall be approved in writing by the city attorney and city commission. 41. Statement of improvement construction timing: A statement indicating whether the required improvements are to be constructed prior to recording the plat or after recording the plat. X X 42. Association or condominium documents: A copy of the homeowners' association or condominium documents if applicable indicating the maintenance responsibility for the required improvements and shall provide for the formation of a special taxing district to assume maintenance responsibility for the required improvements if the condominium or homeowner's association is dissolved. X X  
FOOTNOTES 
1. When numbering pages, each sheet shall show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of sheets included, as well as clearly labeled match lines to each sheet. 2. The name of the subdivision or identifying title shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the incorporated area of the city. If the plat is a replat, amendment or addition to an existing subdivision, it shall include the word "section," "unit," "replat," "amendment," or similar designation reflecting the replat, amendment or addition to an existing subdivision. 3. All maps shall include a north arrow, graphic scale, and date of original preparation and date of subsequent revisions. The scale must be approved by the city, but in no case shall such scale of plats be smaller than one inch to 200 feet. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 4. Any change in such classification shall be made known to reviewing bodies by presenting proof indicating that any required applications and fees for attaining such policy changes have been submitted. All applications shall comply with requirements outlined in the city Code. 5. Subdivision preliminary plats showing temporary structures or permanent structures having a temporary use shall be reviewed by the city staff with 18 months from the last approval date. Following approval of a subdivision master plan, such approved temporary structures may be erected prior to plan recording. All city permit requirements, including but not limited to city land development regulations governing temporary structures, as amended, shall be satisfied. A mobile home may not be used as a temporary structure, except that mobile homes approved for use as temporary construction trailers may be considered for exemption from the application of such definition when fully bonded to ensure removal. 6. The survey data compiled and shown on the plat shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter and F.S. ch. 177, as amended. The certification shall also state that permanent reference monuments (PRM) have been set in compliance with this chapter and F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and the permanent control points (PCP) will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within one year from the date the plat was recorded. When required improvements have been completed prior to the recording of a plat, the certification shall state the PCP's have been set in compliance with the laws of the state and city ordinances. When plats are recorded and improvements are to be accomplished under surety posted as provided for by this chapter, the required improvements and surety shall include installation of PCP's. 7. The verification shall state that "the mortgagee(s) consents and agrees to the platting of the land embraced in this plat and to the dedication(s) shown hereon; and, further, should it become necessary to foreclose the mortgage covering the said property, that all pieces and parcels dedicated to the public will be excluded from said suit, and the dedication remain in full force and effect." If the mortgagee is a corporation, the consent and approval shall be signed in behalf of the corporation by the president or a vice-president and the secretary or an assistant secretary, respectively, by and with the authority of the board of directors. 8. The title certification must be an opinion of an attorney at law licensed in the state or the certification of an abstractor or a title insurance company licensed in the state. 9. If the proposed subdivision is of such size that its development will be undertaken in increments, those increments and their order shall be indicated. Where increments of high elevations are undertaken before those of lower elevation, ultimate stormwater disposal courses in the lower increments must be concurrently developed. 10. The permanent reference markers should be set at such critical points and so interconnected and dimensioned that any registered land surveyor can lay out lots in the subdivision correctly by referring to the plat alone without any additional information. 11. All lots shall be numbered or lettered in each block by progressive numbers individually throughout the subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwest corner of each block of the subdivision. Blocks in each incremental plat shall be lettered consecutively throughout a subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwesternmost corner of the subdivision. Block perimeter returns at block line intersections shall be stated in terms of tangent distances of five-foot intervals, with a minimum tangent distance of 20 feet. All monumentation shall comply with the guidelines established in section 118-298 lot and block design criteria shall comply with sections 118-293 and 118-296. The dimension of all lots and parcels shall be shown to the nearest hundredth, except where riparian boundaries are involved which may be plus or minus. Whenever lands are subdivided along waterways, lot dimensions shall be shown to the approximate ordinary high water at date of survey. 12. Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of water supply; type and use of sanitary facilities; use and benefits of water areas, canals and other open spaces, odd-shaped and substandard parcels; restrictions controlling building lines; establishment and maintenance of buffer strips and walls; and restrictions of similar nature shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be noted on the plat. Documents pertaining to restrictive covenants shall be submitted with the final plat. 13. The purpose of all reserved areas shown on the plat shall be defined in the dedication on the plat. All areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision as well as all areas reserved for public use, including but not limited to parks; rights-of-way for roads, streets or alleys; utility or drainage easements or rights-of-way; together with all other area lands to be used by the public or subdivision residents shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the plat is recorded. Easements, dedications, and right-of-way shall comply with guidelines in section 118-394, division 5 of article IV of this chapter and sections 118-460 through 118-479. 14. The plat shall contain the name of each street shown on the plat. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the same name of the existing street. In no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street, excluding a numerical system, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "court," or similar suffix. 15. All streets and their related facilities designed to serve more than one property owner shall be dedicated to the public use. Notwithstanding, private streets shall be permitted within property under single ownership, a property under single ownership, a property owners' association or a condominium or cooperative association as defined by state law. Where private streets are permitted, ownership and maintenance association documents shall be submitted with the final plat, and the dedication contained on the plat shall clearly dedicate the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse to the city or any other public agency. For other design guidelines for streets see sections 118-460 through 118-479. 16. The contour map shall show ground elevations at intervals of not more than six feet of the area to be subdivided and of a perimeter strip at least 50 feet and up to 150 feet in width around the area as required by the city. 17. Topographical conditions on the subject subdivision including all the existing watercourses, drainage ditches and bodies of water, marshes and other significant, natural or manmade features. 18. Applications shall comply with all performance criteria of article II of chapter 108 pertaining to site plan review procedures, including but not limited to preservation of wetlands and transitional wetlands; aquifer recharge protection; wellfield protection; wildlife habitat preservation; protection of upland vegetative communities and endangered or threatened flora and fauna; floodplain protection; soil erosion, sedimentation control, and shoreline protection; and other performance criteria. 19. No strip or parcel of land shall be reserved by the owner unless the strip or parcel of land is sufficient in size and area to be of some particular use or service. The intended use for all reserved areas shall be shown on the plat in note form on the cover sheet. 20. An adverse report by the state board of health shall be deemed as sufficient grounds for disapproval of the proposed subdivision or portion thereof. Any subdivision being denied on such grounds shall not be reconsidered until the requirements of the state board of health are met. 21. The master surface water management plan for the subdivision shall comply with all applicable requirements of the surface water management performance criteria set forth in article VIII of chapter 108. 22. The preliminary plat shall comply with concurrency management procedures identified in chapter 94. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes and capacity of the street system proposed or affected by the development and the phasing of improvements. 23. The traverse map shall mathematically close with 0.01 feet and shall be accurately tied to all township, range and section lines occurring with the subdivision by distance and bearing. In addition, the initial in the description shall be accurately tied to the nearest quarter-section corner or section corner or government corner. The point of beginning shall be labeled with the letters "P.O.B." in bold letters. 24. In special cases involving small subdivisions of three acres or less, the city commission may in its discretion waive the requirement for estimates of cost prepared by a state-registered engineer, provided alternate descriptive data and procedures ensuring satisfactory compliance with the purposes of this chapter are submitted and accepted. As an alternative to submittal of an engineer's estimate of costs, bids for the work from two reputable contractors or a copy of an executed construction contract for the work will be acceptable. 25. Storm drainage plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management. The final plat shall include an as-built of all improvements with certification as to their respective locations by the applicant's engineer and the developer. 26. If the water distribution or sewage collection system is to be an extension of existing systems, the submittal need not include complete plans and specifications for the total basic existing system but shall include certification with supporting data by the applicant's engineer demonstrating that adequate plant and other system capacity is available to serve existing connections plus those proposed in general accordance with the design standards listed in the city's regulations. Additionally, the plans will show the connection of proposed facilities to existing systems and all proposed facilities within the proposed subdivision. 27. Performance guarantees can be presented as either a cash deposit, personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit, or a surety completion bond as described in section 118-265.  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(table XIX-A), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-137-118-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT SPLIT AND MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 118-166. - Submission of plat of record. 
    Any applicant desiring to create a minor subdivision, as defined in section 118-3, shall submit to the administrative official copies of a plat of record for the proposed subdivision in conformance with this chapter, as prepared by a land surveyor and any other requirements of F.S. ch. 177. Applications for minor subdivisions shall also comply with article IV of this chapter pertaining to required improvements and design criteria and sections 118-522 and 118-523 pertaining to construction standards and include the submission of supplementary documents as outlined in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents, and any other information which may be unique to the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-167. - Review procedures. 
(a)  The city commission shall determine by resolution the number of copies, related fees, and the time periods required for each of the minor subdivision procedure requirements. The city engineer or other designated professional acting under the direction of the city commission shall inform the applicant's engineer that the submittal does or does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Copies of the plat of record shall be distributed to the planning board and the city commission. 
(c)  Subsequent to recommendations made by the administrative official, city engineer and others as directed by the administrative official and the planning board, the city commission shall approve the development as a minor subdivision or require the applicant to proceed under the sections of this chapter governing major subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-168. - Filing of plat. 
    Upon city commission approval, the plat of record for the minor subdivision shall be filed by the applicant with the administrative official within a required time period from the date of approval. Failure to file within the required time period shall void such subdivision approval. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-169. - Lot splits. 
    Any applicant desiring to create a lot split as defined in section 118-3 shall submit to the administrative official copies of a final plat in conformance with the regulations identified in sections 118-256 through 118-260, as prepared by a land surveyor and any other requirements of F.S. ch. 177. The plat shall be approved by the development review committee. Upon approval, the plat of record shall be filed by the applicant with the administrative official within a required time period from the date of approval. Failure to file within the required time period shall void such lot split approval. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-170-118-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 118-196. - Required preapplication procedures. 
    Prior to making application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant for subdivision approval shall meet with the city manager and/or other designated city staff (collectively referred to as "staff") to discuss, informally, preliminary studies and sketches and their relationship to this chapter. Applicants for planned redevelopment and development (PRD) districts should reference division 2 of article II of chapter 107 pertaining to the conceptual development plan required for PRD districts. The procedures provide an opportunity for the applicant to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the proposals of the comprehensive plan affecting the area in which the proposed subdivision lies. Applicants shall be subject to the preapplication procedures in sections 118-197 and 118-198. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-197. - Application. 
    The applicant for subdivision approval shall submit a written preapplication to the administrative official for review by staff. The preapplication shall contain a written statement and sketch plan. These are described in detail in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-198. - Staff review. 
    Upon receipt of a satisfactory completed statement, plan and fee as required in this subdivision, the administrative official shall distribute copies to the city engineer and appropriate staff for review and comment. Preapplications shall be reviewed within a required time period. Any opinion set forth by the staff shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-199-118-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Preliminary Plat Procedures 

Sec. 118-226. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the preliminary plat is to present the proposed subdivision in an exact and precise manner in order that it may be evaluated pursuant to this subpart B. The preliminary plat shall be completed and approved prior to construction of the improvements required by this chapter. The city commission shall determine by resolution the number of copies, related fees, and the time periods required for each of the preliminary plat procedures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-227. - Preparation of preliminary plat. 
    The applicant for subdivision approval shall retain the services of a civil engineer and/or land surveyor registered in the state to prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet and shall include information as outlined and detailed in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(B)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-228. - Filing fee. 
    Upon filing the preliminary plat with the administrative official, the applicant shall submit a fee which shall be determined by resolution of the city commission, payable to the city. The fee is not reimbursable but is to help defray the cost of administering and processing the preliminary plat. If more than one resubmittal of a corrected or revised preliminary plat is required by the city staff or reviewing entity, an additional fee shall be charged for each resubmittal as shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(B)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-229. - Review procedures. 
(a)  The planning board shall coordinate the review of the preliminary plat and supplemental information as to their completeness and specific conformance with this chapter and within a required time period. The city staff shall inform the applicant's engineer whether the plans and/or plat as submitted meet the general requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  When the staff finds that the preliminary plat and required data do not meet requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be so advised in writing as soon as practicable concerning what corrections or revisions are necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Upon receipt of such findings, the applicant shall make the corrections or revisions and resubmit the preliminary plat and required data to the administrative official for review of the amended plan. If the applicant chooses not to provide the corrections, revisions, or other information requested by the staff, the department shall at the request of the applicant forward the application to the planning board accompanied by the staff's comments, including documentation of unresolved issues. 
(c)  When the staff determines that the preliminary plat and required data meet the requirements of this chapter, such written recommendations shall be submitted to the applicant, and the subdivision application will be scheduled for the next step in the review process. Similarly, if the applicant fails to provide satisfactory responses to issues identified by the staff, the applicant shall be allowed to appear on the agenda of the planning board. In such case, written comments of the staff shall be provided to the commission, and the applicant and the subdivision application shall be forwarded to the commission. 
(d)  Subsequent to receiving a staff recommendation, the applicant shall be scheduled for the next available regular public meeting of the planning board. Prior to the planning board's review, the applicant shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and required data to the administrative official. The number of copies to be submitted and the timing of the procedure shall be established by resolution of the city commission. The planning board may consider the physical characteristics of the property, the availability of community services, traffic impact, economic impacts, appropriateness of the type and intensity of the proposed development, existing and future development, existing and future development patterns, land development regulations, relationship of the project to the city's capital improvements program, or other such factors as may relate to the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. The planning board shall make a recommendation on the development which shall be included in the public record of the subdivision hearing. 
(e)  Subsequent to receiving recommendations from the planning board and other reviewing entities as may be determined by resolution of the city commission, the applicant shall be scheduled for the next available regular public meeting of the city commission. Prior to the city commission's review the applicant shall submit to the administrative official the appropriate number of copies of the subdivision master plan. The applicant may tender changes to the application to correct deficiencies identified by the planning board prior to forwarding the application to the city commission. The planning board, however, shall review the changes prior to forwarding the application to the city commission. The number of copies to be submitted and the timing of the procedures for review by the city commission shall be established by resolution of the city commission. During its review, the city commission shall consider the written recommendations of the city staff, the planning board, any other reviewing agencies, and presentations from the public. The city commission may approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and required data. When an application is disapproved, the city commission shall state the reasons for disapproval and indicate what further actions, if any, by the applicant may be undertaken to secure the city commission's approval. 
(f)  When a proposed development is a development of regional impact (DRI) as defined by F.S. § 380.06, the additional public hearing requirements for a development of regional impact shall be followed simultaneously. Copies of all plans, reports, maps and other documents required by the regional reviewing agency shall be submitted to the administrative official if the proposed development is a development of regional impact. The number of copies shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(g)  No construction shall be permitted until the city commission has approved the preliminary plat and all other required permits and approvals have been obtained and submitted to the city commission. 
(h)  The city commission may by resolution shorten or extend the review time for development reviews generally and direct such shortening or extension for any given application, if the city commission determines that such action is necessary and proper to the orderly and efficient processing of land development applications. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(B)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-230-118-255. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Final Plat and Planned Redevelopment and Development Plan 

Sec. 118-256. - Approval procedures. 
(a)  This subdivision applies to both the subdivision final plat and the planned redevelopment and development plan approval procedures. The content requirements for both final plats and planned redevelopment and development district plans can be found in article IV of this chapter pertaining to required improvements and design criteria and sections 118-522 and 118-523 pertaining to construction standards and in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents. 
(b)  As the final step in the review procedure for obtaining approval of a subdivision in the city, the applicant shall have prepared and shall submit a final plat. The city commission shall determine by resolution the number of copies, related fees, and the time periods required for each of the final plat procedures. No final plat shall be recorded until the required improvements have been installed or performance guarantee posted pursuant to this chapter. No such required improvements including streets, drainage and other required facilities shall be accepted and maintained by the city, unless and until the improvements have been duly inspected and approved by the city staff and have also been approved and accepted for maintenance by the city attorney and city commission. Prior to acceptance and approval of the required improvements, the final plat shall be approved by the city engineer, city attorney, and the city commission, and it shall be submitted by the city attorney and duly recorded by the clerk of the circuit court who shall record only those final plats which have been so approved in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-257. - Fee for final plat. 
    Upon filing application for final plat approval, the applicant shall pay to the city a processing fee, the amount of which shall be determined by resolution of the city commission, in order to help defray the cost of processing the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(C)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-258. - Timing of final plat submission. 
    Failure to submit the final plat within a specified amount of time shall require reapplication under subdivision II of this division pertaining to preliminary plats unless the city commission grants a specific extension of time. The timing of planned redevelopment and development district final plat submittal requirements shall control in case of conflict with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(C)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-259. - Required compliance. 
    The final plat shall conform to the approved subdivision master plan, shall meet the legal requirements of platting as defined by F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and shall consist of a fully executed correct plat map, meeting all state and city standards, final engineering drawings and auxiliary submittals, and all required legal instruments. Notwithstanding, the final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat and subdivision master plan which the applicant proposes to record and develop within a required time period. When an application is disapproved, the city commission shall state the reasons for disapproval and indicate what further actions, if any, by the applicant may be undertaken to secure the city commission's approval. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(C)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-260. - Content of final plat. 
    The final plat shall include one original to be drawn or printed on 24-inch by 36-inch Mylar or other approved material and two copies of the final plat and of all other required data. The final plat shall be prepared by a state-registered engineer and is to be clearly and legibly drawn with black permanent drawing ink or other approved process to a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, or as otherwise determined by the city. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and shall conform to the requirements outlined in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(C)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-261. - Schedule of development phases. 
    The applicant for subdivision approval may schedule proposed development phases within any proposed subdivision. The scheduled development phases shall have been specified on the approved preliminary plat and shall be of such a size and design and be scheduled so that all portions completed at any time can exist independently as a subdivision in complete conformity with the requirements of this chapter. Any change in the schedule of phases must receive prior approval by the planning board. If phased, the applicant shall have the option of requesting either final plat approval or the issuance of a certificate of completion on one or more of the development phases in conformity with all the procedures and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-262. - Time restriction on development. 
    The applicant may not apply for final plat approval on any portion of the approved preliminary plat which he does not propose to record and develop within the required time period. Failure to make application for final plat approval of a development phase or for the issuance of a certificate of completion for a development phase on an approved preliminary plat within the required time period from the date of approval of the preliminary plat, or within the required time period of the final plat approval for a related phase of a multiphase development, may result in revocation of such preliminary plat unless the applicant applies for an extension from the city commission prior to the lapse. The request for extension must be made in writing to the city commission prior to the scheduled expiration of the preliminary plat. The applicant must demonstrate good cause for the extension. The city commission shall consider the request at a meeting and may extend the prescribed time period if the applicant presents evidence which demonstrates that the applicant has progressed in good faith toward implementing the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-263. - Submission of final plat. 
(a)  Generally. Upon completion of the foregoing requirements, prints of the final plat and reproducible Mylars of the final plat shall be submitted to the administrative official and shall be accompanied by the supplementary materials as outlined in section 118-136 pertaining to required supplementary submission documents. 
(b)  Review by staff. The city engineer and city attorney shall examine the final plat as to its compliance with the constitution and statutes of the state and the city ordinances and shall in writing, within a required time period or at such other time as shall be determined by resolution of the city commission, report their findings, recommendations or approval to the applicant. Such action shall be specified in writing. 
(1)  If any deficiency exists, a reference shall be made to the specific article or section with which the final plat does not comply. Any such deficiency shall be corrected by the applicant upon written notice. 
(2)  If the final plat meets the requirements of this chapter, complies with the constitution and statutes of the state and the city ordinances, the city engineer shall recommend approval to the city commission. 
(3)  No revisions shall be allowed to the final plat after it has received city commission approval. 
(c)  City commission review procedure where required improvements constructed prior to recording. Upon submittal of the reproducible final plat, certification and approvals contained on the plat shall be current, and the plat shall be checked as required by this chapter prior to presentation to the city commission for approval. 
(d)  City commission review procedure where performance guarantee posted. If the applicant elects to record the final plat prior to completion of the required improvements under performance guarantees as provided for in section 118-265, the final plat shall be presented to the city commission by the city attorney accompanied by appropriate legal instruments. Action by the city commission shall be taken within a required timeframe after receipt of the final plat and supporting data to the city unless delay is requested by the applicant. If the commission certifies that the development has met all requirements of this chapter, the plat shall be endorsed as finally approved by the mayor and attested by the administrative official in order that it may be recorded among the public records of the county. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-264. - Final plat recording requirements. 
(a)  Generally. The final plats for subdivisions, within the incorporated area of the city, shall not be recorded until the developer has installed the required improvements or has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the city commission that such improvements will be installed. 
(b)  Completion of required improvements prior to final plat recording. If the applicant exercises the right to construct and complete required improvements prior to recording of the final plat, the city staff shall have the right of entry upon the property to be platted for the purpose of inspecting and reviewing the construction of the required improvements during the progress of such construction. The applicant shall coordinate the construction with the city staff. When the required improvements are complete, the final plat along with the records and data as prescribed in this subdivision shall be submitted by the applicant to the administrative official and shall be reviewed by the administrative official as provided for in this chapter. When all requirements of this chapter have been complied with, the plat and a completion certificate, rendered on a form to be provided by the administrative official, shall be presented for review and approval to the city commission by the city staff, within a required timeframe after receipt of the completion certificate. Upon such approval, the plat shall be submitted by the administrative official to the office of the clerk of the circuit court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-265. - Performance guarantees. 
    A guarantee shall be required from the applicant who chooses not to install the required improvements prior to final plat approval providing guarantees to ensure the proper installation of required street, utility, and other improvements, if the applicant defaults. The guarantee shall be presented in one of the following forms: 
(1)  Cash deposit. The applicant shall deposit with the city or place in an escrow bank account subject to the control of the city cash in the full amount of 125 percent of engineering and construction costs for the installation and completion of the required improvements. The applicant shall be entitled to receive all interest earned on such deposit or account. If the applicant defaults or fails to complete such improvements within the time required by this chapter, the city, after 60 calendar days written notice to the applicant, shall have the right to use such cash deposit or account to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; 
(2)  Personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit. The applicant may furnish to the city a personal bond secured by the unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount equal to 125 percent of the total estimated cost of engineering and construction for the installation and completion of the required improvements. The expiration date of the letter of credit shall be at least three months following the date of certification of all improvements. The letter of credit shall be issued to the city by the state or United States banking institution. Such letter of credit shall be in the form set forth by the city attorney and approved by the city commission. If the applicant defaults or fails to complete such improvements within the time required by this chapter, the city, after 60 days written notice to the applicant, shall have the right to use any funds resulting from drafts on the letter of credit to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or 
(3)  Surety completion bond. A surety completion bond, including a payment of vendors clause, executed by a company having a Best's rating of AAA and authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, shall be furnished and payable to the city for two years in the sum of 125 percent of the total cost of the engineer's estimates for streets, street and traffic control devices, markings, sidewalks, drainage facilities, street signs, water and sewer facilities and other improvements as shown on the final development plan; the bond to run from the date the building in the development or the last building in an approved phasing of the development is certified for occupancy by the building official. If default in reasonable maintenance occurs as determined by the city engineer, the administrative official shall do either of the following: 
a.  Demand performance within ten days by certified mail; or 
b.  Call the maintenance bond required under this chapter and expend all sums as required without restriction or limitation to cure defaults or remove structures when required. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.6(G)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-266-118-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN CRITERIA 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-291. - Scope. 
(a)  The tangible improvements in this article are required in conjunction with the development of a subdivision within the city. A state-registered professional engineer shall be employed to design all required improvements including streets, drainage structures, bridges, bulkheads, and water and sewer facilities. Design data, such as calculations and analyses, shall be submitted along with the development plans covering important features affecting design and important features of construction. Such calculations and analyses shall include but not be limited to high ground and surface water elevations, drainage facilities of all kinds, subsurface soil data, utilities, alternate pavement and subgrade types, and radii at intersections when standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) are inadequate. The design of required improvements shall be accomplished in such a manner that they shall be equal to or exceed those outlined in this article. 
(b)  The required improvements shall be completed prior to recording the plat in the manner prescribed in this chapter or the applicant shall submit to the city a guarantee in one of the forms prescribed by this chapter to ensure the installation of the required improvements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-292. - Commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
    Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, except that all local streets shall be designed according to the collector street typical section contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-293. - Blocks. 
    The length, width and shape of blocks in a subdivision shall be determined with due regard to the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
(3)  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Most advantageous use of topography and preservation of mature trees and other material features wherever possible. 
a.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet in length between intersecting streets nor shorter than 300 feet. Greater lengths may be approved by the city engineer where special topographical conditions exist. Where blocks are over 1,000 feet in length, a crosswalk at least ten feet in width may be required near the center of the block. In platting residential lots containing less than 12,000 square feet, the depth of the block should not exceed 250 feet. 
b.  Pedestrian crosswalks not less than eight feet wide may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-294. - Buffers, including berms, fences and landscaping. 
(a)  Screening such as fences, berms and other landscaping shall be required in a subdivision for the following reasons: 
(1)  Visual screening between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses or zoning categories, including but not limited to single-family residential development adjacent to multiple-family structures. 
(2)  Open space distances between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses or zoning categories, especially when building heights increase or noise becomes a problem. 
(3)  Movement barriers to prevent direct driveway cuts onto collector or arterial streets. 
(b)  Screening shall be required on lot lines which border collector or arterial streets. The plat and planned improvements shall comply with the screening and buffer performance criteria of articles III, and V of chapter 108 pertaining to appearance, design, and compatibility. Masonry walls or suitable alternatives shall be provided when noise from adjacent streets is or is judged to be a potential future problem. Suitable screening may be required between lots, especially commercial, industrial, or offices, and adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses. Along collector or arterial roads suitable screening may be used instead of a masonry fence if noise from the road will not adversely affect the proposed use. 
(c)  Buffer zones, either open space or specially vegetated, may be required between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses, especially where problems with building heights, noise, or scenic impairment might be a problem. 
(d)  Where a buffer screen of decorative masonry, plant materials, fences, berms are required, or where desired by the applicant and approved by the city, such walls, vegetative screens, or fences shall be set back at least one foot from the right-of-way and shall be so constructed that pilasters or fence terminal anchor posts shall be installed at the corners of each lot in such manner that each property owner might maintain his own section or provisions shall be made to have them maintained by a community association or other appropriate private entity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-295. - Fire protection facilities. 
    The following fire protection facilities shall be provided in all subdivisions: 
(1)  Fire hydrant location. Fire hydrants in a single-family residential district shall be located so that they are spaced no more than 300 feet apart and no more than 150 feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision. Fire hydrants in all other districts shall be located so that they are spaced no more than 300 feet apart and no more than 150 feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision. Fire hydrants shall not be connected to or supplied by water distribution mains less than eight inches in diameter, unless a larger main is required by the fire department. 
(2)  Fire hydrant cutoff valve. A cutoff valve with the top of its valve box located at finished grade to house the valve stem shall be installed between each fire hydrant and the distribution main supplying it with water. At all times the cutoff valve shall remain in the "on" position except when it is used to cut off the water flow to the fire hydrant for repair or replacement of the hydrant and its branch piping. 
(3)  Fire hydrant installation. Fire hydrants shall be installed so that the elevation of the bottom of hose connection outlets shall be not less than 12 inches above the finished grade at each hydrant. The finished grade shall be level for a radius of not less than five feet around each hydrant. 
(4)  Water distribution main installation. Water distribution mains shall be installed in all streets, except cross streets not requiring service connections and culs-de-sac less than 300 feet long. Water distribution mains shall be looped or interconnected with valves to enable localizing any portion of the distribution system except for short branches supplying not more than five lots. 
(5)  Storage capacity/emergency pumping. Sufficient storage or emergency pumping facilities shall be provided to an extent that the minimum fire flows will be maintained for at least four hours at 20 psi. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(M)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-296. - Lots. 
(a)  General requirements. All lots in a subdivision shall have frontage on a street which has a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet and a minimum area of 5,000 square feet. Lots shall be graded to at least four feet above mean sea level. All lots shall have area, frontage, width and depth required by the zoning district in which such lots are located. The minimum width of a lot fronting on the inside of curvature of a street or cul-de-sac shall be measured from side boundary to side boundary along the chord of the front setback line. Notwithstanding, lots developed under an approved planned redevelopment and development district plan shall be regulated by lot dimension requirements stipulated in the approved planned redevelopment and development district site plan. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are to be retained, lots are to be designed so as not to cause such existing structures to become nonconforming with respect to building area or lot size. Access from individual lots generally should not be permitted directly to collector or arterial streets. Flag lots shall be expressly prohibited. The entire parent tract being subdivided shall be placed in lots, streets, and other usable tracts so that remnants and other landlocked areas shall not be created. No lot shall be divided by a municipal boundary. 
(b)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Where double frontage lots are developed they shall be buffered as required by this chapter. The required front yard shall be provided on each street on double frontage or through lots. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width equal to the width required by the land development regulations for internal lots, plus the difference between the required front yard width and required side yard width. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(O)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-297. - Off-street parking areas. 
    Off-street parking areas shall be provided in a subdivision in accordance with article VII of chapter 108 pertaining to off-street parking and shall contain provisions for ingress, egress, vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and orderly temporary storage of motor vehicles. Parking areas, including vehicular storage spaces, driveways and access aisles, shall be laid out and striped in accordance with the minimum parking standards of article VII of chapter 108. Access management as well as internal circulation and off-street parking performance criteria of article II of chapter 108 pertaining to site plan review procedures shall be satisfied. Parking areas including spaces, driveways, and access aisles shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Parking areas for all residential lots and for commercial lots having an area of 15,000 square feet or less shall have a wearing surface of one inch of type SI or type II asphalt concrete laid over a subbase not less than six inches thick, free of muck and organic materials, stabilized to a minimum 50 psi F.V.B. 
(2)  Nonresidential parking areas for lots with areas greater than 15,000 square feet shall be paved in the same manner as a local street. 
(3)  Adequate drainage shall be provided for a one-in-ten-year storm in all off-street parking areas in accordance with article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(Q)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-298. - Permanent survey monuments. 
(a)  Permanent monuments of stone or concrete shall be placed in a subdivision at all block corners or at tangent points of curves connecting intersection street lines; at the point of curvature and tangency; at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision, except at such corners which are inaccessible due to topography; and at such other points as may be designated by the city commission. Such monuments shall be set flush with the surface of the ground or finished grade. 
(b)  Monuments shall be of precast concrete two feet in length and three inches square, or four inches in diameter, having a metal dowel imbedded therein. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(R)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-299. - Sidewalks and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Concrete sidewalks of a minimum width of four feet shall be constructed along both sides of all streets in a subdivision. Sidewalks shall be constructed with other required improvements and shall meet local sidewalk construction requirements. 
(b)  The construction of bicycle/pedestrian paths may be used to waive required sidewalks by the city commission as a form of pedestrian circulation. Such paths shall be a dual system consisting of sidewalks within the road right-of-way and bicycle/pedestrian paths outside of the road right-of-way with a minimum width of eight feet. Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be constructed according the state department of transportation Bicycle Facilities Planning and Design Manual. Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be constructed concurrently with other required improvements. The control, jurisdiction and maintenance obligation of bicycle/pedestrian paths not located within the road right-of-way shall be placed in a property owners' association, condominium association or cooperative apartment association, as defined by the state law, or an improvement district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(S)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-300. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall have an adequate comprehensive stormwater management system compliant with the surface water management requirements in article VIII of chapter 108, including necessary ditches, canals, swales, percolation areas, berms, dikes, piers, detention ponds, storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, head walls, end walls, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions for the positive drainage of stormwater. In addition, stormwater treatment facilities shall be required in the subdivision to control stormwater runoff quality by providing for on-site percolation and/or retention or other appropriate treatment technique for stormwater. Such requirements shall be compliant with article VIII of chapter 108 as well as the environmental performance criteria of sections 108-1 and 108-957; and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection. 
(b)  The design data of the drainage system shall be submitted along with the construction plans in a report form prepared by the applicant's engineer indicating the method of control of stormwater and groundwater pursuant to criteria of article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(T)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-301-118-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ACCESS 

Sec. 118-326. - Scope. 
    Ingress, egress, and access management in a subdivision shall be compliant with criteria stipulated in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-327. - General design. 
    Access in a subdivision shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to private property and the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets, classified major collector and above, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated by the dedication of access rights to the city. 
(2)  Street stubs to adjoining undeveloped areas shall be provided when required to give access to such areas or to provide for proper traffic circulation. Street stubs in excess of 250 feet shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround. 
(3)  Tapers, deceleration lanes, left-turn lanes, bypass lanes, median modifications or other design features may be required to protect the safe and efficient operation of the access street. 
(4)  Every lot or parcel shall be served from a publicly dedicated street; however, an applicant may retain as private a local street if the following conditions are met: 
a.  Public right-of-way is not required in order to serve adjacent development that is existing or projected; 
b.  A permanent access easement is granted for service and emergency vehicles and for maintenance of public and semipublic utilities; and 
c.  A reciprocal easement for ingress and egress is granted all residents of the development. 
(5)  Reserve strips restricting access to streets or alleys shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-328. - Specific design. 
(a)  Minimum dimensions between the edge of intersections to the edge of points of access (driveways) to lots developed within a subdivision shall be located as follows: 
Intersection Control Local Collector Arterial Stop sign 50 75 115 Signalized 50 175 230  
Note: These standards are consistent with state department of transportation rule #14-97, State Highway System Access Management Classification System and Standards, which dictates the location of access to state facilities. 
(b)  The subdivision shall be designed to provide access to the lots by the use of local streets. A secondary means of access shall also be provided to all subdivisions for use by emergency vehicles. Local street connections to collector streets shall be a minimum of 660 feet apart, and collector street connections to arterial streets shall be a minimum of 1,320 feet apart. Where access is desired along collector or arterial streets, it shall be provided by means of a marginal access road. The first point of access to the marginal access (frontage) road from collector and arterial streets shall be a minimum of 330 feet from intersection right-of-way lines as shown on the comprehensive plan future traffic circulation map series, with intermittent points at median opening locations being a minimum of 660 feet from intersecting right-of-way lines, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Access spacing of lesser lengths may be granted if requested by the applicant and if approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-329. - Nonresidential driveways and internal circulation. 
(a)  Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property, and vehicles located within one portion of the development must have access to all other portions without using the adjacent street system. 
(b)  Acceptable plans must illustrate that proper consideration has been given to the surrounding street plan, traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular street capacities, pedestrian movements, and safety. 
(c)  No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(A)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-330. - Service drives. 
    Where a subdivision borders on or contains a limited access highway right-of-way or arterial street, the city commission may require a service drive or suitable provisions for future service drives approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Distances involving right-of-way shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(A)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-331-118-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Sec. 118-356. - Environmental considerations. 
    All performance standards of section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection shall be satisfied, including but not limited to: preservation of natural resources; preservation of wetlands; species of special concern; soil erosion, sedimentation control; shoreline protection; freshwater lens protection; preservation of wildlife habitats and protection of upland vegetative communities and endangered or threatened flora and fauna; land use and soil compatibility; and floodplain protection. Each of these environmentally sensitive areas are defined in section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-357. - Fill. 
    The subdivision shall be graded and, where necessary, filled to comply with the surface water management requirements prescribed in article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management. The fill shall be free of muck; peat; clay; unstable soils; organic matter such as logs, stumps, trees, clippings and cuttings; any form of junk, rubbish, trash, liquid or solid wastes; and any form of debris that is subject to consolidation, disintegration, erosion or encourages the presence of insects, termites, or vermin. The type of fill within the rights-of-way shall be satisfactory to and meet with the approval of the city engineer who shall require soil tests of the backfill and the underlying material at the cost of the applicant and who shall require the development's project engineer to certify the type of material and method of placement. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-358. - Soils. 
(a)  The plan shall show the location and results of test borings of the subsurface condition of the tract to be developed. The tests shall be the type performed by the Soil Conservation Service including percolation characteristics and detailed soils data. 
(b)  When nonpervious soils (hardpan or other impervious soils) or unstable (peat, muck, etc.) materials are encountered, the plan shall reflect a satisfactory design to cope with such conditions. If the soil analysis reflects that the area contains hardpan or other impervious soils or contains peat, muck or other unstable materials, the city engineer shall require such additional design and construction as are necessary to ensure proper drainage and development of the area. The number of tests and their location shall be mutually determined by the applicant's engineer and the city engineer and shall be recorded as to location and result on the construction plans. All plans and improvements shall be compliant with section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection. 
(c)  Land which is subject to periodic flooding or which has unsuitable soil conditions shall to be subdivided until all water and soil hazards have been reasonably eliminated in relation to the purpose for which the land is to be used. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-359. - Erosion control. 
    Seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or other acceptable methods shall be performed as required to prevent undue erosion during all construction activities for a subdivision. Erosion, sedimentation control and shoreline protection measures stipulated in section 108-1 and articles III and IV of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection shall be carried out as applicable. The applicant shall be required to keep accumulations of sand and earth out of the curb, gutter, swales, and drainage ditches. Temporary siltation basins may be required during construction. Maintenance shall be provided by the applicant for the two-year period of the road guarantee and for each lot until final inspection is passed. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-360. - Land clearing and excavation. 
(a)  Land clearing, excavation, and fill permits as required by the Code of Ordinances shall be obtained from the building official or other designated staff prior to commencement of clearing, grading or filling work. Similarly, all requisite permits from the county, the state, the South Florida Water Management District, or the federal government shall be obtained and presented to the city prior to commencement of any clearing, filling or excavation. 
(b)  Applicants shall be required to clear all rights-of-way and to plan and construct all grades for streets, alleys, lots and other areas, in a manner which is consistent and compatible with all performance criteria of chapter 102; articles III, IV and V of chapter 108; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110, as stipulated, and all such plans and construction activities shall be consistent with surface water management requirements of article VIII of chapter 108 pertaining to surface water management. 
(c)  In the interest of preserving existing trees and other natural beauty, the planning board or other designated staff may vary the requirements of this division where aesthetic and environmental conditions will be enhanced but will not adversely affect property drainage of the area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-361. - Shoreline protection. 
    Bulkheads, piers and docks installed along the shoreline shall be installed under permit issued by the building official. Bulkheads shall not be constructed below the mean high water line unless permitted by the controlling federal or state agency. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-362. - Compliance required. 
    Any plans and improvements required in this division shall comply with all environmental performance criteria of article II of chapter 108 pertaining to site plan review procedures, including but not limited to preservation of wetlands and other environmentally sensitive areas; soil erosion, sedimentation control, and shoreline protection; preservation of wildlife habitats; and other related performance criteria. No development order approval shall occur until appropriate federal and state permits are issued. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(L)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-363-118-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 118-391. - Underground installation. 
(a)  Required for new subdivisions. New subdivisions shall be required to install underground utilities, including franchised utilities, power and light, telephone and telegraph, water, sewer, cable television, and wiring to streetlights and gas. 
(b)  Coordination of easements. Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities and shall be provided as prescribed by this chapter for the installation of underground utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance with the respective utility authority's rules and regulations. 
(c)  Waivers. The city engineer may waive the requirement for underground installation if the service to the adjacent area is overhead and it does not appear that further development in adjacent areas with underground utilities is possible. Any new service which is allowed by the waiver to be supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel that is convertible for underground utility service at a future date. 
(d)  Applicant's responsibility. The applicant shall make necessary cost and other arrangements for such underground installations with each of the persons furnishing utility service involved. 
(e)  Construction within easements. Utilities shall be constructed in easements as prescribed by this chapter. 
(f)  Utility installation. After the subgrade for a street has been completed, the remainder of the street right-of-way has been graded and before any road or street construction material is applied, all underground work for the water mains, sanitary sewers, gas mains, telephone, electrical power conduits, cable television and any other utilities with appurtenances and branches for surface connections shall be completely installed throughout the width of the street to the sidewalk area or provisions made so that the roadway or right-of-way will not be disturbed for utilities installations or service connections. All underground improvements so installed for the purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and backfilled and their locations identified. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(X)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-392. - Central water system. 
    A complete water distribution system connected to the city water system shall be provided for all new subdivisions. The design of the entire system shall be engineered and coordinated with the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority to comply with the authority's adopted design standards and shall conform to the state department of environmental protection, the fire protection requirements of the American Insurance Association, and accepted standards for municipal water supply and fire protection systems as prescribed by the National Fire Codes and the Fire Protection Handbook published by the National Fire Protection Association as exists or may be amended. Concurrency management criteria of chapter 94 must be met. The following are general requirements for central water systems: 
(1)  Water supply. The central water system shall connect to the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority water system. 
(2)  Distribution system. 
a.  The distribution system shall provide connections to each individual lot, to each public facility, to all required fire hydrants and fire protection systems and to median strips for irrigation where landscaped unless the median strips are irrigated by a separate system. Water mains shall be required in each street right-of-way and shall be looped except in culs-de-sac less than 300 feet long and cross streets not requiring service connections. 
b.  Plans for the central water system including fire protection facilities and appurtenances shall be submitted to the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority as well as the city engineer and fire marshal, for review and approval. 
c.  New water systems shall be designed and constructed for an economic life of not less than 20 years. Central water systems shall comply with the following requirements according to the type of development or subdivision served as prescribed in this chapter. 
(3)  Waivers. Requirements for attachment to an approved water system may be waived only when the waiver is recommended by the planning board as placing an undue hardship on the builder when the subdivision consists of six lots or less and when the city commission approves a preliminary plan including the waiver. The requirement for fire hydrants may be waived temporarily in areas where adequate mains are not available, but in that case the builder must place in escrow an amount equal to the cost of the hydrants plus an additional 25 percent to provide for their connection as soon as adequate mains become available, and these funds may be used for no other purpose. In any case the distribution system shall comply with the requirements below. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-393. - Central wastewater systems. 
    Central wastewater collection, wastewater treatment and disposal systems shall be provided for all new subdivisions. The system shall meet concurrency management criteria of chapter 94 and the following criteria: 
(1)  General requirements. The central wastewater system shall be designed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, conforming to acceptable standards of sound practices for wastewater collection systems and shall conform to all requirements of the state department of environmental protection and any other wastewater permitting authorities and shall conform to the fire protection requirements of the American Insurance Association requirements. The entire wastewater collection system must be engineered and coordinated with the city's comprehensive plan. The appurtenances to the system shall be equal to or shall exceed the minimum requirements of the city and applicable state statutes. New sewer systems shall be designed and constructed for an economic life of not less than 20 years. 
(2)  Submittal requirements. Upon submittal of construction plans for a central system as prescribed by this chapter, the design engineer shall supply data, calculations and analyses showing important features affecting design, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The number of units, bedrooms, other domestic wastewater generators. 
b.  The type of units and expected population or estimated flow of wastewater from any unit designed for use. 
c.  The number of proposed equivalent residential connections (ERC) to the system and the anticipated flow of sewage to the wastewater treatment plant computed in accordance with current city criteria. 
d.  Any other meaningful information necessary to arrive at estimates of amounts and character of wastewater pertinent to the design. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-394. - Easements. 
    Utility easements, including water, sewer, electric, telephone, and gas and drainage, shall be provided in new subdivisions as follows: 
(1)  Applicants are encouraged to install utilities in the public right-of-way. Easements for utilities along rear lot lines and, where deemed necessary, along side lot lines, of a minimum width of eight feet, shall be provided as required for proposed utility installation, maintenance, or as may be required. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots, where necessary, for the extension of main sewer or other utilities or where multiple utilities and water and sewer lines are located within the same easement. Side lot easements may be decreased to ten feet when serving a single electric or telephone utility. Specific easements widths shall be coordinated with CES and the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority. 
(2)  A drainage easement shall be provided when necessary. This easement shall be of sufficient width to provide adequately for watercourses, drainageways, channels, pipes, culverts, or streams, and access to permit maintenance of the drainage easement. 
(3)  Swales shall be permitted within subdivisions; storm sewers shall be covered and open ditches shall be permitted across undeveloped land only as an outlet into an established watercourse. This subsection is subject, however, to the following: 
a.  The current requirements of the state department of environmental protection and South Florida Water Management District. 
b.  Submission of acceptable hydraulic calculations. 
c.  Approval of the city engineer. 
d.  Approval of the state department of environmental protection and the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(K)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-395. - Individual wastewater system. 
    Individual wastewater systems consisting of pipes, tanks or treatment devices and subsurface absorption fields or other devices shall meet the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of all requisite federal, state and regional permitting agency regulations and shall be designed and located to facilitate a convenient and economical connection to a future central sewer system. Individual systems shall not be allowed where connection to the city's central wastewater system is feasible, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(N)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-396-118-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 118-421. - Scope. 
    All residential development shall provide an equitable dedication of land for public park purposes and/or fees in lieu thereof pursuant to the standards stated in this division and shall comply with concurrency management standards of chapter 94. The standards provided in this division are stipulated to implement policies within the parks and recreation element. The standards shall apply to all residential applications for subdivision approval. No property shall be assessed twice for respective subdivision plat applications unless a rezoning subsequently increases the density permitted on a respective parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-422. - Requirements. 
    As a condition of development, the applicant shall dedicate land to the city, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination thereof, at the option of the city, for park and recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula described in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-423. - General standard. 
    Five acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing in the city shall be devoted for park and recreational purposes. To determine park and recreational land to be dedicated within the service area of proposed developments, analysis shall consider available facilities inventoried in the city comprehensive plan, Data Inventory and Analysis, and application of the technical standards established in section 118-427. Prior to dedicating such land, the applicant shall provide the city with an environmental audit performed by a qualified engineer evidencing that the property does not contain any contaminated or hazardous materials defined by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-424. - Fees in lieu of land dedication. 
    If it is demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of the city commission that no park or recreation facility can be located in whole or part within the proposed development to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or if the proposed development shall consist of 50 dwelling units or less, the applicant may, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the fair market value of the land which would have been required to be dedicated as defined in section 118-427. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-425. - Use of money. 
    The money collected as provided in section 118-424 shall be paid to the city and placed in a reserve account within a special fund. Monies within the reserve account shall be used and expended solely for the acquisition, improvement, expansion or implementation of city parks and recreational facilities. The monies and accrued interest from fees paid for any given development shall be used solely for acquisition of parkland or facilities reasonably related to serving such development. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-426. - Determination of fair market value. 
    Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication as provided in this division, the value of the property shall be determined by the value per acre assigned by the county property appraiser on the most recent tax roll or the sale price at the most recent sale of the property, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-427. - Technical standards for determining dedication requirement. 
    The technical standards for determining the dedication requirement are as follows: 
(1)  Dedication formula. The following formula shall be used: 
Average number of persons per dwelling unit × 5 acres per 1,000 persons = Acreage requirement per dwelling unit 
Example for a single-family dwelling unit: 
U.S. 1990 Census (Key West) 2.31 persons/unit × 5 acres per 1,000 persons = 0.01155 acres/unit 
(2)  Dedication table. The following table is derived from subsection (1) of this section and shall be applied to each development: 
1990 U.S. Census (Key West) average household size per dwelling unit is 2.31; 
Acreage requirement per dwelling unit is 0.01155. 
(3)  Land dedication or fee. The city commission shall determine whether to accept land dedication or require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, after consideration of the following: 
a.  Topography, vegetation, hydrology, access and location of land in the development available for dedication; 
b.  Size shall be five acres or larger with a shape and natural features adaptive to passive or active recreation; 
c.  Availability of potential alternate parklands and location of previously acquired park property; and 
d.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Credit for private recreational space and facilities. The city commission may grant full or partial credit for private recreational space and facilities pursuant to the standards established in this section. Such credit shall be applied against the total dedication requirements for parks and recreation pursuant to this section. These guidelines and standards are established in order to ensure that private recreational spaces and facilities provide an appropriate range of recreational opportunities for residents of proposed developments: 
a.  The yards, setbacks, and other open areas required by land development regulations and building codes shall not be included in the computation of private recreational space and facilities. 
b.  The private ownership and maintenance is adequately provided by recorded, written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions. 
c.  The use of the private recreational space and facilities is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owner's property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city commission. 
d.  The proposed private recreational space and facilities are reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, vegetation, hydrology, access and location. 
e.  Environmental preserves which have boardwalks, nature trails, water access, or other usable recreational features may count for up to ten percent of the required dedication. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(J)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-428-118-455. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 118-456. - Curbs. 
    Curbs or combined curbs and gutters shall be constructed along all streets in a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(I)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-457. - Alleys. 
    Alleys shall be required along rear lot lines of commercial and industrial subdivisions and shall be 20 feet in width. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts. No dead-end alley shall be permitted. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. Fire lanes shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-458. - Culverts. 
    In a subdivision culverts shall be of such size to provide adequate drainage opening and sufficient length to extend eight feet on each side beyond the edge of the pavement of the street. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-459. - Median strips andentranceways. 
(a)  Median strips. Median strips which are part of a dedicated or deeded right-of-way in a subdivision may not be utilized for any purpose other than by the city or a public utility. Where an applicant desires or is required to beautify a median strip in a subdivision, he may do so by placing grass, shrubs, and/or approved species of trees within the median strip in accordance with the city landscape ordinance in this subpart B and subpart A of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Subdivision entranceways. Subdivision entranceways consisting of walls, fences, gates, rock piles or the like are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a dedicated or deeded right-of-way. Entranceways, if divided, shall be divided by a raised or landscaped median strip and shall be not less than two lanes each 12 or more feet wide. Decorative entranceways shall be constructed upon plots of land adjacent to the right-of-way in compliance with the land development regulations and building codes and placed so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. A guardhouse located so as not to create a traffic hazard may be constructed at the entrance to a development having private streets. 
Where an applicant is specifically permitted by the city to construct decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping within the right-of-way of any street, the applicant or community homeowners' association shall provide an adequate bond to guarantee maintenance for a specified period and to provide for removal for such structures and for landscaping at the end of such period on order by the city for cause. The city shall not accept any liability or responsibility for maintenance for decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping in rights-of-way. Such improvements shall be designed in such a manner so as to not obstruct desirable visibility or restrict turning movements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(P)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-460. - Streets. 
    All streets and related facilities required to serve the proposed subdivision shall be constructed and paved by the applicant pursuant to specifications stipulated in this chapter. The construction shall consist of but not be limited to street grading, subgrading stabilization, base preparation and surface course along with drainage as required under this chapter. All roadway improvements shall comply with concurrency management in chapter 94. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-461. - Street layout. 
    The proposed subdivision street layout shall be coordinated with the adopted comprehensive plan as adopted or as may be amended and with the street system of the surrounding area. Consideration shall be given to existing and planned streets, relation to topographical conditions, relation to public convenience and safety and their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-462. - Costs of paving streets. 
    No part of the cost of paving streets in any undeveloped subdivision shall be paid by the city. Where access streets to a subdivision are not adequately paved to handle the anticipated traffic, arrangements for paving the access streets should be made with the city prior to acceptance of the final plat by the developer. All paving installed in and adjacent to these subdivisions shall be at the entire cost of the applicant and shall be pursuant to the sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-463. - Streets adjoining unsubdivided land. 
    When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, new streets which, in the opinion of the city engineer, the planning board, and/or the city commission, are required to serve the abutting unsubdivided land shall be designed as collector streets and shall be carried to the boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided. Local streets, when extended to the boundary of the tract, shall be designed in a manner that will discourage through traffic. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-464. - Impact of future traffic circulation map series. 
    The new subdivision shall provide for the incorporation and compatible development of present and future streets as generally delineated on the future traffic circulation map series adopted by the city commission under the comprehensive plan ordinance, when such present or future streets are affected by the proposed subdivision. Notwithstanding, where the city engineer and/or the planning board recommend and the city commission determines that there is a need for incorporating a new or realigned major thoroughfare based on characteristics of specific development proposals as well as changed conditions since the adoption of the comprehensive plan, the city shall require subdivision applicants to conform to the newly prescribed road improvement. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-465. - Traffic analysis. 
    A subdivision preliminary plat shall include preparation of a traffic impact analysis pursuant to the concurrency management criteria in chapter 94, if the proposed subdivision is projected to generate a traffic flow above the threshold therein defined. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes, capacity of street systems proposed or affected by the development, and the phasing of improvements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-466. - Street right-of-way characteristics. 
(a)  Street improvements shall be designed in a manner compatible with design characteristics of the city's future traffic circulation system and the city's minimum right-of-way standards as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum Right-of-Way Width 
(feet) Arterial roadways 80-90 Collector streets: Major 60-80 Minor 50-60 Local streets 40-60 (if curb and gutter)  
(b)  The city shall preserve existing rights-of-way and shall enforce standards requiring dedication of roadways for which the need is generated by new development. 
(c)  These design parameters may be adjusted based on projected traffic-carrying capacities of specific developments and application of accepted principles and practices of traffic engineering and design of facilities. The specific design features shall be recommended for approval by the city engineer prior to acceptance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(6)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-467. - Dead-end streets; culs-de-sac. 
    Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets in a subdivision shall provide a terminal turnaround having a radius of not less than 40 feet. Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 700 feet in length exclusive of the turnaround. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(7)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-468. - Temporary cul-de-sac turnaround streets. 
    In a subdivision streets that terminate temporarily, and thereby take on the character of a dead-end street, shall be provided with a temporary terminal turnaround having a radius of not less than 40 feet. When one or more temporary turnarounds are shown, the following note shall be included on the plat; "The area on this plat designated as `temporary turnaround' will be constructed and used as other streets on the subdivision until (_______) is/are extended to (_______) at which time the land in the temporary turnaround area will be abandoned for street purposes and will revert to adjoining lot owners in accordance with specific provisions in their respective deeds." 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(8)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-469. - Construction in muck areas. 
    The design of proposed streets in a subdivision in excessive muck areas shall be considered on an individual basis. All plans submitted for construction in such areas shall be certified by a state-registered engineer. Prior to issuing a permit for such construction, the city engineer and planning board shall approve the engineered plan as submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(9)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-470. - Street grades. 
    All streets in a subdivision shall be graded to the appropriate grade to their full width with side slopes and fills where required. The grade of all streets at the crown shall be at least four feet above mean sea level. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(10)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-471. - Intersection of streets. 
    Street jogs at intersections with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet are prohibited in a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(11)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-472. - Marginal access streets. 
(a)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing limited access highway, freeway or arterial street, a marginal access street shall be required to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(b)  Wherever possible, all subdivision access roads shall be located at existing median openings. If a subdivision access road is not located at an existing median opening, the applicant's paving plan shall provide for construction of a median opening, where permitted, or shall provide for the modification of existing openings, where required, at no cost to the city. The design of subdivision access roads shall comply with the requirements of the jurisdiction of the highway in which the median is located. 
(c)  The design of access streets shall, where required, provide for acceleration, deceleration, storage, channelization, and drainage modifications as are necessary to comply with the required standards of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(12)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-473. - Local streets. 
    In a subdivision local streets shall be so laid out that use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(13)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-474. - Half streets. 
    Half or partial streets shall not be permitted in a subdivision. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be required to be dedicated and constructed within such tract. A proposed subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street which does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this chapter shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of such street so that the minimum right-of-way requirements of this chapter are fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(14)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-475. - Street names. 
    Extensions of existing streets in a subdivision shall bear the same name of the existing street. In no case shall the name of a proposed new street, which is not part of an existing facility, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(15)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-476. - Alignment, intersections and radii. 
(a)  Alignment. The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of the existing or platted streets into adjoining areas or their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided insofar as they may be deemed necessary by the city commission for public requirement. The street and alley arrangement shall be such as not to cause a hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. 
(b)  Intersections. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street right-of-way shall intersect another at an angle of less than 80 degrees unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. All intersections shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in accordance with the current edition of American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards. Intersections with major streets should be located no less than 800 feet apart, centerline measurement. 
(c)  Radii. The point of curvature of any local street shall not be closer than 100 feet to the point of intersection. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to ensure safe sight distance and driver comfort, but never less than a minimum centerline radius of 100 feet. Property lines at street intersections shall have a 25-foot or greater radius, and street pavement radii shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(16)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-477. - Private streets. 
    A private street as a principal means of access to individually owned lots shall be prohibited in a subdivision. This requirement may not apply to the provision of roadways within shopping centers, industrial or wholly commercial districts, apartment projects, townhouse projects, condominiums, and other developments under single ownership. In such cases, the owner shall be responsible for the construction, maintenance, and control of the private streets. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(17)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-478. - Standards for roadway section. 
    A properly prepared subgrade and an approved road base and wearing surface shall be provided for all streets in a subdivision. Subgrade shall be adequately compacted and bonded prior to treatment and shall be stabilized from curb to curb. After subgrading streets, there shall be given one course penetration treatment of emulsified asphalt and local aggregate to the full width of the street and an additional course to the middle 22 feet of such street, all to the specifications and requirements of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(18)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-479. - Street lighting. 
(a)  The street lighting requirements in this section shall apply to major subdivisions and planned redevelopment and development districts. The city engineer shall determine whether streetlights shall be required for minor subdivisions on a case-by-case basis. The applicant shall install and be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of streetlights in accordance with this chapter, and the streetlights, poles, fixed equipment, and any and all fixtures and equipment germane to the subdivision development will be installed at no cost to the city. The city shall pay only energy costs associated with the operation of the streetlights installed in accordance with this chapter within subdivisions located within the city. 
(b)  Streetlights shall be installed at each street intersection, at midblock locations where the distance between intersections exceeds 900 feet, and at the end of each cul-de-sac. Such lights shall be required on interior streets and may be required on alleys, boundary streets, and access paths if the city commission finds that the anticipated frequency of usage makes such requirement reasonable for public safety and welfare. Wherever, in the opinion of the city engineer, a dangerous condition is created by sharp curves or irregularities in street alignment, additional lights shall be required. The streetlights and mounting poles shall be a type approved by the city engineer and shall be wired for underground service except where overhead service is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(U)(19)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-480. - Street markers. 
    Street name signs, of a type meeting the approval of and in locations designated by the city commission, shall be erected at all highway thoroughfares and street intersections in a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(V)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-481. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  This section shall apply to major subdivisions and planned redevelopment and development districts. The city engineer shall determine whether traffic control devices shall be required for minor subdivisions on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  The applicant shall install all required traffic control devices based on design requirements, including but not limited to traffic lights, information and warning signs, acceleration or deceleration lanes, lane delineators, and other necessary traffic control devices on all roads within and interfacing with the subdivision. A traffic impact analysis pursuant to chapter 94 pertaining to concurrency management, approved by the city engineer and the county, shall determine traffic light requirements. All control devices shall be consistent with the state department of transportation manual entitled "Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" as per F.S. § 316.131. If, at any time prior to final acceptance, an unforeseen need becomes apparent for signing, pavement markings, or other traffic controls that were not shown on the approved plans, the city reserves the right to require the additional traffic control devices in the interest of public safety and as a condition of city acceptance. 
Sec. 118-482. - Decorative entrances, structures, landscaping. 
    Where an applicant is specifically permitted by the city to construct decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping within the right-of-way of any street, the applicant or community homeowners' association shall provide adequate bond to guarantee maintenance for a specified period and to provide for removal for such structures and for landscaping at the end of such period on order by the city for cause. The city shall not accept any liability or responsibility for maintenance for decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping in rights-of-way. Such improvements shall be designated in such a manner so as to not obstruct desirable visibility or restrict turning movements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.2(W)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 118-483-118-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 118-511. - Administration of construction. 
    After submittal of the final plat and supplementary material for a proposed subdivision, an applicant may construct the required improvements subject to obtaining all required permits. The city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission shall be notified in advance of the date of commencement of such construction. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-512. - Surveillance. 
    Construction of improvements for a proposed subdivision shall be performed under the surveillance of and shall at all times be subject to review by the city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission. However, this in no way shall relieve the applicant and his engineer of the responsibility for close field coordination and final compliance with the approved plans, specifications and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-513. - Construction administration by state-registered engineer. 
    The applicant shall employ a state-registered engineer for complete administration of the construction of the required improvements for a proposed subdivision. The applicant shall require progress reports and final certification of the construction of the required improvements from such engineer be filed with the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-514. - Right of entry. 
    The city engineer shall have the right to enter upon the property for the purpose of inspecting the quality of materials and workmanship and reviewing the construction of required improvements for a proposed subdivision during the progress of such construction. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-515. - Progress reports. 
    During construction of improvements for a proposed subdivision, the applicant's engineer shall submit construction progress reports at points of progress prescribed by the city. The applicant's engineer shall coordinate joint reviews of the construction with the city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-516. - Stop work orders. 
    The chief administrative official or other duly appointed city official shall have the authority to stop the work upon failure of the applicant or his engineer to coordinate the construction of the required improvements as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-517. - Final inspections. 
    Upon completion of the required improvements for a proposed subdivision, the applicant's engineer shall give the city engineer or other duly authorized city staff with a required time period notice to make the final inspection of the required improvements, landscaping, and sign installations. The city engineer shall also have the authority to withhold or deny approval of certificates of occupancy relative to buildings and/or structures of a subdivision until the construction and installation of required improvements of that subdivision have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the land development regulations as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.7(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-518. - Completion certificate. 
    The required improvements for a proposed subdivision shall not be considered complete until a completion certificate along with the final project records, including as-built drawings, have been furnished to, reviewed and approved by the city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission. The certificate shall be certified by the applicant's engineer stating that the required improvements were installed under his responsible direction and that the improvements conform with the approved construction plans and this chapter. The applicant's engineer shall also furnish a copy of each of the construction plans on a high quality, durable reproducible material acceptable to the city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission, showing the original design in comparison to the actual finished work and a copy of the measurements, tests and reports made on the work and material during the progress of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-519. - Conditions for release of applicant from bond. 
    As a condition for the final release of the applicant from his bond or for the release of any cash securities deposited with the administrative official as required in this chapter, the following must be furnished: 
(1)  A statement from the applicant's engineer that all work has been completed in strict accordance with the approved development plan and appropriate specifications; 
(2)  Evidence by reference to plat book and page that the approved final plat has been filed; 
(3)  A statement from the city engineer that he has found the work to be in accordance with the general provisions of the development plan; 
(4)  The submission by the applicant's engineer to the city engineer of a complete set of as-built drawings together with operating manuals and parts lists for any mechanical installations made; 
(5)  A statement by the applicant's surveyor verifying completion of all required survey work and installation of all required permanent reference monuments; and 
(6)  A release from the contractor, engineer, surveyor or any other person performing any service or furnishing any material for the subdivision that he will not file a lien on the subdivision for nonpayment of service or material charges. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-520. - Time extensions. 
    All required improvements for a subdivision project or each phase thereof shall be completed within a required time period from the date of preliminary plat approval. Time extensions for demonstrated good cause may be granted by the city commission upon the recommendation of the city engineer. The applicant shall present a written request for extension to the office of the administrative official. Each time extension shall not exceed the time period required. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.10), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-521. - Acceptance and maintenance of required improvements. 
(a)  Workmanship and material agreement. The applicant shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the required improvements in a subdivision against defect in workmanship and materials for one year after acceptance of such improvements by the city commission. Such agreement shall be submitted to the administrative official along with the completion certificate and project records. 
(b)  Procedure for accepting dedications. The dedication of public space, parks, streets, rights-of-way, easements or the like on the plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the city. The applicant shall apply to the city for acceptance of required improvements by the city commission. No dedication shall be accepted by the city commission until the city engineer has approved the environmental audit required pursuant to section 118-423. The acceptance of the dedication shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission. Such acceptance shall occur only upon adoption of resolution by the city commission which shall accept the subject dedications at such time as all improvements meet or exceed the standards set forth by this chapter. The applicant's engineer shall furnish to the administrative official in writing a sealed and signed certificate stating that the required improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plan and comply with this chapter and all other applicable codes. The city engineer shall receive notice in adequate time to arrange for inspection prior to the beginning of construction and at appropriate staged intervals thereafter. The city engineer may require laboratory or field tests as well as staged inspections at the expense of the applicant when appropriate. Any failure of work or materials to conform with the plans and specifications or failure to notify the city in time for indicated inspections shall be cause for the city commission to reject the facilities. 
(c)  Recommendation of city engineer. The city engineer upon satisfactory completion; receipt of the applicant's engineer's completion certificate, affidavits from all contractors and others who furnished goods and services for the required improvements acknowledging payment in full therefor; and receipt of the agreement shall certify that the applicant has complied with all of the sections of this chapter and shall recommend to the city commission the acceptance of the dedications and, when applicable, the maintenance of the required improvements. 
(d)  Acceptance by city commission. Upon recommendations by the city engineer, the city commission, by resolution, shall approve the subdivision, the dedications on the plat and the maintenance of responsibilities of the required improvements. 
(e)  Applicant's failure to complete required improvements. Procedures upon the applicant's failure to complete the required improvements are as follows: 
(1)  Premature recording of plats or where applicant fails to complete required improvements. When a plat has been recorded and the applicant fails to complete the required improvements as required by this chapter, the city commission shall complete the required improvements under the guarantees provided by the applicant. In such case, the city commission shall direct the city engineer and/or the city attorney to call upon the guarantees to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements. Legal notice of such action shall be deemed to have been duly served upon posting via certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon the completion of construction of the required improvements, the city engineer shall report to the city commission and the city commission shall accept by resolution the dedications and maintenance responsibility as indicated on the plat. In such cases, the remaining guarantees posted by the applicant shall be retained for a period of one year after completion in lieu of the agreement. Any defects occurring during this period shall be repaired using funds remaining in the guarantee. 
(2)  Failure to record plat. When an applicant has elected to install the required improvements prior to recording of the plat and fails to complete such improvements within the time limitations of this chapter, all approvals of the subdivision shall be null and void, and the land shall revert to its original state. No reference shall be made to the plat with respect to the sale of lots or issuance of building permits, unless and until the plat has been resubmitted with all of the supplementary material and approvals as prescribed by this chapter have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.11), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-522. - Construction methods. 
    The construction methods and all materials used in the improvements required by this chapter shall comply with applicable specifications of the city approved by the city manager and those methods and materials prescribed by the following: 
(1)  The current state department of transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  The American Waterworks Association for water improvements construction; 
(3)  The Water Environment Federation for wastewater facilities construction; 
(4)  The state department of environmental protection; and 
(5)  The South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 118-523. - Measurements and tests. 
    During construction of improvements for a proposed subdivision, the applicant's engineer shall make such measurements, field tests and laboratory tests or cause them to be made to certify that the work and materials conform with the approved development plans and the sections of this chapter. The city engineer or other representative designated by the city commission may require, at his discretion, tests and measurements which he deems necessary and which shall be performed at the expense of the applicant or his engineer. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(4-19.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Chapter 122 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any land development or zoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; alcoholic beverages proximity to churches, schools, cemeteries and funeral homes, § 18-28; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 54; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 82; historic preservation, ch. 102; performance standards, ch. 106; planning and development, ch. 108; resources protection, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 122-1-122-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONCONFORMITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 122-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acquiring authority means the governmental entity proposing to acquire private property for a public transportation or other public purpose, pursuant to eminent domain action or by voluntary conveyance. Acquiring authorities include, but are not limited to, Monroe County, the City of Key West, and the Florida Department of Transportation ("FDOT"). 
    Cure plan means a site plan submitted by an acquiring authority or a private property owner for a site subject to an eminent domain action or a voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. The cure plan shall show proposed changes to structures or other features of the remainder parcel necessary to make the remainder parcel comply with the applicable land development regulations or, comply to the degree feasible. 
    Dwelling unit. See section 86-9. 
    Eminent domain action means one or a series of actions taken by an acquiring authority to obtain fee simple title to all or some part of privately held real property for a public use. 
    Eminent domain/public purpose waiver means authorization from the City of Key West for the continued use and enjoyment of a remainder parcel subsequent to an eminent domain action or a voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. An eminent domain/public purpose waiver shall not be issued where the remainder parcel and the existing structures located thereon conform with the applicable zoning district land development regulations as of the date that title transferred to an acquiring authority under an eminent domain action or through a voluntary conveyance. 
    Noncomplying building or structure means any building or other structure, for which the use is lawful (permitted or nonconforming), but the building or other structure does not comply with all applicable sections of the land development regulations, including, but not limited to, size and dimension regulations, off-street parking requirements, landscape requirements, nuisance abatement standards, or height requirements, either on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or as a result of any subsequent amendment. 
    Nonconforming density means the number of dwelling or living units per acre greater than the number allowed by the land development regulations, which were legally established or licensed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of a building or structure or a tract of land which does not, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or amendment thereto, conform to any one of the current permitted uses of the zoning district in which it is located, but which was legally established in accordance with the zoning in effect at the time of its inception or which use predates all zoning codes and which use has not changed or been abandoned. This definition shall not operate to make legal an unlicensed transient rental accommodation located in a residential structure. 
    Owner of a remainder parcel means the owner in fee simple title of a remainder parcel who is a successor in interest to a private property owner's interest in the remainder parcel; or, the owner in fee simple title of a remainder parcel whose title to the remainder parcel is derived from the private property owner or the private property owner's successors in title. 
    Parent tract means the parcel of land that existed prior to an acquiring authority's acquisition of some portion of the parcel through eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. 
    Private property owner means the owner in fee simple title of a parent tract. 
    Remainder parcel means that portion of the parent tract remaining in private ownership following an eminent domain action or a voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. 
    Voluntary conveyance means the transfer of title to any portion of a parent tract by the private property owner to an acquiring authority for public transportation or other public purpose in lieu of an eminent domain action. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 3, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 12-18, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-27. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to permit a nonconforming use and a noncomplying structure or building to be continued, to be reconstructed or replaced, or to be repaired or maintained under certain conditions, but not to encourage their expansion. Nonconforming densities may also be continued, reconstructed, replaced, repaired or maintained, although a distinction is made for reconstruction or replacement purposes between transient and permanent residential densities. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 4, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 122-28. - Replacement or reconstruction. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies both to voluntary reconstruction or replacement of dwelling units and involuntary reconstruction or replacement of dwelling units. Nothing in this section is intended to supersede applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements for elevation in flood zones. 
(b)  Dwelling units (residential). Residential dwelling units may be replaced at their existing nonconforming density, location and three-dimensional building envelope. Dwelling units involuntarily destroyed do not require variances to be reconstructed or replaced. If a voluntary reconstruction or replacement occurs and if the dwelling units exist or existed in a noncomplying building or structure, the reconstruction or replacement that increases the nonconformity of the building or structure shall require a variance granted by the planning board. In a voluntary reconstruction of a structure on a corner lot, the property owner must apply to the planning board for all necessary setback variances. All noncomplying accessory structures to the principal building or structure (e.g., a shed, pool, fence, etc., but not including a condominium clubhouse) shall also require a variance in order to be enlarged, reconstructed or replaced, either voluntarily or involuntarily. If a proposed reconstruction or replacement would not otherwise require a variance but would add a new building or structure to the site to accommodate allowed density, a variance shall be required for the additional building or structure. A residential building in which one or more units hold a residential transient use business tax receipt shall be deemed residential for the purposes of this section. Variances which would increase density or intensity beyond that maximum allowed on the particular property or lot by the land development regulations shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Dwelling units (transient). Transient dwelling units may be replaced at their existing nonconforming density so long as the reconstruction or replacement complies with all zoning district regulations, review procedures and performance criteria contained in the land development regulations. No variances shall be granted to accommodate such reconstruction or replacement; provided, however, that a variance may be granted to setbacks only if existing setback regulations would create undue hardship. 
(d)  Properties without dwelling units. For a proposed reconstruction or replacement of a property without dwelling units, where that property is either a nonconforming use or a noncomplying building or structure, (i) if the property is involuntarily destroyed, reconstruction or replacement does not require a variance; and (ii) if voluntarily destroyed to the extent that reconstruction or replacement would exceed 50 percent of the property's appraised or assessed value, the applicant must apply to the planning board for a variance. 
(e)  Mixed use properties. If a property contains both a dwelling unit and a commercial use, its reconstruction or replacement shall be governed, separately, under each applicable subsection set forth in this section. 
(f)  Historic district. Notwithstanding any other subsection contained in this section, if a noncomplying building or structure is a contributing building or structure according to the historic architectural review commission (HARC) and it is involuntarily destroyed, such building or structure may be reconstructed or replaced without a variance so long as it is to be rebuilt in the three-dimensional footprint of the original building and built in the historic vernacular as approved by the historic architectural review commission. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. With respect to subsections (a) through (f) of this section, the development review committee and the planning board, in evaluating petitions for variance, shall balance the need to protect life and property with the need to preserve the economic base of the community. Under no circumstances shall a voluntarily or involuntarily destroyed nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure be replaced to a degree or level that increases or expands the prior existing nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 5, 6-6-2000; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 08-04, § 24, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-18, § 3, 10-16-2013) 
Sec. 122-29. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  Generally. Any building or structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming density or nonconforming use may be repaired and maintained as provided in this section. If repair or maintenance shall exceed the criteria set forth in this section, renovation of the building or structure shall be governed by section 122-28. 
(b)  Residential or transient dwelling units. For residential or transient dwelling units, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months for repairs and maintenance to an extent not exceeding 66 percent of the current assessed or appraised value. 
(c)  Property without dwelling units or mixed use (commercial). For property without dwelling units or mixed use (commercial), work may be done in any period for 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs and maintenance to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the current assessed or appraised value. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 6, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 122-30. - Abandonment of nonconforming use. 
    If a nonconforming use ceases, except when government action impedes access to the premises, any and every future use of the building or structure and/or premises shall be in conformity with the use sections of the land development regulations. All material and equipment associated with the abandoned nonconforming use shall be completely removed from the premises by its owner. No new structure or addition that does not conform to the requirements of this article shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when such use has ceased for a period of 24 months. If a dispute occurs with the city about whether a use has been abandoned, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing before the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 7, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-04, § 25, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 122-31. - Noncomplying lots or building sites of record. 
(a)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are allowed, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any legal nonconforming single lot that is in existence on January 1, 1994, and that is in different ownership from the adjoining property. This subsection shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, depth or width, provided that all other zoning requirements shall apply. 
(b)  If two or more adjoining lots or portions of lots in single ownership on January 1, 1994, do not meet the requirements for building site width, depth and area as established by this article, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold that does not meet building site width, depth and area requirements, nor shall any division of the parcel be made that leaves remaining any lot with substandard width, depth, area, parking, open space or stormwater retention. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection, two or more adjoining lots or building sites shall not be considered to be an undivided parcel, and may be sold or used for single-family dwellings, if allowed by applicable district regulations, so long as each lot or building site is at least 75 percent of the minimum lot size of the applicable district regulations and is not otherwise required to provide required parking for the adjacent parcel. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 8, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 122-32. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  A nonconforming use, nonconforming density or a noncomplying building or structure may be continued, subject to this article. 
(b)  A casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land, building or structure shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, nonconforming density or noncomplying building or structure. 
(c)  Should any noncomplying building or structure be moved for any reason from its location, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations or the zoning district of its new location. 
(d)  A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity. This prohibition shall include but not be limited to the extension of a nonconforming use within a building or structure or to any other building or structure. 
(e)  A nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use if the planning board finds that: 
(1)  The new use is equally or more appropriate to the zoning district; and 
(2)  The change of use would not intensify the use of the premises by increasing the need for parking facilities; increasing vehicular traffic to the neighborhood; increasing noise, dust, fumes or other environmental hazards; or by having an adverse impact on drainage. 
(f)  This article shall apply to signs, consistent with chapter 114. 
(g)  Enlargement and extensions: Nonconforming structures which are used in a manner conforming to the provisions of this chapter may be enlarged or expanded provided that the existing nonconformity is not further increased, nor any new nonconformity created. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 9, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-04, § 26, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-18, § 4, 10-16-2013) 
Sec. 122-33. - Eminent domain/public purpose waiver. 
    An eminent domain/public purpose waiver is intended to provide private property owners and owners of remainder parcels a viable and fair alternative to the adverse impact on their real property, as a result of an eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance to an acquiring authority. It allows the continued use of the remainder parcel in a manner similar to its pre-acquisition, pre-taking, or pre-conveyance condition. Waivers provided pursuant to this section 122-33 can be obtained for nonconforming lots and structures. Waivers cannot be granted for nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Vacant parcels, whether conforming or nonconforming lots, shall be eligible for an eminent domain/public purpose waiver from land development regulations including, but not limited to, minimum lot size, setbacks, parking, open space, pervious versus impervious area, density, floor area ratios, landscaping and landscape buffers, and signage setbacks, pursuant to sections 122-33(c), (d), and (e). 
(2)  Developed parcels. Where an eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose reduces the lot size and creates a nonconforming remainder parcel but does not require the relocation of site features, said parcel shall be eligible for an eminent domain/public purpose waiver from land development regulations including, but not limited to, minimum lot size, setbacks, parking, open space, pervious versus impervious area, floor area ratios, density, landscaping and landscape buffers, and signage setbacks, pursuant to sections 122-33(c), (d) and (e). 
(3)  Developed parcels. Where an eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose requires the relocation of site features including, but not limited to, buildings, parking spaces, landscaping, stormwater facilities, dumpsters, light poles and signs, such a parcel shall be eligible for an eminent domain/public purpose waiver, pursuant to sections 122-33(c) and (e). 
(b)  An acquiring authority, a private property owner, and an owner of a remainder parcel are each hereby granted the authority to apply for a waiver from the land development regulations on a remainder parcel that has resulted or will result from an eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. The application may be made prior to or after the acquiring authority has obtained title to some part of the parent tract. The city planner shall have authority to grant eminent domain/public purpose waivers pursuant to sections 122-33(c), (d) and (e). 
(c)  Procedure for an acquiring authority or private property owner to apply for an eminent domain/public purpose waiver. 
(1)  An acquiring authority or a private property owner may apply in writing to the city planner for a waiver pursuant to sections 122-33(c) and (e). The applicable fee, established by resolution, shall be submitted with the following documents: 
a.  An as-built drawing of the parent tract and a legal description of the portion to be acquired by or transferred to the acquiring authority and the remainder parcel shall be submitted for those circumstances described in sections 122-33(a)(1), (2) and (3) above. The as-built drawing must show the parent tract and the remainder parcel with the proposed changes to the site including, but not limited to, buildings, parking, landscaping, stormwater facilities, topographic data and adjacent right-of-way; and 
b.  A site plan (a cure plan as defined herein) showing the parent tract and the remainder parcel with the proposed changes to the site including, but not limited to, buildings, parking, landscaping, stormwater facilities, topographic data and adjacent right-of-way. Submittal of a cure plan shall not be necessary on a vacant parcel but shall be required for those parcels described in section 122-33(a)(3) above. 
(2)  If an application for a waiver is submitted by an acquiring authority, the private property owner shall be notified via certified mail (return receipt requested) by the city planner within ten days of the application submittal date. Likewise if the private property owner applies for a waiver, the acquiring authority shall be notified via certified mail (return receipt requested) by the city planner within ten days of the application submittal date. 
(3)  The city planner shall grant or deny a waiver pursuant to section 122-33(c) in accordance with the standards set forth in section 122-33(e) below. A certified letter (return receipt requested) shall be issued within 30 days to the acquiring authority and the private property owner following the decision. The private property owner shall not be required to accept the waiver or implement a cure plan, as approved by the city planner. 
(d)  Procedure for an owner of a remainder parcel to apply for an eminent domain/public purpose waiver. 
(1)  An owner of a remainder parcel may apply in writing to the city planner for a waiver pursuant to sections 122-33(d) and (e). The applicable fee, established by resolution, shall be submitted with the following documents: 
a.  An as-built drawing depicting the remainder parcel and that portion of the parent tract previously acquired by or transferred to the acquiring authority following an eminent domain action or as a result of a voluntary conveyance shall be submitted for those circumstances described in section 122-33(a)(1) and (2) above; and 
b.  A certified copy of the recorded document evidencing the acquiring authority's acquisition of a portion of the parent tract following an eminent domain action or a certified copy of the deed of conveyance wherein the private property owner conveyed a portion of the parent tract to the acquiring authority as a result of a voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. 
(2)  The city planner shall grant or deny a waiver pursuant to section 122-33(d) in accordance with the standards set forth in section 122-22(e) below. A certified letter (return receipt requested) shall be issued within 30 days to the owner of a remainder parcel following the decision. 
(e)  Standards for issuance of eminent domain/public purpose waivers. 
(1)  If an existing lot, parcel or structure becomes nonconforming (or an existing nonconformity becomes less conforming) as a result of a voluntary conveyance to an acquiring authority or an eminent domain action, a waiver may be granted by the city planner, provided a determination is made by the city planner that: 
a.  The requested waiver will not adversely affect safety, aesthetic or environmental conditions of neighboring properties; and 
b.  The requested waiver shall not adversely affect the safety of pedestrians or operations of motor vehicles; and 
c.  The requested waiver will not encourage or promote the continuation of existing uses of the property which have been or will be rendered unfeasible or impractical due to the impacts of the taking, conveyance, and/or construction of the roadway or other facility including, but not limited to, aesthetic, visual noise, dust, vibration safety, land use compatibility, environmental or other impacts. 
(Ord. No. 12-18, § 2, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 122-34. - Status of parcels during or after acquisition by eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. 
(a)  Where a waiver is issued pursuant to section 122-33(c) and (d), the waiver shall become effective and the remainder parcel shall be considered compliant to the degree feasible after an acquiring authority takes title to any portion of real property subject to an eminent domain action or voluntary conveyance for public transportation or other public purpose. 
(b)  Where a private property owner accepts a waiver on a remainder parcel that was also a vacant parcel or where no cure plan was necessary, the waiver shall remain valid and applicable to the remainder parcel indefinitely. However, future site plan and building permit approvals shall comply with all provisions in the land development regulations except those listed in the waiver. 
(c)  Where a private property owner accepts a waiver based upon a cure plan, the physical changes to the remainder parcel, specified in the cure plan, shall occur within two years of the waiver and cure plan being approved. Future site plan and building permit approvals shall comply with all provisions in the land development regulations except those listed in the waiver. 
(d)  Waivers issued pursuant to this section may be appealed in the manner provided for appeals of administrative interpretations of the city planner pursuant to section 90-430. 
(e)  The city planner shall cause waivers issued pursuant to this section to be filed with the city clerk and recorded in the public records of Monroe County no later than 30 days from the effective date of the waiver. 
(f)  The provisions of sections 122-33(c), (d), and (e) shall not be interpreted to allow for the continued existence of building or safety code violations that are determined to be an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(g)  The appropriate city staff are hereby authorized to take any necessary steps to enforce all applicable building and safety codes though the subject property is part of a pending governmental acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 12-18, § 3, 7-17-2012) 
Secs. 122-35-122-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 122-61. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that a conditional use shall only be permitted on specific sites where the proposed use may be adequately accommodated without generating adverse impacts on properties and land uses within the immediate vicinity. This article sets forth provisions and criteria for consideration of conditional uses on specific sites. Conditional uses shall be permitted only upon a finding that the proposed use satisfies this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-6.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-62. - Specific criteria for approval. 
(a)  Findings. A conditional use shall be permitted upon a finding by the planning board that the proposed use, application and, if applicable, development plan comply with the criteria specified in this section, including specific conditions established by the planning board and or the city commission during review of the respective application in order to ensure compliance with the comprehensive plan and land development regulations. If the proposed conditional use is a major development pursuant to sections 108-165 and 108-166, the city commission shall render the final determination pursuant to section 122-63. A conditional use shall be denied if the city determines that the proposed use does not meet the criteria provided in this section and, further, that the proposed conditional use is adverse to the public's interest. An application for a conditional use shall describe how the specific land use characteristics proposed meet the criteria described in subsection (c) of this section and shall include a description of any measures proposed to mitigate against possible adverse impacts of the proposed conditional use on properties in the immediate vicinity. 
(b)  Characteristics of use described. The following characteristics of a proposed conditional use shall be clearly described as part of the conditional use application: 
(1)  Scale and intensity of the proposed conditional use as measured by the following: 
a.  Floor area ratio; 
b.  Traffic generation; 
c.  Square feet of enclosed building for each specific use; 
d.  Proposed employment; 
e.  Proposed number and type of service vehicles; and 
f.  Off-street parking needs. 
(2)  On- or off-site improvement needs generated by the proposed conditional use and not identified on the list in subsection (b)(1) of this section including the following: 
a.  Utilities; 
b.  Public facilities, especially any improvements required to ensure compliance with concurrency management as provided in chapter 94; 
c.  Roadway or signalization improvements, or other similar improvements; 
d.  Accessory structures or facilities; and 
e.  Other unique facilities/structures proposed as part of site improvements. 
(3)  On-site amenities proposed to enhance site and planned improvements. Amenities including mitigative techniques such as: 
a.  Open space; 
b.  Setbacks from adjacent properties; 
c.  Screening and buffers; 
d.  Landscaped berms proposed to mitigate against adverse impacts to adjacent sites; and 
e.  Mitigative techniques for abating smoke, odor, noise, and other noxious impacts. 
(c)  Criteria for conditional use review and approval. Applications for a conditional use shall clearly demonstrate the following: 
(1)  Land use compatibility. The applicant shall demonstrate that the conditional use, including its proposed scale and intensity, traffic-generating characteristics, and off-site impacts are compatible and harmonious with adjacent land use and will not adversely impact land use activities in the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Sufficient site size, adequate site specifications, and infrastructure to accommodate the proposed use. The size and shape of the site, the proposed access and internal circulation, and the urban design enhancements must be adequate to accommodate the proposed scale and intensity of the conditional use requested. The site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate urban design amenities such as screening, buffers, landscaping, open space, off-street parking, efficient internal traffic circulation, infrastructure (i.e., refer to chapter 94 to ensure concurrency management requirements are met) and similar site plan improvements needed to mitigate against potential adverse impacts of the proposed use. 
(3)  Proper use of mitigative techniques. The applicant shall demonstrate that the conditional use and site plan have been designed to incorporate mitigative techniques needed to prevent adverse impacts to adjacent land uses. In addition, the design scheme shall appropriately address off-site impacts to ensure that land use activities in the immediate vicinity, including community infrastructure, are not burdened with adverse impacts detrimental to the general public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  Hazardous waste. The proposed use shall not generate hazardous waste or require use of hazardous materials in its operation without use of city-approved mitigative techniques designed to prevent any adverse impact to the general health, safety and welfare. The plan shall provide for appropriate identification of hazardous waste and hazardous material and shall regulate its use, storage and transfer consistent with best management principles and practices. No use which generates hazardous waste or uses hazardous materials shall be located in the city unless the specific location is consistent with the comprehensive plan and land development regulations and does not adversely impact wellfields, aquifer recharge areas, or other conservation resources. 
(5)  Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. A conditional use application shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable federal, state, county, and city laws and ordinances. Where permits are required from governmental agencies other than the city, these permits shall be obtained as a condition of approval. The city may affix other conditions to any approval of a conditional use in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(6)  Additional criteria applicable to specific land uses. Applicants for conditional use approval shall demonstrate that the proposed conditional use satisfies the following specific criteria designed to ensure against potential adverse impacts which may be associated with the proposed land use: 
a.  Land uses within a conservation area. Land uses in conservation areas shall be reviewed with emphasis on compliance with section 108-1 and articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection, especially compliance with criteria, including land use compatibility and mitigative measures related to wetland preservation, coastal resource impact analysis and shoreline protection, protection of marine life and fisheries, protection of flora and fauna, and floodplain protection. The size, scale and design of structures located within a conservation area shall be restricted in order to prevent and/or minimize adverse impacts on natural resources. Similarly, public uses should only be approved within a wetland or coastal high hazard area V zone when alternative upland locations are not feasible on an upland site outside the V zone. 
b.  Residential development. Residential development proposed as a conditional use shall be reviewed for land use compatibility based on compliance with divisions 2 through 14 of article IV and divisions 2 and 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to zoning district regulations, including size and dimension regulations impacting setbacks, lot coverage, height, mass of building, building coverage, and open space criteria. Land use compatibility also shall be measured by appearance, design, and land use compatibility criteria established in chapter 102; articles III, IV and V of chapter 108; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110; especially protection of historic resources; subdivision of land; access, internal circulation, and off-street parking; as well as possible required mitigative measures such as landscaping and site design amenities. 
c.  Commercial or mixed use development. Commercial or mixed use development proposed as a conditional use shall be reviewed for land use compatibility based on compliance with divisions 2 through 14 of article IV and divisions 2 and 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to zoning district regulations, including size and dimension regulations impacting floor area ratio, setbacks, lot coverage, height, mass of buildings, building coverage, and open space criteria. Land use compatibility also shall be measured by appearance, design, and land use compatibility criteria established in chapter 102; articles I, II, IV and V of chapter 108; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110; especially protection of historic resources; subdivision of land; access, pedestrian access and circulation; internal vehicular circulation together with access and egress to the site, and off-street parking; as well as possible required mitigative measures such as landscaping, buffering, and other site design amenities. Where commercial or mixed use development is proposed as a conditional use adjacent to U.S. 1, the development shall be required to provide mitigative measures to avoid potential adverse impacts to traffic flow along the U.S. 1 corridor, including but not limited to restrictions on access from and egress to U.S. 1, providing for signalization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and/or other appropriate mitigative measures. 
d.  Development within or adjacent to historic district. All development proposed as a conditional use within or adjacent to the historic district shall be reviewed based on applicable criteria stated in this section for residential, commercial, or mixed use development and shall also comply with appearance and design guidelines for historic structures and contributing structures and/or shall be required to provide special mitigative site and structural appearance and design attributes or amenities that reinforce the appearance, historic attributes, and amenities of structures within the historic district. 
e.  Public facilities or institutional development. Public facilities or other institutional development proposed as a conditional use shall be reviewed based on land use compatibility and design criteria established for commercial and mixed use development. In addition, the city shall analyze the proposed site location and design attributes relative to other available sites and the comparative merits of the proposed site, considering professionally accepted principles and standards for the design and location of similar community facilities and public infrastructure. The city shall also consider compliance with relevant comprehensive plan assessments of community facility and infrastructure needs and location impacts relative to service area deficiencies or improvement needs. 
f.  Commercial structures, uses and related activities within tidal waters. 
The criteria for commercial structures, uses and related activities within tidal waters are as provided in section 122-1186. 
g.  Adult entertainment establishments. The criteria for adult entertainment establishments are as provided in division 12 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-6.2), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 9-18-2001) 
Sec. 122-63. - Review; enforcement. 
(a)  The application for a conditional use shall be on a form provided by the city planning office and shall be submitted to the city planning office. Required attachments, as stated on the application form, shall be submitted with the application. The development review committee shall perform a technical review of each proposed conditional use and provide comments to the planning department. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the comments of the development review committee, the planning department shall review the project and provide a report with recommendations to the planning board. The planning board shall consider applications for a conditional use at a regularly scheduled board meeting. The planning board shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a proposed conditional use. 
(c)  On all development, except major developments as defined in sections 108-165 and 108-166, the planning board's decision shall be final unless that decision is appealed to the city commission within ten days following the planning board's action. Refer to section 122-65. Where a conditional use is proposed as part of a major development as defined in sections 108-165 and 108-166, the planning board's decision regarding the conditional use approval is advisory only, and the final decision shall be rendered by the city commission when the major development plan is considered by the city commission. 
(d)  A written record of findings by the planning board shall be maintained, including a written statement of all the following: 
(1)  Conditions of approval; and 
(2)  Findings supporting denial of a conditional use. 
(e)  Revisions or additions to a conditional use shall be reviewed based on the criteria of section 122-62(b) and (c). The procedures governing such reviews shall be identical to the procedures identified for the respective development plan which are presented in article II of chapter 108. A conditional use shall expire if construction has not commenced within 12 months of approval. A conditional use may be extended only one time for 12 months by a favorable vote of the planning board or city commission, when the project is a major development, if the applicant submits a petition for such extension prior to the development plan's expiration and demonstrated reasonable cause for the extension. The burden of proof in justifying reasonable cause shall rest with the applicant. 
(f)  A conditional use approval shall run with the land and is transferable to successors in ownership. The use must remain compliant with all applicable rules and regulations, including any specific conditions duly mandated by the city as a condition of the original conditional use approval. At the city's option, it may enforce an alleged violation of a conditional use approval either in a court of law or in the proceedings of the code enforcement special magistrate pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 2, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "conditional use" and "special exception" are of equal meaning. Such a violation shall be enforceable under, and subject to the penalties provided in, chapter 86 and section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances, or in accordance with any other applicable provision of the Code of Ordinances or of state law. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-6.3), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-26, § 5, 11-6-2002; Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 7-5-2006) 
Sec. 122-64. - Notification procedures. 
    Prior to taking any action under section 122-63 regarding conditional use approval, the planning board shall be required to notify the public in accordance with division 2 of article VIII of chapter 90. Such notice shall also be published before any action is taken on appeals to the city commission pursuant to section 122-65. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-6.4), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 14, 2-1-2000) 
Sec. 122-65. - Appeals of actions. 
    Any applicant for conditional use approval or any other aggrieved person having an interest therein may file an appeal to the city commission to review the action of the planning board in allowing or disallowing the application for a conditional use approval as provided in section 90-427 pertaining to final decisions of the planning board. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days from the date of final action of the planning board. The city clerk shall place the matter of appeal on the city commission agenda as expeditiously as possible. The city commission shall thereupon set a date for a public hearing with regard to such appeal. After giving public notice thereof in such manner as the city commission shall prescribe, at which time all interested parties shall have the right to appear before the city commission in regard thereto, the city commission shall thereupon render its decision therein. The decision of the city commission shall be final, unless otherwise appealed to the courts. Where an appeal to an approved conditional use is upheld, any construction activity shall be stayed pursuant to the provisions of the city's building code. For a conditional use involving a major development, the final action rests with the city commission. Appeals to actions of the city commission shall be to the courts. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-6.5), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-66-122-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-91. - Comprehensive plan implementation. 
    In order to implement the comprehensive plan in a manner consistent with F.S. § 163.3201, the land development regulations in this division are established. They are intended to assist in managing comprehensive planning issues surrounding the use and/or development of specific lots, parcels, and tracts of land or any combination thereof within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-92. - Future land use map designations and zoning districts. 
    The following table references adopted future land use map designations contained in the land use element of the city comprehensive plan and identifies corresponding zoning districts which are established in order to implement the future land use map designations, respectively: 
FUTURE LAND USE MAP DESIGNATIONS AND ZONING DISTRICTS 
Residential LDR-C Low density residential-coastal SF Single-family units MDR-C Medium density residential-coastal MDR Medium density residential HDR High density residential HDR-1 High Density Residential College Road Commercial Development CL Limited commercial CG General commercial CT Salt Pond tourist commercial Mixed Use New Town Development RO Residential/office PRD Planned redevelopment and development Old Town Historic Preservation HRO Historic residential/office HRCC-1 High density residential/commercial core: Bay side HRCC-2 High density residential/commercial core: Key West Bight HRCC-3 High density residential/commercial core: Atlantic side HMDR Medium density residential HSMDR Historic special medium density residential HPRD Planned development and redevelopment HNC-1 Neighborhood commercial: Simonton, Truman, and S. White Street corridors HNC-2 Neighborhood commercial: Old Town northeast and southeast HNC-3 Neighborhood commercial: Bahama Village HCT Tourist commercial HPS Public service, including recreation and open space HHDR High density residential Institutional PS Public services (1) A Airport Conservation C Conservation (2) (1) "Public services" includes all lands designated "public services" or "military" on the comprehensive plan future land use map series which are located within the city limits. (2) "Conservation" incorporates all lands designated "conservation" on the comprehensive plan future land use map series, including tidal and freshwater wetlands, mangroves, upland hammocks, and waters of the state, including an area extending 600 feet into the tidal waters adjacent to the corporate city limits.  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.2), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-33, § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-93. - Official zoning map and district boundaries. 
(a)  Map adoption. The boundaries of each zoning district are on the official zoning map for the city. The boundaries of the districts, together with all explanatory statements thereon, are adopted and incorporated as a part of this subpart B. Pursuant to Laws of Fla. ch. 78-540, § 8, the city shall exercise extraterritorial zoning powers within an area extending 600 feet into the tidal waters adjacent to the corporate city limits. Accordingly, the official zoning map of the city shall apply a zoning classification of "conservation-outstanding waters of the state (C-OW)" district to the described tidal waters. These tidal waters are designated "conservation-outstanding waters of the state (C-OW)" on the future land use map and are part of the designated National Marine Sanctuary. 
(b)  Map amendment. Procedures for amendment of the official zoning map are as follows: 
(1)  No changes or amendments to the official zoning map shall be made except in compliance and conformity with all procedures set forth in this subpart B. If changes or amendments are made to district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes or amendments shall be made promptly after official adoption of the change or amendment as provided for in this subsection. The city clerk shall be responsible for ensuring that the physical updating and amendment of the official zoning map is carried out in a timely manner. 
(2)  Where a proposed rezoning affects a large portion of the land area of the city, it shall be considered to be legislative in nature and shall be enacted in accordance with legislative standards contained in the state constitution, the state statutes, the city's comprehensive plan and the city land development regulations. 
(3)  Where a proposed rezoning affects a limited number of persons or property owners or is contingent on a fact arrived at from distinct alternatives presented at a hearing and where the decision can be functionally viewed as policy application rather than policy setting, it shall be considered to be quasijudicial in nature, and the rules contained in this subsection shall apply. The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the rezoning proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan and that it complies with all procedural requirements of the zoning ordinances. Should the property owner prove these elements, the burden shifts to the city commission to show that maintenance of the existing zoning classification with respect to the property accomplishes a legitimate public purpose and to show that denial of rezoning approval is not arbitrary, discriminatory, or unreasonable. In rendering a decision, the city commission shall not be required to make a finding of fact. City commission action on a rezoning request for a limited number of persons or property owners shall be reviewable by petition for writ of certiorari in accordance with the Florida Rules Appellate Procedure. The standard for review shall be "strict scrutiny," by which is meant the same standard as that used in the review of other quasijudicial decisions and not constitutional cases. The city commission's decision should be upheld if the city can show that there was competent substantial evidence presented to the city commission to support its ruling. 
(4)  The new official zoning map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending this subpart B or any subsequent amendment thereto without duly noticed public hearings as provided in this subsection. 
(5)  When any official zoning map is replaced, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption and amendment. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-94. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    When uncertainty exists as to boundaries of the districts on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways and alleys shall be construed as following such lines. 
(2)  Lot, section and tract lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines or section or tract lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Political boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries shall be construed as following such political boundaries. 
(4)  Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed as following the mean high water line (MHW), and if the mean high water line changes, the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the mean high water line. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(5)  Parallel lines. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6)  Bisecting lines. Where district boundary lines approximately bisect blocks, the boundaries are the median line of such blocks, between the centerlines of boundary streets. 
(7)  Uncertainties. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or if any other uncertainty exists, the city commission shall interpret the intent of the official zoning map as to the location of district boundaries. 
(8)  Street abandonments. Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, or alley. 
(9)  Excluded areas. Where parcels of land and water areas have been inadvertently excluded from a zoning district classification in any manner, such parcels shall be classified in conformance with the most restrictive zoning district which abuts the excluded area until or unless changed pursuant to amendment procedures contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-95. - Compliance required. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building, land or water be used for any purpose other than a use permitted in the district in which such building, land or water is located. No building or land shall be used so as to produce greater heights, smaller yards, less unoccupied area, or higher density or intensity than is prescribed for such building or land within the district regulations in which the building or land is located. No lot which is or which may be built upon shall be so reduced in area so that the yards and open spaces will be smaller than prescribed by this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-96. - Procedures and criteria for review of similar uses. 
    In the classification of uses stipulated by zoning district in divisions 2 through 14 of article IV and divisions 2 and 3 of article V of this chapter, wherever reference is made to the term "other similar uses," the planning board and city commission shall apply the following procedures and criteria in the review of such uses: 
(1)  The criteria for review shall be the same general criteria used in review of conditional uses. 
(2)  Procedures for review shall be the same procedures used in review of a conditional use. 
(3)  In addition, the planning board and city commission shall determine: 
a.  Whether the use is similar in character to other uses cited in the specific land use classification; and 
b.  Whether the impacts generated by the use are similar in character to the impact generated by other uses cited in the specific land use classification. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-4.6), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-97. - Scope. 
    This article and divisions 2 and 3 of article V of this chapter describe the purposes and intent of each zoning district, identify permitted and conditional uses by zoning district, and provide size and dimensional regulations for respective zoning districts. All proposed new development shall be required to comply with performance criteria of chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; site plan review requirements of article II of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114. Divisions 2 through 14 of this article and divisions 2 and 3 of article V of this chapter present the basic purpose and intent of each zoning district and the uses permitted therein. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(art. V), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-98-122-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSERVATION DISTRICT (C) 

Sec. 122-126. - Intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to implement the comprehensive plan policies for preserving areas designated "conservation" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. These conservation district areas primarily consist of environmentally sensitive natural resources and systems, including but not limited to the Salt Ponds, tidal wetlands, mangroves, freshwater wetlands, transitional wetlands, upland hammocks, and waters of the state including an area extending 600 feet into the tidal water adjacent to the corporate city limits. The intent of this district is to provide for the longterm preservation of environmentally sensitive natural resources systems designated "conservation" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(b)  No development shall be permitted within the conservation district and/or within waters below mean high water, wetlands, upland habitats or yellow heart hammocks unless the applicant for such development provides proof of permits or proof of exemptions from all applicable state or federal agencies having jurisdiction. Where the city determines that development should be allowed to occur for purposes of avoiding a taking, the density in no case shall exceed one unit per ten acres, and site alteration shall be limited to ten percent of the entire site. 
(c)  The developer/applicant of lands within the conservation (C) district shall be required to provide a site-engineered delineation of all environmentally sensitive lands, including but not limited to wetlands and upland habitat and shall also indicate the location of lands or waters within the jurisdiction of the state and/or federal government. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in determining that development plans required pursuant to article II of chapter 108 include appropriate mitigative techniques to prevent/minimize adverse impacts to wetlands, transitional wetlands, upland habitat, yellow heart hammocks, tidal waters, including benthic communities, such as seagrass beds and algal beds, as well as other live bottom communities such as reef systems, or other environmentally fragile natural systems. An on-site survey by environmental professionals shall be submitted by the applicant. Such determinations shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations and provided with the earliest application for city development approval. These determinations shall be predicated on findings rendered by professionals competent in producing data and analyses necessary to support impact assessments, including findings regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological function and value of environmentally sensitive lands. Any development within the conservation districts shall be required to comply with all performance criteria of chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, especially section 108-1; article III of chapter 110; and articles IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110 pertaining to environmental protection, as well as all other applicable land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-127. - Transfer of development rights. 
(a)  A transfer of development rights (TDR) shall be provided for all land within the conservation district at a density of one unit per one acre. These environmentally sensitive sites shall be designated as "sending areas," and landowners within such "sending areas" shall be able to sell their density rights on the open market to landowners of specific parcels of land within the Key West Bight Redevelopment Area which are identified by the city as "receiving areas." 
(b)  In executing the transfer of development rights program, during the initial two-year period following adoption of the comprehensive plan, sending areas shall be exclusively restricted to environmentally sensitive wetlands located within the South A1A-Atlantic Boulevard Corridor, including but not limited to the salt pond area. However, following the initial two-year period, other sites may be identified as sending areas based on a thorough analysis of the effectiveness of the transfer of development rights program. The addition of new sending areas shall require amendment to the land development regulations. Specific receiving areas must be identified in the comprehensive plan. These receiving areas shall be limited to approved sites in the Key West Bight Redevelopment Area designated "HRCC-2" on the future land use map. 
(c)  The addition of any area other than the HRCC-2 area as a receiving area shall require a comprehensive plan amendment. The city must approve site plans for development of such receiving areas prior to commencement of activity. All transfers of development rights shall be recorded in the official records of the county in a deed, contract for deed, or other legal document conveying property. Density in the Key West Bight receiving areas shall be consistent with comprehensive plan policy 1-2.3.3. In the Key West Bight area, clustering of residential units is encouraged to preserve waterfront views and open space. 
(d)  The specific receiving area threshold must be approved by the city. Similarly, the city must approve each transfer of development rights from a sending area to a receiving area. Prior to approving the transfer of development rights, the city shall render a finding that the owner of land in the impacted sending area has provided the city with legal instruments acceptable to the city attorney which dedicate conservation easements. The conservation easements shall prohibit any development right from being transferred more than one time. In addition, the conservation easement shall prohibit all future development of the respective sending area. When only a portion of transferrable units are transferred, the sending area applicant/owner shall be entitled to reapply for additional transfer of development rights until whichever of the following first occurs: 
(1)  The applicant/owner has exhausted all transfers of development rights on the subject sender site; 
(2)  The city's capacity to absorb transfers of development rights at approved Key West Bight Redevelopment Area receiving sites has been exhausted; or 
(3)  The city's building permit allocation has been exhausted. 
(e)  The city shall prepare and maintain a system for tracking the sale and acquisition of development rights transferred from sending areas to receiving areas. The transfer of development rights tracking system shall serve as an official ledger of density transfers and, as a minimum, shall record each approved transfer of development rights by real estate parcel citing landowners, zoning, land area, base density allowed by zoning, as well as dwelling unit capacity after each transfer of development rights is approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-128. - Uses permitted. 
    All development within the conservation district shall be by conditional use due to the environmental sensitivity of lands within the conservation district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-129. - Conditional uses. 
    Prior to any development within a conservation district, all state or federal agencies having jurisdiction shall have granted requisite permits, including but not limited to dredge and fill permits. As stated in article III of this chapter pertaining to conditional uses, applicants for a conditional use must demonstrate that the proposed uses and facilities identified in this section are compliant with all applicable criteria and relevant mitigative measures for conditional use approval, including but not limited to wetland preservation, coastal resource impact analysis and shoreline protection, protection of marine life and fisheries, protection of flora and fauna, and floodplain protection. The design of proposed conditional use facilities shall be required to apply mitigative measures to prevent and/or minimize adverse impacts on natural systems, including but not limit to habitats, water quality, and the physical and biological functions of wetlands. The size and scale of such development shall be restricted. The proposed uses and facilities that shall be compliant with all applicable criteria and relevant mitigative measures for conditional use approval are as follows: 
(1)  Areas below mean high water. Within areas below mean high water only water-dependent facilities are permitted, including the following: 
a.  Fishing piers, docks and related boardwalks not exceeding a width of five feet; and 
b.  Watercraft. 
(2)  Areas above mean high water. Within areas above mean high water the following uses are permitted: 
a.  Boardwalks not exceeding a width of five feet which shall be elevated in order to reduce adverse impacts on hydrologic functions of wetlands. 
b.  Water-related facilities as follows: 
1.  Hiking trails not exceeding a width of four feet to avoid adverse impacts on upland habitats and those portions traversing waterways shall be elevated in order to reduce adverse impacts on hydrologic functions. 
2.  Picnic areas. 
3.  Observation towers which shall be elevated in order to reduce adverse impacts on hydrologic functions of wetlands. 
c.  Residential development is restricted as follows: 
1.  The maximum density shall be one unit per ten acres. No residential development shall be approved on a site within the conservation district unless a development plan incorporating appropriate mitigation procedures and environmentally sensitive design techniques has been submitted and approved by the city pursuant to article II of chapter 108 and performance criteria of chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, especially environmental protection criteria of section 108-1; article III of chapter 110; and articles IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110. 
2.  Where isolated uplands or disturbed areas are located on a site proposed for development within the conservation district, all development shall be directed to such uplands or disturbed areas; however, the city may determine that, due to the specific size, shape or location of such uplands, less disturbance to environmentally sensitive land will occur if development is allowed within a portion of the wetlands. On-site residential development shall be required to apply cluster design techniques so that the development minimizes disturbance of wetland and upland habitat buffering wetlands. 
3.  Where on-site residential is approved by the city, no transfer of development shall be approved on the subject site. If a proposed development lies within a conservation district and another zoning district, the total density and intensity shall not exceed the weighted average provided for in the specific district regulation impacting the site. Once a specific area to be developed has been determined, a conservation easement shall be prepared by the applicant, approved by the city, and filed with the county court clerk. The conservation easement shall preserve in perpetuity all on-site wetlands and upland habitat together with any required upland buffer as open space. The development plan, including the conservation easement, shall be the subject of a development agreement pursuant to article IX of chapter 90. 
d.  Transfer of development rights is restricted pursuant to the terms of an approved development agreement, as provided in article IX of chapter 90, at a density of one unit per one acre from an approved conservation district sender site to an approved HRCC-2 receiving site. Transfers of development rights together with the required conservation easement shall be duly recorded with the county court clerk as provided in section 122-127. The conservation easements shall prohibit any development right from being transferred more than one time. For further limitations, refer to section 122-127 and division 6 of article V of this chapter. 
e.  Public and private utilities are permitted where such facilities are essential to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-130. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited in the conservation district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-131. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the conservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per ten acres (0.1 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.01. 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: five percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: five percent. 
c.  Maximum site alteration: ten percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: ten acres. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: All development, excepting permitted water-dependent uses, must comply with requirements for setbacks from wetlands and open waters established in sections 110-91 and 122-1148. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-132. - Additional criteria for commercial structures, uses and related activities within tidal waters-Generally. 
    Pursuant to Laws of Fla. ch. 78-540, § 8 and comprehensive plan objective 1-2.4 and comprehensive plan policies 1-2.4.1 and 5-1.1.4, the city shall regulate the location as well as the intensity and character of permanent and temporary commercial water-sport structures, uses, and related activities within an area extending 600 feet into the tidal waters adjacent to the corporate city limits. This section and sections 122-133 through 122-143 do not apply to watercraft located within a duly permitted marina. Applicants desiring to develop, establish or expand temporary or permanent structures, uses, and related activities of a commercial nature within the subject tidal waters, including but not limited to commercial water-sport operations with a clientele which is usually transported from the shoreline into tidal waters, shall be required to file a major development plan pursuant to procedures set forth in article II of chapter 108. The applicant shall be required to submit a plan compliant with applicable performance criteria set forth in chapter 94; chapters 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, including but not limited to article IV of chapter 110 pertaining to coastal resource impact analysis and article VII of chapter 108 pertaining to off-street parking and loading requirements. In addition, the applicant shall comply with the location criteria, design and aesthetic criteria and safety standards cited in sections 122-133 through 122-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-133. - Same-Additional criteria applicable to required development plans. 
    In addition to the coastal impact analysis criteria set forth in article IV of chapter 110, the coastal impact analysis required in section 122-132 shall include the following: 
(1)  Description of potential adverse impacts. The coastal impact analysis shall include a description of the potential adverse impacts on hardbottom biological communities caused by the following: 
a.  Any proposed construction activity; and 
b.  Uses accommodated by the proposed structure, including but not limited to proposed recreational activities involving motorized watercraft. 
(2)  Map of tidal waters potentially impacted by the structure and related uses. The analysis shall include a map delineating the location of the proposed structure as well as the area to which related activities associated with the structure shall be restricted. 
(3)  Proposed signs associated with commercial use. The application shall include proposed signs to be placed on the subject property, including any signs to be placed on floating platform docks. Any such sign shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to chapter 114. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-134. - Same-Required intergovernmental coordination. 
    The applicant desiring to develop, establish or expand temporary or permanent structures, uses, and related activities of a commercial nature within the tidal waters shall be responsible for obtaining all applicable permits from state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction. The city shall coordinate with appropriate state and federal agencies having jurisdiction and/or knowledge of living marine resources within the subject tidal waters. The applicant shall bear the cost of any field analysis, expert testimony, and related work required to ascertain the location of and mitigative measures required to protect and/or restore benthic communities, including seagrass beds, algal beds, and other live bottom communities such as reef systems, that will potentially be impacted by the proposed structure as well as the uses accommodated by the structure. The city shall retain to power to select appropriate professionals to perform required field analysis and other technical work required in the review of the application, including technical evaluation of disputed issues. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-135. - Same-Location criteria-Generally. 
    The location of temporary and permanent commercial water-sport structures in the tidal waters subject to sections 122-132 through 122-143 shall comply with location criteria set forth in section 122-136 and the following: 
(1)  Location of commercial structures and uses potentially hazardous to swimmers within designated swimming areas. Temporary and permanent water-sport structures principally designed to accommodate water-sport vehicles, including but not limited to personal watercraft, and other water-sport uses which are potential hazards to swimmers shall not be located within 600 feet of city-, county- or state-designated public beaches and/or designated swimming areas within an area extending 600 feet into tidal water adjacent to the corporate city limits. 
(2)  Location of commercial structures and uses potentially hazardous to watercraft operating in designated channels. Temporary and permanent commercial water-sport structures principally designed to accommodate water-sport vehicles, including but not limited to personal watercraft, and other water-sport uses which are potential hazards to watercraft operating in designated channels shall not be located within 1,000 feet of designated channels for watercraft. 
(3)  Location of commercial structures and uses potentially hazardous to living marine resources within tidal waters. The location of temporary or permanent commercial water-sport structures as well as related water-sport vehicles, including but not limited to personal watercraft, and other water-sport uses potentially hazardous to living marine resources such as reef systems and benthic communities, including seagrass beds, algal beds, and other live bottom communities, shall be restricted in order to protect living marine resources. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(3)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-136. - Same-Same-Location of commercial water-sport structures and uses potentially disruptive to the quality of shoreline aesthetics or waterfront vistas. 
    The location of temporary and permanent commercial water-sport structures as well as related water-sport vehicles, including but not limited to personal watercraft, and other water-sport uses potentially disruptive to the quality of shoreline aesthetics, waterfront vistas, or views of tidal waters shall not be permitted to locate within the subject tidal waters under the city's extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction unless the city commission renders a finding that the proposed structure and/or related uses comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Accessory to approved principal use. The proposed commercial water-sport structure and related activities shall be permitted only if the proposed structure is an accessory use to an approved principal use which is located on the upland adjacent to the subject tidal waters. In such case the application shall include verification that the owner of the upland principal use, and the landowner if the landowner is different from the owner of the principal use, agrees to the terms of the application. 
(2)  Visual exposure of commercial water-sport structures. Any proposed commercial water-sport platform, including but not limited to any floatation devices, shall comply with all building codes applicable to such waterfront docks. Similarly, any structure designed to store water-sport vehicles shall comply with all applicable building codes. Commercial water-sport platforms shall only be permitted as a component of an approved dock. Similarly, no free floating platform, raft, or similar structure shall be permitted within the subject tidal waters. The intent and purpose is to prohibit the proliferation of commercial floating structures on the subject tidal waters. The cumulative impact of such structures on tidal waters is to cause visual pollution of tidal waters which may be characterized as: 
a.  Outstanding waters of the state; 
b.  A part of a National Marine Sanctuary; and 
c.  Highly scenic marine ecosystem which is an international tourist destination point. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(3)(d)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-137. - Same-Regulations on personal watercraft-Generally. 
    In order to avoid adverse impacts on living marine resources and hazardous conflict with other water-dependent activities, including swimming, boating within main channels, nonmotorized boats and sailboats, in the tidal waters subject to sections 122-132 through 122-143, personal watercraft shall comply with the safety standards and other regulations governing licensing as well as franchise or lease requirements identified in sections 122-138 through 122-142. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-138. - Same-Same-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 122-137 through 122-142, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved flotation device means any United States Coast Guard approved type I, II, III, or V personal flotation device. 
    Headway speed means the minimum speed necessary to maintain steerage and control of a personal watercraft while such personal watercraft is moving. 
    Personal watercraft means a small class A-1 or A-2 vessel which uses an outboard motor or an inboard motor powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on or being towed behind the vessel, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(a)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-139. - Same-Same-Safety standards. 
(a)  Safety standards for personal watercraft in the tidal waters subject to sections 122-132 through 122-143 are as follows: 
(1)  Flotation device. A person may not operate a personal watercraft unless each person riding on or being towed behind such vessel is wearing an approved flotation device. 
(2)  Lanyard-type engine cutoff switch. A person operating a personal watercraft equipped by the manufacturer with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch must attach such lanyard to his person, clothing, or personal flotation device as is appropriate for the specific vessel. 
(3)  Hours of operation. A person may not operate a personal watercraft at any time between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
(4)  Safe operation. A personal watercraft must at all times be operated in a reasonable and prudent manner, having a regard for other waterborne traffic, posted speed and wake restrictions, the presence of a divers-down flag, and all other attendant circumstances so as not to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. Any person who violates this subsection 122-139(a)(4) shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. Maneuvers which unreasonably or unnecessarily endanger life, limb, or property, shall include but not limited to the following: 
a.  Weaving through congested vehicle traffic. 
b.  Jumping or attempting to jump the wake of another vessel within 100 feet of such other vessel, or when visibility around such other vessel is obstructed. 
c.  Following within 100 feet of a water skier. 
d.  Swerving at the last possible moment to avoid collision. 
e.  Approaching within 600 feet of a designated swimming area, diver-down flag, or an area of wading birds. 
(5)  Operator age restriction. No person under the age of 14 shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state. 
(6)  Responsibility of owner or person in charge of personal watercraft. It is unlawful for the owner of any personal watercraft or any person having charge over or control of a personal watercraft to authorize or knowingly permit the watercraft to be operated in violation of any subsection of this section. 
(7)  Speed regulation. No person shall operate a personal watercraft at any speed greater than headway speed while within or at the entrance to a marina or other place used as an anchorage. 
(8)  Required city approval of placement, launch, and operation of commercial personal watercraft. No person shall bring into, launch or operate any commercial personal watercraft, including rentals, upon any watercourse within the jurisdiction of the city, including an area extending 600 feet into the tidal waters adjacent to the city, except at such places as are or may be designated for such use or purposes by the city commission. 
(b)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any performer engaged in a professional exhibition or a person preparing to participate or participating in a regatta, race, marine parade, tournament, or exhibition held in compliance with F.S. § 327.40. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(b)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-140. - Same-Same-Licensing and insurance requirements applicable to personal watercraft for hire. 
(a)  Before any person shall conduct or maintain a business of renting, leasing or providing any personal watercraft for hire within the city, including the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction within an area extending 600 feet into the tidal waters adjacent to the corporate city limits, such person shall make application with the city manager for a license to operate such business. No such business shall be conducted or maintained unless applicable license fees are paid and the required license is duly issued in conformance with the requirements of the land development regulations and unless the applicant has caused to be executed a liability insurance policy for each personal watercraft in the amounts prescribed, the terms of which shall provide protection for all persons or property suffering injury, damage or loss because of the negligent operation of such vehicle by any person. The applicant shall maintain the subject liability insurance policy in full force and effect, and the insurer shall notify the city upon cancellation of the insurance policy. Licenses granted pursuant to this section shall be renewed from year to year; however, any license not renewed by September 30 will become void and of no further use whatsoever to the license holder. 
(b)  Every insurance policy required by this section shall be executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. Such policy shall insure the operation of each personal watercraft in a sum acceptable to the city for life and property. A duly authenticated copy of every such insurance policy, covering all personal watercraft used in such business, shall be filed with the city clerk. All such policies shall remain in full force and effect at all times during the operation of such business. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(c)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-141. - Same-Same-Franchise and lease agreements. 
    No person engaged in renting, leasing or providing any personal watercraft for hire pursuant to section 122-140 shall operate such business or moor, tie up, or anchor the place of business within 600 feet of any shoreline or public beach or public park in the city or within the confines of city or state park wetland habitats within the city unless specifically authorized in a valid franchise or lease agreement with the city or other proprietary entity or when located in a marina or on private property or in a channel marked for navigation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(d)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-142. - Same-Same-Other restrictions applicable to personal watercraft rental. 
    Other restrictions applicable to personal watercraft rental pursuant to sections 122-140 and 122-141 are as follows: 
(1)  Valid automobile driver's license required. No person shall rent a personal watercraft to any person who does not hold a valid automobile driver's license. 
(2)  Disclosure of areas of operation. No person shall rent a personal watercraft to any person without explaining to the person the areas where the personal watercraft is and is not allowed to be operated. 
(3)  Vessel equipped to render assistance required. No person shall rent a personal watercraft to any person without providing, at the site where such personal watercraft is rented, a vessel equipped to render assistance, guidance and policing of rented personal watercraft. 
(4)  Provision of information and written acknowledgment thereof. No person shall rent a personal watercraft to any person without providing the following information to the person and obtaining from the person a written acknowledgment that the person has read and understands the following information: 
a.  A printed map or chart of the area where the person is permitted to operate the personal watercraft. 
b.  A booklet or manual relating to personal watercraft safety which is accepted or recognized by the Personal Watercraft Industry Association. 
c.  A summary of sections 122-137 through this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(e)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-143. - Same-Same-Conditions for approving location of structures and uses hazardous to living marine resources within tidal waters. 
    As part of the development plan review process, the city shall coordinate with appropriate federal, and state agencies to ascertain appropriate conditions, including compensatory mitigative measures, which should be imposed to protect and/or restore benthic communities, including seagrass beds, algal beds, and other live bottom communities such as reef systems, that will potentially be impacted by the proposed structure as well as the uses accommodated by the structure in the tidal waters subject to sections 122-132 through 122-143. The city commission shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed development plan based on development plan approval criteria contained in the land development regulations, in addition to criteria included or referenced in sections 122-132 through this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.1(G)(5)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-144-122-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-171. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The overall purpose and intent of the residential districts as provided in this division is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan residential development objectives and policies directed toward: 
(1)  Protecting the quality and character of existing neighborhoods, including compatibility of land use and structures; 
(2)  Preserving open space; 
(3)  Maintaining densities which are compatible with existing and anticipated future developments; 
(4)  Promoting compatibility with natural features of the land; and 
(5)  Minimizing the burden on supportive public services and facilities within the area. 
(b)  All residential development shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, as well as all other applicable land development regulations. This division contains a description of the intended purpose of each zoning district established in this division, including reference to the comprehensive plan future land use map designations which shall be implemented through the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-172-122-200. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Coastal Low Density Residential District (LDR-C) 

Sec. 122-201. - Intent. 
(a)  The coastal low density residential district (LDR-C) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "LDR-C" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. These areas are situated on the north side of South Roosevelt Boulevard on the very narrow strip of uplands lying between the "bridle path" easement and jurisdictional waters and lands of the state as well as certain undeveloped lands east of Atlantic Boulevard which are located fully within the coastal high hazard velocity (VE) zone as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These areas are restricted to residential development with a maximum density of one unit per acre and shall not include transient lodging or guesthomes. Supportive public community facilities and accessory land uses also may be located within areas designated for coastal low density residential use. 
(b)  The coastal low density residential (LDR-C) designation is established to: 
(1)  Provide an equitable development right for the LDR-C designated areas; 
(2)  Protect remaining coastal wetlands; 
(3)  Maintain water quality; 
(4)  Protect marine habitats; and 
(5)  Preserve a significant amount of open space for purposes of reducing surface water runoff and maintaining water quality in a major environmentally sensitive coastal area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-202. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the coastal low density residential district (LDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-203. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the coastal low density residential district (LDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Parks and recreation, passive. 
(2)  Protective services. 
(3)  Public and private utilities where such facilities are essential to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-204. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the coastal low density residential district (LDR-C), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-205. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the coastal low density residential district (LDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per acre (1 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 1 acre. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from wetlands and open waters established in sections 110-91 and 122-1148, in addition to the following: 
a.  Front: 30 feet. 
b.  Side: the greater of 15 feet or 10 percent of the lot width to a maximum of 20 feet. 
c.  Rear: 25 feet or 20 feet when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-206-122-230. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Single-Family Residential District (SF) 

Sec. 122-231. - Intent. 
(a)  The single-family residential district (SF) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "SF" on the comprehensive plan future land use map, especially comprehensive plan policy 1-2.1.3. The SF district is designed to accommodate single-family permanent residential development and may also include one accessory attached or detached unit per principal dwelling unit. 
(b)  The SF district shall not include transient accommodations. Supportive community facilities and accessory land uses may be located within areas designated for single-family residential uses. 
(c)  The single-family residential (SF) designation is established to: 
(1)  Protect the quality and character of existing single-family neighborhoods; 
(2)  Preserve open space; 
(3)  Encourage densities which are compatible with existing and anticipated future developments; 
(4)  Promote compatibility with natural features of the land; and 
(5)  Minimize the burden on supportive public services and facilities within the area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-232. - Accessory units. 
    The single-family residential district (SF) shall accommodate one accessory attached or detached unit per principal dwelling unit so long as the accessory unit is duly approved pursuant to the building permit allocation system, as provided in article IV of chapter 54, and meets the criteria cited in this subdivision. The building permit allocation methodology includes a permit formula in which one accessory unit equals 0.55 dwelling unit. Accessory units shall meet all size and dimension requirements of a principal structure and shall not be excluded from impact fee provisions. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(A)(1)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-233. - Special criteria applicable to accessory units. 
(a)  Accessory units proposed within the single-family residential district (SF) shall met the following criteria: 
(1)  Each unit shall have a rental rate, including utilities, not exceeding 15 percent of the median household income in the county. This affordability criteria shall be duly recorded as a deed restriction in perpetuity. 
(2)  Accessory units shall be restricted to occupancy by permanent residents. 
(3)  Accessory units shall not be sold separately as a condominium. 
(4)  When an accessory unit permit is originally initiated, the principal unit must be owned and occupied by a permanent resident. 
(5)  Accessory units shall not take up more than 40 percent of the principal structure. 
(6)  Accessory units shall comply with maximum impervious surface regulation within the SF district. Parking surfaces shall not be counted as open space. 
(7)  Accessory units shall comply with applicable landscaping requirements. 
(8)  Accessory units shall comply with the maximum threshold for lot coverage by impervious surfaces. 
(9)  Parking requirements shall be satisfied by both the principal and accessory unit. 
(10)  Density shall be calculated based only upon the number of principal units on a site. 
(11)  Accessory units shall not exceed 600 square feet and the minimum size shall be 300 square feet. 
(b)  Any application for accessory units shall include deed restrictions which shall be filed with the city and the clerk of the circuit court. The deed restrictions shall incorporate mandatory compliance with the criteria cited in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(A)(2)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-234. - Potential increase in accessory unit threshold size. 
    No accessory unit in the single-family residential district (SF) shall have more than one bedroom unless an additional bedroom is approved as a variance by the planning board. If such variance is approved, the total square footage shall not exceed 600 square feet. The permit allocation system shall be coordinated with the county's analysis of evacuation clearance times in order to maintain or decrease the standard time for such clearance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(A)(3)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 27, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 122-235. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the single-family residential district (SF) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwellings and accessory residential units. 
(2)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-236. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the single-family residential district (SF) are as follows: 
(1)  Two-family residential dwellings (duplexes). Note: Duplexes shall not be located within the following portions of the SF district: 
a.  The Venetian Subdivision located south of the Riviera Canal; and 
b.  The area bounded on the north by Flagler Drive, on the south by Casa Marina Court, on the east by White Street and on the west by Reynolds Street. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Parks and recreation, active or passive. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Protective services. 
(6)  Public and private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-237. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the single-family residential district (SF), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-238. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the single-family residential district (SF) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: eight dwelling units per acre (8 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet plus an additional five feet for nonhabitable purposes if the structure has a pitched roof. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 35 percent, except that in the following areas the maximum building coverage shall be 30 percent: 
1.  The Venetian Subdivision located south of the Riviera Canal; and 
2.  The area bounded on the north by Flagler Drive, on the south by Casa Marina Court, on the east by White Street and on the west by Reynolds Street. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 
1.  Single-family: 50 percent. 
2.  Community facilities: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 
a.  Single-family and two-family units: 6,000 square feet, except that in the following areas the minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet: 
1.  The Venetian Subdivision located south of the Riviera Canal; and 
2.  The area bounded on the north by Flagler Drive, on the south by Casa Marina Court, on the east by White Street and on the west by Reynolds Street. 
b.  Two-family dwelling units (duplexes) are permitted as a conditional use in all portions of the SF district, excepting the area defined below, but only if the land area comprised a minimum area of 10,890 square feet in order to satisfy minimum density requirements. Two-family dwellings shall not be allowed within the areas described in subsections (5)a.1 and (5)a.2 of this section. 
c.  The minimum lot size for educational institutions and community facilities, including places of worship areas, follows: 
1.  Community facilities including places of worship: one-half acre; and 
2.  Educational institutions: 1 acre. 
d.  Minimum width: 50 feet. 
e.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum width: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Single-family: 
1.  Front: 30 feet or the average depth of front yards on developed lots within 100 feet each side, but not less than 20 feet. 
2.  Side: 5 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet or 20 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 10 feet. 
b.  Community facilities: 
1.  Front: 30 feet. 
2.  Side: 15 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet. 
4.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.2(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 2, 4-7-2009) 
Secs. 122-239-122-265. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Medium Density Residential District (MDR) 

Sec. 122-266. - Intent. 
(a)  The medium density residential district (MDR) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "MDR" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The MDR district shall provide sufficient land area for medium density residential development adequately supported by public services and facilities and compatible with existing and anticipated future land uses. The MDR district shall accommodate a mixture of single-family and multiple-family structure types. Supportive community facilities and accessory land uses may be located within areas designated "MDR." This district shall not accommodate transient lodging and guesthomes, commercial uses or freestanding office buildings. However, accessory uses, including approved home occupations, conducted within the residential structures are permitted so long as all such accessory uses are customarily incidental to and subordinate to the residential use. Other customary accessory uses and community facilities may also be located in areas designated MDR. 
(b)  Review of specific densities of developments shall be directed toward preserving stability of established residential areas. Sites for medium density residential developments should be located so that they provide a smooth transition between lower density residential areas and areas developed and/or designated for other more intense uses. Generally, medium density areas should be located between the perimeter of low density residential areas and areas of high density residential concentrations or other less restrictive uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.2.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-267. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the medium density residential district (MDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.2.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-268. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the medium density residential district (MDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with 7 to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(4)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(5)  Places of worship. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.2.3(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-269. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the medium density residential district (MDR), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.2.3(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-270. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the medium density residential district (MDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 35 percent. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 50 percent. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 
a.  Single-family and two-family: one-half acre. 
b.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 1 acre. 
c.  Minimum width: 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 70 feet or the prevailing lot width on developed lots within 200 feet of the subject lot but not less than 50 feet. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 80 feet. 
d.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Single-family and two-family: 
1.  Front: 30 feet or the average depth of front yards within 100 feet of the subject lot but not less than 20 feet. 
2.  Side: 7 feet. 
3.  Rear: 20 feet or 15 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 10 feet. 
b.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 
1.  Front: 30 feet. 
2.  Side: 25 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet or 20 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.2.3(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-271-122-275. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV.1. - Medium Density Residential District-1 (MDR-1) 

Sec. 122-276. - Intent. 
    The MDR-1 district is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "MDR-1" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The MDR-1 district shall provide the Poinciana Housing Parcel with a designation appropriate to the existing medium density multiple-family development on the site and compatible with the existing and future land uses. The MDR-1 district shall accommodate a mixture of multiple-family structure types, supportive community facilities, and accessory land uses. This district shall not accommodate guest homes, commercial uses or freestanding office buildings. However, accessory uses, including approved home occupations, conducted within the residential structures are permitted so long as all such accessory uses are customarily incidental to and subordinate to the residential use. Other customary accessory uses and community facilities may also be located in areas designated MDR-1. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(A))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-277. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the medium density residential district-1 (MDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Single- family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Places of worship. 
(3)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(4)  Community centers. 
(5)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Special needs social services. 
(8)  Protective services. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(B)), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-278. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the medium density residential district-1 (MDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with 7 to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(4)  Public and private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(C))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-279. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the medium density residential district-1 (MDR-1), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(D))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-280. - Dimensional regulations. 
    The dimensional requirements in the medium density residential district-1 (MDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: Eight dwelling units per acre (8 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum FAR: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 35 percent. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 50 percent. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 
a.  Multiple-family: 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Single-family: 5,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum width: 
1.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 80 feet. 
d.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 
b.  Single-family and two-family: 
1.  Front: 10 feet. 
2.  Side: 55 feet or 10 percent of lot width to a maximum of 15 feet, whichever is greater. 
3.  Rear: 20 feet. 
4.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(E))), 9-8-1999) 
Secs. 122-281-122-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Coastal Medium Density Residential District (MDR-C) 

Sec. 122-296. - Intent. 
    The coastal medium density residential district (MDR-C) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "MDR-C" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The purpose of the MDR-C district is to reinforce state policies mandating that concentrations of populations be directed away from coastal high hazard areas in order to protect against loss of life. No transient use shall be allowed in the MDR-C district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.4(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-297. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the coastal medium density residential district (MDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(4)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.4(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-298. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the coastal medium density residential district (MDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Parks and recreation, passive. 
(3)  Protective services. 
(4)  Public and private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.4(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-299. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the coastal medium density residential district (MDR-C), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.4(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-300. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the coastal medium density residential district (MDR-C) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: Eight dwelling units per acre (8 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: one-half acre. 
a.  Minimum width: 70 feet or the prevailing lot width on developed lots within 200 feet of the subject property but not less than 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setback. All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from wetlands and open waters established in sections 110-91 and 122-1148, in addition to the following: 
a.  Single-family and two-family: 
1.  Front: 30 feet or the average depth of front yards within 100 feet of the subject property but not less than 20 feet. 
2.  Side: 7 feet or 10 percent of lot width to a maximum of 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
3.  Rear: 20 feet or 15 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 10 feet. 
b.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 
1.  Front: 30 feet. 
2.  Side: 20 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet or 20 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.4(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Subdivision VI. - High Density Residential District (HDR) 

Sec. 122-326. - Intent. 
    The high density residential district (HDR) implements comprehensive plan future land use map policies for areas designated "HDR." The high density district shall only be approved for land accommodating high density residential development adequately supported by public services and facilities and compatible with existing and anticipated future land uses. Supportive community facilities and accessory land uses may be located within the HDR district. This district shall not accommodate transient lodging and guesthomes, commercial uses or freestanding office buildings. However, accessory uses, including approved home occupations, conducted within the residential structures are permitted so long as all such accessory uses are customarily incidental to and subordinate to the residential use. Other customary accessory uses and community facilities may also be located in the HDR district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-327. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the high density residential district (HDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-328. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the high density residential district (HDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(4)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(5)  Places of worship. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(8)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-329. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the high density residential district (HDR), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-330. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the high density residential district (HDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre (22 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 40 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 1 acre. 
a.  Minimum width: 
1.  Single-family and two-family: 70 feet or the average lot width on developed lots within 200 feet of the subject lot but not less than 50 feet. 
2.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 80 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Single-family and two-family: 
1.  Front: 30 feet or the average depth of front yards within 100 feet of the subject lot but not less than 20 feet. 
2.  Side: 7 feet. 
3.  Rear: 20 feet or 15 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 10 feet. 
b.  Multiple-family and community facilities: 
1.  Front: 30 feet. 
2.  Side: 25 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet or 20 feet when abutting an alley. 
4.  Street side: 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.2.5(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-331-122-355. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - High Density Residential College Road District (HDR-1) 

Sec. 122-331. - intent. 
(a)  The high density residential college road district (HDR-1) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HDR-1" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HDR-1 district shall accommodate high density affordable housing at 40 dwelling units per acre. The HDR-1 district shall accommodate permitted uses and duly approved conditional uses as specified in section 122-332 and section 122-333. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 2, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-332. - Permitted uses. 
    Uses permitted in the high density college road (HDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 2, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-333. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the high density residential college road district (HDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care facilities. 
(3)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes 
(4)  Parks and recreation active and passive. 
(5)  Places of worship. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(8)  Parking lots and facilities 
(9)  Emergency shelters for the homeless, and shelters for temporarily housing the homeless which meet the following minimum standards for development review, site development and operation: 
a.  Fencing: The entire site shall have a six-foot opaque fence on all sides. 
b.  Landscape buffer: A minimum of a five-foot wide "D" buffer as specified in section 108-374 (c) 
c.  Security lighting on the perimeter of the site and upon the interior of the fenced premises which shall be designed to "dark sky" lighting standards to protect adjacent residential uses. 
d.  Onsite security personnel licensed by the State of Florida for such role and activity provided by the operator of the facility during the hours of operation inclusive of nighttime or any time when clients of the facility are present. 
e.  An outdoor daytime congregation area inside the grounds of the site large enough to accommodate the maximum client population of the facility to prevent waiting and congregating off site. 
f.  Onsite facilities: 
i.  Sleeping facilities for 100% of the maximum client population; 
ii.  Dining facilities for at least 50% of the maximum client population; 
iii.  Shower and toilet facilities in a quantity necessary to serve the maximum client population; 
iv.  Intake and counseling offices; 
v.  Storage for client personal effects, food, sleeping linens, miscellaneous support materials; 
vi.  Loading zone and bus parking area. 
g.  All shelters for the homeless or for temporary housing [of] the homeless shall undergo review as a major development plan and meet the requirements of section 108-92 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 2, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-334. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the high density residential college road district (HDR-1), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 2, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-335. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the high density residential college road district (HDR-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 40 dwelling units per acre (40 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet, unless otherwise increased by referendum. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 1 acre. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 10 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: Multiple family and community facilities 80 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: 10 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: 10 feet. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 2, 2-7-2018) 
Secs. 122-336-122-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-356. - General intent. 
(a)  The overall purpose and intent of the commercial districts as provided in this division is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan commercial development objectives and policies. The location and distribution of specific types of commercial activities shall be determined based on the following considerations: 
(1)  Trip generation characteristics, including impact on transportation facilities and off-street parking systems; 
(2)  Location and site requirements based on specific needs of respective commercial activities, their market area, anticipated employment generation and floor area requirements; 
(3)  Compatibility with and impact on nearby residential and other surrounding commercial activities; 
(4)  Relationship to surrounding land uses and natural systems; and 
(5)  Impact on existing and planned community services and utilities. 
(b)  All commercial development shall comply with the comprehensive plan and performance criteria in chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, as well as all other applicable land development regulations. Each of the subdivisions in this division contain a description of the purpose of each zoning district established in this division, including reference to the comprehensive plan future land use map designation which shall be implemented through the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-357-122-385. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Limited Commercial District (CL)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 122-386. - Intent. 
(a)  The limited commercial district (CL) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "CL" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The CL district shall accommodate limited commercial land uses with maximum gross floor area not exceeding 5,000 square feet, including total area both under roof and outside sales area, and which shall include shops catering primarily to the following markets: 
(1)  Neighborhood residential markets within the immediate vicinity as opposed to citywide or regional markets; 
(2)  Specialized markets with customized market demands; or 
(3)  Tourist-oriented markets in the immediate vicinity. 
(b)  In order to manage the impacts of future development on transportation and public facilities, the city shall limit the intensity of development in the CL district to activities generating no more than 100 trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per day. Areas designated for residential and limited commercial development shall not accommodate large scale retail sales and trade activities generally serving a citywide or regional market. Such stores usually differ from limited commercial shops since the former generally require a larger floor area, carry a relatively larger inventory, and require a substantially greater off-street parking area. 
(c)  Uses which are not accommodated within the limited commercial area include the following: large scale discount stores or supermarkets; department stores; wholesale and warehousing activities; sales, service or repair of motor vehicles, machine equipment or accessory parts, including tire and battery shops; automotive services centers; and fast food establishments primarily serving in disposable containers and/or providing drive-in or drive-through facilities. In addition, the CL designation shall not accommodate transient residential uses, including motels or hotels and conversions from permanent residential use to transient residential use. However, existing motels within CL designated areas shall be grandfathered as lawful nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-387. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the limited commercial district (CL) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Places of worship. 
(4)  Business and professional offices. 
(5)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-388. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the limited commercial district (CL) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(5)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(6)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(7)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(8)  Protective services. 
(9)  Public and private utilities. 
(10)  Commercial amusement. 
(11)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(12)  Commercial retail high intensity. 
(13)  Medical services. 
(14)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(15)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(16)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals (allowed only as an accessory use to a hotel/motel). 
(17)  Veterinary medical services, with or without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-389. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the limited commercial district (CL), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-390. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the limited commercial district (CL) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units/acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 40 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum width: 70 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front and rear: minimum of 25 feet or as an alternative ten percent of lot depth for buildings up to 25 feet in height or 20 percent of lot depth for buildings over 25 feet in height; provided, however, the maximum setback shall be 50 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet or ten percent of lot width up to a maximum of 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-391-122-415. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - General Commercial District (CG)[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 122-416. - Intent. 
(a)  The general commercial district (CG) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "CG" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The CG district shall accommodate general commercial uses which shall include commercial retail, highway-oriented sales and services, other general commercial activities specified in section 122-1111 pertaining to land use by districts, customary accessory uses, and requisite community facilities. The general commercial district shall service the general commercial needs of residents and tourists which are not fulfilled in the historic area mixed use districts. The area is generally located along the North Roosevelt Corridor. Single-family, duplex and multiple-family residential activities may be accommodated only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to conditions and procedures identified in article III of this chapter. Height restrictions shall ensure a more effective land use transition from adjacent and nearby single-family neighborhoods. 
(b)  The CG area shall not accommodate manufacturing of goods or other activities which may generate nuisance impacts, including glare, smoke or other air pollutants, noise, vibration, major fire hazards, or other impacts generally associated with more intensive industrial uses. On the other hand, transient lodging including hotels and motels, timesharing or fractional fee residential complexes or other transient quarters may be located within the CG district if the use complies with all provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-417. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the general commercial district (CG) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Hospitals and extensive care. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 10,000 square feet. 
(7)  Commercial retail high intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(9)  Medical services. 
(10)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(11)  Restaurants, with or without drive-through. 
(12)  Veterinary medical services with or without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.2(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-418. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the general commercial district (CG) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family/two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(5)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(6)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(7)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(8)  Protective services. 
(9)  Public and private utilities. 
(10)  Bars and lounges. 
(11)  Boat sales and service. 
(12)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 10,000 square feet. 
(13)  Commercial retail high intensity greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(14)  Commercial amusement. 
(15)  Funeral homes. 
(16)  Gasoline stations. 
(17)  Light industrial. 
(18)  Marinas. 
(19)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals (allowed only as an accessory use to a hotel/motel). 
(20)  Vehicular sales and related services. 
(21)  Tattoo establishments (see division 13 of article V). 
(22)  Pain management clinics (see division 14 of article V). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.2(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 13-12, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-419. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the general commercial district (CG), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-420. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the general commercial district (CG) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units/acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 40 feet except for the following: The maximum height shall be 30 feet along N. Roosevelt Boulevard, from Seventh Avenue west to Eisenhower Drive and Jose Marti Drive. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front and rear: minimum of 25 feet or as an alternative ten percent of lot depth for buildings up to 25 feet in height or 20 percent of lot depth for buildings over 25 feet in height; provided, however, the maximum setback shall be 50 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet or ten percent of lot width up to a maximum of 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.2(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-421-122-445. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Salt Pond Commercial Tourist District (CT) 

Sec. 122-446. - Intent. 
    The Salt Pond commercial tourist district (CT) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "CT" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. Strategically located adjacent to the Key West International Airport, the CT district shall accommodate motels, limited scale tourist facilities stipulated in section 122-1111 pertaining to land use by districts, customary accessory uses, and requisite community facilities. The CT district shall not accommodate other commercial retail sales and services aside from motels and tourist-related facilities identified in section 122-1111. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.3(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-447. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the Salt Pond commercial tourist district (CT) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(5)  Places of worship. 
(6)  Business and professional offices. 
(7)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(9)  Medical services. 
(10)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.3(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-448. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the Salt Pond commercial tourist district (CT) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Nursing homes/rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(3)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Parks and recreation active and passive. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(8)  Bars and lounges. 
(9)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(10)  Commercial retail high intensity. 
(11)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(12)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals (allowed only as an accessory use to a hotel or motel). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.3(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-449. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the Salt Pond commercial tourist district (CT), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.3(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-450. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the Salt Pond commercial tourist district (CT) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 40 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet street frontage. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front and rear: minimum of 25 feet or as an alternative ten percent of lot depth for buildings up to 25 feet in height or 20 percent of lot depth for buildings over 25 feet in height; provided, however, the maximum setback shall be 50 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet or ten percent of lot width up to a maximum of 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.3.3(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-451-122-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MIXED USE DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-476. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the mixed use districts in this division is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan mixed use development objectives and policies, including: (i) residential/office development and (ii) planned redevelopment and development. All mixed use development shall comply with the comprehensive plan and the performance criteria in chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, as well as other applicable land development regulations. This division contains a description of the purpose of each mixed use zoning district established, including reference to the comprehensive plan future land use map designation which shall be implemented through the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-477-122-505. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Mixed Use Residential/Office District (RO)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 122-506. - Intent. 
    The mixed use residential/office district (RO) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "RO" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The RO district shall accommodate business and professional offices as well as single-family, duplex, and multiple-family residential structures. Customary accessory uses and community facilities may also locate within the areas designated "RO." Areas designated "RO" shall not accommodate transient lodging and guesthomes, general retail sales and services, warehousing, and outside storage. Furthermore, this policy designation is intended for areas which: 
(1)  Are located to provide for a land use transition between areas designated "SF" and more intense mixed use areas; 
(2)  Have access to a major thoroughfare and all required urban services; 
(3)  Contain sufficient land area to accommodate good principles of urban design, including sufficient land area to provide adequate landscaping and buffers to separate existing as well as potential future adjacent land uses of differing intensity; and 
(4)  Accommodate only residential uses as well as business and professional office buildings, including financial institutions, and medical facilities as regulated in the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.1(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-507. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the mixed use residential/office district (RO) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(7)  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.1(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-508. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the mixed use residential/office district (RO) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Public and private utilities. 
(3)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(4)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(5)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(6)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(7)  Parks and recreation active and passive. 
(8)  Protective services. 
(9)  Medical services. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.1(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-509. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the mixed use residential/office district (RO), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.1(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-510. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the mixed use residential/office district (RO) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acres). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 30 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet. 
c.  Rear: 25 feet. 
d.  Street side: 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.1(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-511-122-535. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Mixed Use Planned Redevelopment/Development District (PRD)[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and development, ch. 54; planning and development, ch. 108. 

Sec. 122-536. - Intent. 
(a)  The mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "PRD" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The PRD district shall accommodate planned development or redevelopment of strategically located sites for large scale development. Such development or redevelopment generates communitywide impacts and requires a regulatory framework that provides for comprehensive impact assessment as well as flexibility in negotiating development agreements (reference F.S. § 163.3220 et seq., the Florida Local Government Development Agreement Act) which significantly further the goals, objections, and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The PRD district regulations provide a regulatory framework for managing large scale development or redevelopment which generates potential communitywide impacts. Such large scale development and redevelopment activities may include redevelopment of large scale shopping centers along the North Roosevelt Corridor or the anticipated large scale residential development targeted for the municipal golf course. A PRD designation may also be appropriate for managing potential communitywide impacts generated by redevelopment of large scale and long established mobile home developments. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-537. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings (except in the Key West golf club development). 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.2(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 1-21-2004) 
Sec. 122-538. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Golf course facilities which maintain ten percent native vegetative uplands. 
(6)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes (except in the Key West golf club development). 
(7)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(8)  Places of worship. 
(9)  Protective services. 
(10)  Public and private utilities. 
(11)  Business and professional offices. 
(12)  Commercial retail low, medium and high intensity. 
(13)  Medical services (except in the Key West golf club development). 
(14)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(15)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.2(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-02, § 2, 1-21-2004) 
Sec. 122-539. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-540. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD), except as provided in section 122-541, are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: eight dwelling units per acre (8 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: minimum of 25 feet or as an alternative 10 percent of lot depth for buildings up to 25 feet in height or 20 percent of lot depth for buildings over 25 [feet] in height; provided, however, the maximum setback shall be 50 feet. 
b.  Side: 20 feet. 
c.  Rear: 40 feet or 35 feet when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.4.2(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-02, § 3, 1-21-2004) 
Sec. 122-541. - Dimensional requirements for Key West golf club development. 
    The dimensional requirements in the mixed use planned redevelopment/development district (PRD) applicable to the Key West golf club development are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot existing on January 1, 2003. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet (0 feet for air conditioning equipment, pool enclosures, pool equipment, carports and garbage enclosure areas) (2.5 feet for pools). Structures in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, however, shall be entitled to retain their existing side setbacks. 
c.  Rear: 5 feet (0 feet for pools, pool enclosures, pool equipment and garbage enclosure areas). 
d.  Street side: 5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 4, 1-21-2004) 
Sec. 122-542. - Accessory structures, swimming pools and spas in the Key West golf club development. 
    The following provisions apply to accessory structures, swimming pools and spas constructed within the Key West golf club development: 
(a)  Accessory structures and additions to existing homes are permitted to be constructed on lots, consistent with the conditions set forth in this section. Accessory structures shall include, but not be limited to: patios, decks, fences, gazebos, arbors, trellises, sheds, pools, spas, and mechanical swimming pool or spa equipment. The Key West Golf Club Homeowners Association must provide the City of Key West a written approval of a proposed accessory structure or a proposed addition to an existing house, as a condition of issuance of a building permit. Swimming pools and spas are prohibited on those lots identified on the attached Exhibit A as lots 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66A, 66B, 67A, 67B, 68, 69, 87, 88, 89, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147A, 147B, 148A, 148B, 149A, 149B, 151, 152, 153A, 153B, 154A, 154B, 155A, 155B, 156A, 156B, 157A, 157B, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299 and 300. On these lots where swimming pools and spas are prohibited, the following rear-yard accessory structures and additions must be screened as a further condition of issuance of a building permit: decks elevated above 30 inches, porches and balconies. 
(b)  On the following lots or portions thereof, as indicated on Exhibit A by a circle, which are subject to existing restrictive covenants, no improvements including swimming pools and spas shall be constructed except the certain landscaping as permitted in the restrictive covenants: the rear (northerly) 8.0 feet of 47RY, the rear (southerly) 28.92 feet of 120RY, the rear (southerly) 27.90 feet of 121RY and all of 283RY. 
(c)  A fence or hedge designed to shield a yard from errant golf shots may be up to 9.5 feet high. 
(d)  There shall be no variance of the prohibition against swimming pools and spas on the lots enumerated in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 5, 1-21-2004) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A cited in § 122-542 is not set out in this Code but is available for review in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 122-543. - Key West golf club residential lots; unity of title. 
(a)  The residential lots authorized for the Key West golf club development are limited to those lots depicted on the final lot survey of the Key West golf club development approved in Key West Resolution Number 04-041. No other lot may be created, nor may any lot be subdivided. The final lot survey, dated September 22, 2003, is on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  Those lots designated on the final lot survey of Key West golf club as sub-lots (with "RY" suffix) may be conveyed only to the owner of the contiguous lot bearing the same lot number as the sub-lot, and once conveyed, may not be separately re-conveyed or otherwise separately alienated; i.e., conveyance of the sub-lot shall establish an indivisible unity of title joining the title of the sub-lot with title to the correspondingly numbered contiguous lot. 
(c)  No principal use may be constructed on a Key West golf course sub-lot. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 6, 1-21-2004) 
Secs. 122-544-122-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-566. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the historic preservation districts in this division and in divisions 7 through 12 of this article is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan historic preservation objectives and policies. Development within the districts identified in this division and in divisions 7 through 12 of this article shall be planned and developed in a manner to preserve the form, function, image, and ambiance of the historic district. Any development plans for these areas shall be designed in a manner compatible with historic structures within the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 11, 2-1-2000) 
Secs. 122-567-122-595. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Historic Medium Density Residential District (HMDR)[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-596. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic medium density residential district (HMDR) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HMDR" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HMDR district shall accommodate historic Old Town medium density residential development for permanent residents, including single-family, duplex, and multiple-family residential structures. The HMDR district shall provide a management framework for preserving the residential character and historic quality of the medium density residential areas within Old Town. 
(b)  In addition, accessory uses, including approved home occupations conducted within the residential structure, and customary community facilities can be located in the HMDR designated area. This area shall not accommodate transient residential uses, including guesthomes, motels or hotels. Similarly, the area shall not accommodate commercial office, retail, or other commercial uses. Lawfully existing office or commercial uses shall be permitted to continue to exist as lawful nonconforming uses if such uses continue to comply with conditions invoked when the respective uses were approved. 
    In the event the city owns the portion of the Truman Waterfront Parcel designated HMDR, the site will be developed for 100 percent affordable housing. If the site is privately owned, one-third of the dwelling units will be affordable. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.1(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.1(A)), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-597. - Permitted uses. 
    Uses permitted in the historic medium density residential district (HMDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.1(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.1(B)), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-598. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic medium density residential district (HMDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(4)  Nursing homes/rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation active and passive. 
(6)  Places of worship. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.1(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.1(C)), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-599. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic medium density residential district (HMDR), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.1(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.1(D)), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-600. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic medium density residential district (HMDR) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.1(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.1(E)), 9-8-99; Ord. No. 10-04, § 3, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-601-122-610. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Historic Special Medium Density Residential District 

Sec. 122-611. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic special medium density residential district (HSMDR) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HSMDR" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HSMDR district shall accommodate historic special Old Town medium density residential development for permanent residents, including single-family, duplex, and multiple-family residential structures. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures, including approved home occupations conducted within the residential structure, and customary community facilities can be located in the HSMDR designated area. This district shall not accommodate transient residential lodging uses, including guest homes, motels or hotels, time-shares, transient apartment, vacation rental, and gated transient communities. 
(c)  Freestanding commercial offices, retail or other commercial or industrial uses of any kind shall not be permitted. 
(d)  The historic preservation planner shall have the discretion to review redevelopment and new development impacts for mass, scale, size, proportion and screening to ensure compatibility with the existing commercial fabric. 
(e)  Any development plan approval submitted for a property in the HSMDR zoning district shall be accompanied by a concurrent application for a development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 122-612. - Permitted uses. 
    Uses permitted in the historic medium density residential district (HSMDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(4)  Approved home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 122-613. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic medium density residential district (HSMDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Community centers, clubs and lodges accessory to residential uses. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Parks and recreation active and passive. 
(4)  Public and private utilities. 
(5)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(6)  Educational institutions and day care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 122-614. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic special medium density residential district (HSMDR), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 122-615. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic special medium density residential district (HSMDR) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the Historic Architectural Review Commission Design Guidelines, for additions and alterations and new construction, dated and effective January 5, 2010, and administered by the historic preservation planner, and/or the HARC commission, who shall have the responsibility to review and approve or deny all applications for improvements, redevelopment and new development. 
(1)  Maximum density: 8.6 dwelling units per acre (8.6 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio for all development including residential: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 122-616. - Affordable housing requirements. 
    Affordable housing shall be required for all existing residential, redeveloped residential and new residential development at a ratio of 30 percent of the total units existent, redeveloped and/or created on properties located within the HSMDR zoning district per chapter 122, article V, division 10, sections 122-1465 through 122-1472. Except that applications for rezoning of the property to HSMDR zoning received before September 6, 2012, shall have the 30% ratio adjusted such that the requirement shall be not less, but not more than 30 percent of the units existent on site at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 12-33, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Secs. 122-617-122-625. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Historic High Density Residential District (HHDR)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-626. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic high density residential district (HHDR) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HHDR" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HHDR district shall accommodate historic high density residential development for permanent residents, including single-family, duplex, and multiple-family residential structures. The purpose of the historic high density residential designation is to provide a management framework for preserving the residential character and historic quality of the Old Town central residential community. 
(b)  In addition, incidental accessory uses, including duly approved home occupations, and customary community facilities can be located in the HHDR district. The HHDR district shall not accommodate transient residential uses, including guesthomes, motels or hotels. Similarly, the area shall not accommodate freestanding commercial offices, retail, or other commercial uses. Lawfully existing office or commercial uses shall be permitted to continue to exist as lawful nonconforming uses if such uses continue to comply with conditions invoked when the respective uses were approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.2(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-627. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic high density residential district (HHDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Cemeteries, in the area bounded by Olivia Street, Windsor Lane, Passover Lane, Angela Street, and Frances Street. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.2(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 5-18-2004) 
Sec. 122-628. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic high density residential district (HHDR) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(4)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(6)  Places of worship. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.2(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-629. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic high density residential district (HHDR), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.2(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-630. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic high density residential district (HHDR) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre (22 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.00. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 90 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet or 10 percent of lot width to a maximum of 15 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
d.  Street side: 5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.2(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 4, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-631-122-655. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL CORE DISTRICTS (HRCC-1 to 3)[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-656. - General intent. 
    The historic residential commercial core districts (HRCC-1 through 3) are established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HRCC-1 through 3" on the comprehensive future land use map. The HRCC districts shall accommodate the historic residential commercial core mixed use center. The HRCC district shall provide a management framework for preserving the nature, character and historic quality of the historic commercial core, including related residential development. Consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use map, the HRCC district has been divided into three subdistricts in order to carry out comprehensive plan policies addressing the function, form, and development constraints associated with the respective subareas. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-657. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the HRCC district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 122-658. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the HRCC district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Places of worship. 
(3)  Business and professional offices. 
(4)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Medical services. 
(6)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(7)  Veterinary medical services without outside kennels. 
(8)  Community centers, clubs, and lodges. 
(9)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(10)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(11)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(12)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(13)  Protective services. 
(14)  Public and private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 2, 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 122-659. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the HRCC district, all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 3, 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 122-660. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the HRCC district are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: A maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre (12 du/acre), provided that 40 percent are affordable; or a maximum of 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre), provided that 50 percent are affordable; or a maximum of 22 dwellings units per acre (22 du/acre), provided that 66.66 percent are affordable. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.5. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 7.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet, but 10 feet when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 4, 1-7-2003; Ord. No. 10-04, § 5, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-661-122-685. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - HRCC-1 Duval Street Gulfside District 

Sec. 122-686. - Intent. 
(a)  The HRCC-1 Duval Street gulfside district incorporates the city's intensely vibrant tourist commercial entertainment center which is characterized by specialty shops, sidewalk-oriented restaurants, lounges and bars with inviting live entertainment; and transient residential accommodations. The core of the commercial entertainment center spans generally from the Pier House south to Petronia Street as specifically referenced on the official zoning map. This segment of Duval Street is the most intense activity center in the historic commercial core. The following light manufacturing and warehousing uses are located within the eastern portion of the HRCC-1 district: 
(1)  Strunk Lumber Yard. 
(2)  Key West Aloe Processing Plant. 
(3)  Key West Hand Print Fabric Shop. 
(b)  These light manufacturing and warehouse uses include real estate parcel numbers 24, 29, 36, 99, and 116, as delineated in the county property appraiser's city property location map dated January, 1991. In addition to uses generally allowed throughout the HRCC-1 area, the following light industrial and warehouse uses may locate exclusively within these areas (i.e., real estate parcels 24, 29, 36, 99, and 116) upon satisfying comprehensive performance criteria, including but not limited to nuisance abatement standards, screening and buffering, concurrency management, open space, and all such activities must be under roof with no open yard storage: 
(1)  Warehousing and wholesaling within enclosed buildings; 
(2)  Service and repair establishments, excluding vehicle and heavy machinery service and repair; business services; printing shops; and similar uses; 
(3)  Light manufacturing, excluding metal processing or fabrication, including light processing, assembly and distribution functions, electronics, research and development, and similar uses; 
(4)  Building materials supply and storage, and contractor's storage; 
(5)  Vocational trade schools; 
(6)  Enclosed parking facilities; and 
(7)  Accessory uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(1)(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-687. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the HRCC-1 Duval Street gulfside district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Commercial retail high intensity less than or equal to 2,500 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(8)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(9)  Medical services. 
(10)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(11)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(12)  Veterinary medical services without outside kennels. 
(13)  Adult entertainment establishments (see section 122-1533). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(1)(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 7-7-2004) 
Sec. 122-688. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the HRCC-1 Duval Street gulfside district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Community centers, clubs, and lodges. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Bars and lounges, including those associated with adult entertainment establishments. 
(10)  Boat sales and service. 
(11)  Commercial amusement, except adult entertainment establishments. 
(12)  Commercial low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(13)  Commercial retail high intensity greater than 2,500 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(14)  Funeral homes. 
(15)  Light industrial. 
(16)  Marinas. 
(17)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(1)(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-14, § 2, 7-7-2004) 
Sec. 122-689. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the HRCC-1 Duval Street gulfside district, all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(1)(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-690. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the HRCC-1 Duval Street gulfside district are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre (22 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet plus an additional 5 feet if the structure has a pitched roof, the design of which is approved by the historic architectural review commission. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 70 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: none. 
b.  Side: 2.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: none. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(1)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 6, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-691-122-715. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - HRCC-2 Key West Bight District 

Sec. 122-716. - Intent. 
(a)  Consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use map, the HRCC-2 Key West Bight district includes the Key West Bight area. Development within this district shall reinforce the following: 
(1)  Preservation of public waterfront access as well as waterfront views; 
(2)  Improved pedestrian linkages with adjacent and nearby activity centers; 
(3)  Protection and enhancement of opportunities for water-dependent and water-related land use activities, while preventing undue concentrations of population within the coastal high hazard area; 
(4)  Accommodation of public improvements necessary to achieve redevelopment plan objectives; 
(5)  Implementation of urban design schemes which attract pedestrians, increase waterfront exposure, reinforce the ambiance of the waterfront, and regulate against structures which wall off or otherwise inhibit access to waterfront views, strategic open spaces, or pedestrian linkages; and 
(6)  Consistency with the redevelopment plan for the Key West Bight and the Caroline Street Redevelopment Area. 
(b)  This threshold shall be consistent with the limits established in F.S. § 420.9071(20) for moderate income persons. The HRCC-2 area is the only designated receiving area for transfers of development rights. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(2)(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-717. - Uses permitted. 
    In the HRCC-2 Key West Bight district, only water-dependent uses shall be located within the first 30 feet landward of the mean high water (MHW) or the bulkhead. Similarly, only water-related uses shall be located between the 30-foot setback and the 100-foot setback from the mean high water or the bulkhead. No permanent residential use shall be located within 100 feet of the mean high water, and no transient residential uses shall be allowed within any portion of the HRCC-2 district. Permitted uses include the following: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Medical services. 
(8)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(9)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(10)  Veterinary medical services without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(2)(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-718. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the HRCC-2 Key West Bight district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Community centers, clubs, and lodges. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Bars and lounges. 
(10)  Boat sales and service. 
(11)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(12)  Commercial retail high intensity as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(13)  Funeral homes. 
(14)  Light industrial. 
(15)  Marinas. 
(16)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(2)(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-719. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the HRCC-2 Key West Bight district, all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(2)(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-720. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the HRCC-2 Key West Bight district are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: Density of areas designated HRCC-2 on the future land use map shall carry a base density of eight units per gross acre. These HRCC-2 designated areas may develop to a density of 12 units per acre under the transfer of development rights program assuming that the owner/developer certifies by affidavit as described in this subsection that a minimum of 40 percent of the residential units shall be provided and maintained as affordable housing as described. Areas designated "HRCC-2" on the future land use map may be increased to 20 units per acre if all units within the development are certified by affidavit of the owner/developer as affordable residential units. All increases in density above the base density of eight units per acre shall be only by transfer of development rights. An affordable housing affidavit shall guarantee that the affordable units shall be inhabited in perpetuity by residents whose income levels are consistent with income thresholds to be established in the city's affordable housing in division 10 of article V of this chapter. All developments in the HRCC-2 district involving transfer of development rights and affordable housing shall be approved pursuant to a development agreement as provided in chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114. This threshold shall be consistent with the limits established in F.S. § 420.9071(20) for moderate income persons. The HRCC-2 area is the only designated receiving area for transfers of density. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.5. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet, except within the 100-foot setback from mean high water, the following restrictions apply: 
a.  The minimum open space ratio shall be 0.5. 
b.  The height of buildings shall be one habitable floor/story above the base flood elevation. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: Within the 100-foot setback from mean high water, the minimum open space ratio shall be 0.50, and the maximum height of buildings shall be restricted to one habitable floor/story above base flood elevations. The open space restriction shall not apply to a ferry terminal if the Chevron property within the Key West Bight area is selected for the city ferry terminal. The redevelopment plan shall provide design criteria which shall protect waterfront views, mandate pedestrian access improvements, and ensure preservation of open space. Landward of the 100-foot setback area the following restrictions shall apply: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent, excepting the first 100 feet from mean high water as provided in section 122-716. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 7.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet but ten when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(2)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 7, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-721-122-745. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District 

Sec. 122-746. - Intent. 
    Consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use map, the HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District includes the Duval Street Oceanside Corridor from Petronia Street south to United Street. Located toward the southern end of Duval Street, this corridor serves as a center for arts, crafts, gifts, designer goods, restaurants, and tourist accommodations. Structures within this corridor generally have retained a front facade which is much less commercialized relative to the entertainment center on the gulf side of Duval Street. The front facades generally have much smaller storefront windows and frequently incorporate a residential vernacular characterized by wood frame windows, equipped with mullions, and wood clapboard siding. This area shall be regulated by more restrictive performance standards than those applicable to the HRCC-1 district north of Petronia Street. The criteria for development within the HRCC-3 district shall require larger open space ratios, design standards which preserve and reinforce the physical characteristics of the area, and land use restrictions which exclude sidewalk bars and lounges which may produce excessive noise incompatible with surrounding activities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(3)(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-747. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Hotels, motels and transient lodging. 
(8)  Medical services. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(10)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(11)  Veterinary medical services without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(3)(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-748. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Bars and lounges. 
(10)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(11)  Commercial retail high intensity. 
(12)  Funeral homes. 
(13)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(3)(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-749. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District, all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(3)(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-750. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the HRCC-3 Duval Street Oceanside District are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre (22 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet plus an additional 5 feet if the structure has a pitched roof, the design of which is approved by the historic architectural review commission. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setback: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.3(3)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 9, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-751-122-755. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - HRCC-4 Truman Waterfront District 

Sec. 122-756. - Intent. 
    The HRCC-4 district is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas zoned "HRCC-4" within the Truman Waterfront parcel. The district specifically accommodates uses compatible with or accessory to the Truman Waterfront Regional Park and encourages preservation of the nature, character, and quality of the city's historic development. The Truman Waterfront Park shall be dedicated in perpetuity as a regional park. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(A))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-757. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the HRCC-4 zoning district are as follows: 
(1)  Parks and recreation, passive and active, inclusive of uses typically associated with or accessory to a regional waterfront park that serve social, educational and cultural needs not otherwise listed. 
(2)  Protective services. 
(3)  Community centers. 
(4)  Government business and professional offices. 
(5)  Commercial retail and concessionaire sales accessory to primary uses. 
(6)  Parking lots. 
(7)  Cultural and civic activities, inclusive of museums, theatres, stadiums and amphitheaters. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(B))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1(Exh. A), 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-758. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the HRCC-4 Truman Waterfront District are as follows: 
(1)  Waterfront restaurants and food service facilities associated with park activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(C))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-759. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the HRCC-4 Truman Waterfront District, the following uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(D))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1(Exh. A), 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-760. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the HRCC-4 Truman Waterfront District are as follows; however, construction may be limited by, scale, mass and proportion considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines; in addition to dimensional requirements imposed by the adjacent military property as stated in the Truman Waterfront parcel land conveyance documents: 
(1)  Maximum density: Not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum FAR: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 30 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: Not applicable. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 7.5 feet. 
b.  Side: 7.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 7.5 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(7)  Additional regulations: 
a.  Required street landscape buffers may be reduced to the setbacks enumerated in subsection (6) above when the principal use is passive and active recreation defined in chapter 86, section 86-9, definition of terms. 
b.  Military requirements for landscaping adjacent to military lands should be installed in accordance with the Truman Waterfront parcel land conveyance documents. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(E))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-04, § 8, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 12-3-2013) 
Cross reference- Historic Preservation, ch. 102. 
Secs. 122-761-122-775. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-776. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic neighborhood commercial districts, HNC-1 through 3 districts, are established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HNC-1 through 3" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HNC districts shall accommodate both residential and neighborhood commercial uses typically located along major thoroughfares which lead into or are adjacent to the central core commercial area of the city. Residential activities permitted within the HNC-1 through 3 districts include single-family and duplex structures as well as multiple-family structures. Commercial uses generally permitted in these districts include the following: 
(1)  Professional offices; 
(2)  Banking and financial institutions; 
(3)  Personal service shops; 
(4)  Specialty shops; 
(5)  Retail sales and services, excluding automotive sales and services as well as drive-through restaurants, theaters or other drive-through facilities which potentially generate similar traffic flow problems; and 
(6)  Transient living accommodations and guest cottages within the HNC-1 and HNC-3 districts but not within the HNC-2 district. 
(b)  The HNC-1 through 3 districts may also accommodate customary accessory uses and community facilities. The HNC district regulations include criteria for managing issues surrounding land use compatibility; historic preservation; access to public facilities with available capacity; urban design amenities; and related issues which must be managed to ensure effective implementation of the comprehensive plan goals, objectives, and policies. Within the HNC districts redevelopment or conversion of permanent housing structures to transient residential, office, or other allowable commercial uses shall be permitted only if no on-site reduction in housing units for permanent residents occurs. The minimum size dwelling shall be 750 square feet. 
(c)  Performance standards shall restrict the allowable neighborhood commercial uses to very limited square footage in order to maintain land use compatibility with residential uses in the vicinity. In addition, the performance standards shall require minimum open space ratios, restrict the floor area based on traffic-generating characteristics, and incorporate other qualitative and quantitative standards which protect residential properties. 
(d)  In order to manage the impacts of future development on transportation and public facilities, the city shall limit the intensity of development within the HNC district by establishing the following thresholds within subdistricts HNC-1, HNC-2, and HNC-3, respectively: 
(1)  Within the HNC-1 subdistrict, excepting sites abutting Simonton Street and Truman Avenue, land use activities shall generate no more than 100 trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per day. 
(2)  Within the HNC-2 and HNC-3 subdistricts, land use activities shall generate no more than 50 trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per day. 
(3)  Within the HNC-2 transient accommodations shall be prohibited. 
(e)  The HNC subdistricts are generally located on the official zoning map as provided in subdivisions II through IV of this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-777-122-805. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Historic Neighborhood Commercial District-Truman/Simonton (HNC-1) 

Sec. 122-806. - Intent. 
    The historic neighborhood commercial district-Truman/Simonton (HNC-1) consists of Simonton, Truman Avenue, and White Street South Corridors. The HNC-1 district is located along major segments of Simonton Street, from Caroline South to United Street; Truman Avenue, from Simonton Street northeast to White Street; and White Street, from Truman Avenue south to United Street; and generally includes larger scale commercial uses oriented toward the motoring public. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(1)(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-807. - Uses permitted. 
    Within the historic neighborhood commercial (HNC) districts, redevelopment or conversion of permanent housing structures to transient residential, office, or other allowable commercial uses shall be permitted only if no on-site reduction in housing units for permanent residents occurs. Uses permitted include the following: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 2,500 square feet. 
(7)  Hotels, motels and transient lodging. 
(8)  Medical services. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(10)  Veterinary medical services without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(1)(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-808. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic neighborhood commercial district-Truman/Simonton (HNC-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 2,500 square feet. 
(10)  Commercial retail high intensity. 
(11)  Funeral homes. 
(12)  Light industrial. 
(13)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(14)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(1)(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-809. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic neighborhood commercial district-Truman/Simonton (HNC-1), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(1)(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-810. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic neighborhood commercial district-Truman/Simonton (HNC-1) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. Refer to section 122-776 for additional restrictions that regulate the square footage of gross leasable floor area based on trip generation within HNC areas. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(1)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 10, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-811-122-835. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Historic Neighborhood Commercial District (HNC-2)[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-836. - Intent. 
    The historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2) is restricted to small offices, neighborhood shops, restaurants with very limited seating, or other commercial uses similar in character to traditional neighborhood commercial services which have very limited square footage and generate low volumes of traffic. In the future in-fill within the HNC-2 district shall be strictly governed by performance criteria which ensures continued land use compatibility and stability within and among adjacent residential areas. The HNC-2 district mixed use subareas are comprised of both residential and commercial activities and shall continue to be allowed to develop as mixed use neighborhood centers. Qualitative and quantitative performance criteria shall be used to prevent encroachment by incompatible commercial uses characterized by excessive scale and intensity. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.5.4(2)(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(A))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-837. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low intensity less than or equal to 2,500 square feet. 
(7)  Medical services. 
(8)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(9)  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels. 
(10)  Parks and recreation, active and passive on the Truman Waterfront parcel, only. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.5.4(2)(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(B))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-838. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(4)  Nursing homes, rest and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(8)  Commercial retail low intensity greater than 2,500 square feet and less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(9)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. However, restaurants are expressly excluded from lots fronting the south side of Caroline Street, west of William Street and extending west 50 feet past Peacon Lane to include the lot abutting both the west side of Peacon Lane and the south side of Caroline Street. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.5.4(2)(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(C))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-839. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.5.4(2)(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(D))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-840. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-2) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. Refer to section 122-776 for additional restrictions that regulate the square footage of gross leasable floor area based on trip generation within HNC areas. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.5.5.4(2)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(E))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-04, § 11, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-841-122-865. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Historic Neighborhood Commercial District (HNC-3)[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-866. - Intent. 
    The historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3) consists of the Bahama Village commercial core. The HNC-3 Bahama Village commercial core district includes the Bahama Village neighborhood commercial core along Petronia Street, approximately 200 feet southwest of Duval Street, and extends southwestward to the rear property lines of lots abutting the southwest side of Emma Street. The village area is a redevelopment area, including a commercial center linked to Duval Street. Consistent with the comprehensive plan, development in the district shall be directed toward maintaining and/or revitalizing existing housing structures, preventing displacement of residents, and compliance with concurrency management. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(3)(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-867. - Uses permitted. 
    Within the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3), redevelopment or conversion of permanent housing structures to transient residential, office, or other allowable commercial uses shall be permitted only if no on-site reduction in housing units for permanent residents occurs. Uses permitted include the following: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low intensity less than or equal to 2,500 square feet. 
(7)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(8)  Medical services. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(10)  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(3)(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-868. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(4)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(6)  Protective services. 
(7)  Public and private utilities. 
(8)  Commercial retail low intensity greater than 2,500 square feet to less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(9)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(3)(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-869. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(3)(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-870. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic neighborhood commercial district (HNC-3) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. Refer to section 122-776 for additional restrictions that regulate the square footage of gross leasable floor area based on trip generation within HNC areas. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: none. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.4(3)(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 12, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-871-122-895. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HISTORIC COMMERCIAL TOURIST DISTRICT (HCT)[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-896. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic commercial tourist district (HCT) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HCT" on the future land use map. The HCT district is comprised of areas having a high concentration of hotels, motels, and/or transient lodging facilities together with primarily tourist-oriented commercial services, including specialty shops, restaurant and drinking establishments, personal services, offices, and other similar activities. 
(b)  The HCT district may also accommodate customary accessory uses and community facilities. The district regulations include criteria for managing issues surrounding land use compatibility, historic preservation, access to public facilities with available capacity, urban design amenities, and related issues which must be managed to ensure effective implementation of the comprehensive plan goals, objectives, and policies. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.5(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-897. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic commercial tourist district (HCT) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with six or less residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Commercial retail low intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet. 
(7)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(8)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.5(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-898. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic commercial tourist district (HCT) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Bars and lounges accessory to and located within a motel, hotel or other transient facility having at least 20 units. 
(10)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(11)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(12)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals (allowed only as an accessory use to a hotel/motel). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.5(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-899. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic commercial tourist district (HCT), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.5(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-900. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic commercial tourist district (HCT) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre (22 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 70 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet, except that for single-family and two-family residences the minimum lot size will be 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: 5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.5(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 13, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-901-122-925. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - HISTORIC RESIDENTIAL/OFFICE DISTRICT (HRO)[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-926. - Intent. 
    The historic Residential/Office (HRO) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "Historic Commercial" on the future land use map. The HRO district shall accommodate business and professional offices as well as residential structures. Cultural and civic activities are allowed anywhere in the district and those same uses with accessory/associated commercial sales are allowed on Whitehead Street between Greene Street and Southard Street. Low-med intensity retail, transient residential, restaurants and small recreational power-driven equipment rentals are allowed along the Appelrouth Business Corridor, generally described as the properties adjacent to Appelrouth Lane within the HRO including the parcel located on the Northern corner of Whitehead Street and Southard Street, excluding the parcel located on the South-Eastern corner of Whitehead Street and Appelrouth Lane. Customary accessory uses and community facilities may also be located within the HRO district. 
    Notwithstanding the Appelrouth Business Corridor, the HRO district shall not accommodate new transient lodging or guesthouses. In addition, the HRO district shall expressly exclude general retail sales, warehousing, and outdoor storage. In order to manage the impacts of future development on transportation and public facilities, the city shall limit the intensity of development within the HRO district to activities generating no more than 50 trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per day. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.6(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 18-16, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-927. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic residential/office district (HRO) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(3)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(4)  Places of worship. 
(5)  Business and professional offices. 
(6)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(7)  Medical services. 
(8)  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels. 
(9)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity less than or equal to 5,000 square feet, as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter, within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(10)  Commercial retail high intensity less than or equal to 2,500 square feet, as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter, within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(11)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(12)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through, within the appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.6(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 18-16, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-928. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic residential/office district (HRO) are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes with seven to 14 residents as provided in section 122-1246. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities with or without associated/accessory commercial sales on Whitehead Street from Greene Street to Southard Street. 
(3)  Community center, clubs and lodges. 
(4)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Funeral homes. 
(10)  Commercial low and medium intensity greater than 5,000 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter, within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(11)  Commercial retail high intensity greater than 2,500 square feet as provided in division 11 of article V of this chapter, within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(12)  Small recreational power-driven equipment rentals within the Appelrouth Business Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.6(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 18-16, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-929. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic residential/office district (HRO), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.6(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-930. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic residential/office district (HRO) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre (16 du/acre). 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. Refer to section 122-926 for additional restrictions that regulate the square footage of gross leasable floor area based on trip generation within the HRO districts. 
(3)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 50 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: 5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.6(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 14, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-931-122-955. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - HISTORIC PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC SERVICES DISTRICTS [17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Subdivision I. - Historic Public and Semipublic Services District (HPS) 

Sec. 122-956. - Intent. 
    The historic public and semipublic services district (HPS) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HPS" on the future land use map. The HPS district shall accommodate existing public and semipublic services. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-957. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic public and semipublic services district (HPS) are as follows: 
(1)  Community centers, clubs, and lodges. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Hospitals and extensive care. 
(4)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(6)  Places of worship. 
(7)  Business and professional offices. 
(8)  Medical services. 
(9)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(10)  Cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.7(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-09, § 3, 5-18-2004) 
Sec. 122-958. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic public and semipublic services district (HPS) are as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Protective services. 
(4)  Public and private utilities. 
(5)  Marinas. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-959. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic public and semipublic services district (HPS), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-960. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic public and semipublic services district (HPS) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for the HPS area shall be 1.0, excepting large scale regional facilities, which require a community impact statement. The latter projects may have a higher floor area ratio if approved by city commission. However, prior to approving a floor area ratio in excess of 1.0, the city commission must render a finding that the proposed public facility requires a higher floor area ratio in order to accommodate a regional service necessary to the general health, safety, and welfare of the city and/or county. Furthermore, the finding must indicate that the regional facility as proposed shall comply with all other qualitative and quantitative criteria of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations, including but not limited to the adopted concurrency management policies. 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: greater of 5 feet or 10 percent of lot width to a maximum of 15 feet. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet or 15 feet when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 10 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.7(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 15, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-961-122-965. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Historic Public and Semipublic Services District-1 (HPS-1) 

Sec. 122-966. - Intent. 
    The HPS-1 district is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated HPS-1 on the future land use map located within the Truman Waterfront parcel. This district is specifically intended to implement policies that facilitate the development and use of the Truman Waterfront Park, inclusive of the NOAA/environmental education center. The Truman Waterfront Park shall be dedicated in perpetuity as a regional park. 
    The HPS-1 district shall accommodate a regional park with uses essential and accessory to parks of regional importance. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(A))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-967. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic public and semipublic services district-1 (HPS-1) are as follows: 
(1)  Cultural and civic activities, inclusive of museums, theatres, stadiums and amphitheaters. 
(2)  Parks and recreation, passive and active, inclusive of uses typically associated with or accessory to a regional waterfront park that serve social, educational and cultural needs not otherwise listed. 
(3)  Community centers. 
(4)  Parking lots. 
(5)  Protective services. 
(6)  Government business and professional offices. 
(7)  Commercial retail and concessionaire sales accessory to primary uses. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(B))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-968. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic public and semipublic services district-1 (HPS-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Waterfront restaurants and food service facilities associated with park activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(C))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-969. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic public and semipublic services district-1 (HPS-1), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(D))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 122-970. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic public and semipublic services district-1 (HPS-1) are as follows; however, construction is limited by scale, mass and proportion considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines; in addition to dimensional requirements imposed by the adjacent military property as stated in the Truman Waterfront parcel land conveyance documents: 
(1)  Maximum density: Not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum FAR: 0.80. 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 30 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: Not applicable. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks. 
a.  Front: 7.5 feet. 
b.  Side: 7.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 7.5 feet. 
d.  Street side: 7.5 feet. 
(7)  Additional regulations: 
a.  Required street landscape buffers may be reduced to the setbacks enumerated in subsection (6) above when the principal use is passive and active recreation defined in chapter 86, section 86-9, definition of terms. 
b.  Military requirements for landscaping adjacent to military lands should be installed in accordance with the Truman Waterfront parcel land conveyance documents. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(E))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-04, § 16, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 10-05, § 2, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 12-3-2013) 
Cross reference- Historic Preservation, Ch. 102. 
Secs. 122-971-122-975. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Historic Public and Semipublic Services District-2 (HPS-2) 

Sec. 122-976. - Intent. 
    The historic public and semipublic services district - 2 (HPS-2) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated HPS-2 on the future land use map. The district is specifically intended to implement policies for the Peary Court Cemetery and be consistent with the historic preservation plan for that site. HPS-2 district shall accommodate an existing cemetery and historic open space accommodating passive park and recreation activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(A))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-977. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic public and semipublic services district - 2 (HPS-2) are as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Open space. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(B))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-978. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic public and semipublic services district - 2 (HPS-2) are as follows: 
None. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(C))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-979. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic public and semipublic services district - 2 (HPS-2), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this subdivision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(D))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-980. - Dimensional regulations. 
    The dimensional regulations in the historic public and semipublic services district - 2 (HPS-2) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: Not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum FAR: Not applicable. 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Maximum building coverage: Not applicable. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: Not applicable. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: Not applicable. 
a.  Minimum lot width: Not applicable. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: Not applicable. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: Not applicable. 
b.  Side: Not applicable. 
c.  Rear: Not applicable. 
d.  Street side: Not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(E))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-04, § 17, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-981-122-986. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - HISTORIC PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (HPRD)[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Planning and development, ch. 54; historic preservation, ch. 102; planning and development, ch. 108. 

Sec. 122-986. - Intent. 
(a)  The historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated "HPRD" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The HPRD district shall provide a management framework for directing future redevelopment in several redeveloping fringe areas within and outside the review area of the historic architectural review commission. 
(b)  The HPRD district includes the Truman Annex project, including Sunset Island. The HPRD district shall provide a basis for encouraging additional development and redevelopment activities in other areas. Such new development and redevelopment shall be designed to advance the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. For instance, the HPRD district shall promote the following: 
(1)  Historic preservation. 
(2)  Neighborhood facility improvements. 
(3)  Architectural and urban design amenities which are consistent with the traditional Old Town historic character and which further subarea design and improvement strategies. 
(4)  An increased supply of affordable housing which is accessible to targeted income groups over a longterm period. 
(5)  Off-site parking facilities, including parking structures at strategically located areas through contributions to a special parking fund to be established to assist in financing construction of off-site centrally located parking facilities. 
(c)  In addition, the HPRD district shall be used as a vehicle to: 
(1)  Avoid displacement of low and moderate income families and generate additional affordable housing opportunities. 
(2)  Retain and/or enhance access to the shoreline by the general public. 
(3)  Prevent conversion of open space, loss of vegetation and specimen trees, and displacement of porous surfaces with impermeable surfaces which may intensify drainage problems. 
(4)  Avoid replacement of permanent housing stock with transient lodging. 
(5)  Prevent displacement of smaller but diverse shops. 
(6)  Encourage diversity within Old Town structure types as opposed to look-alike improvements. 
(7)  Maintain and enhance infrastructure levels of service consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.8(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-987. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes with less than or equal to six residents. 
(4)  Business and professional offices. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.8(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-988. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD) are as follows: 
(1)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(2)  Cultural and civic activities. 
(3)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(4)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(6)  Places of worship. 
(7)  Protective services. 
(8)  Public and private utilities. 
(9)  Commercial retail low, medium, and high intensity. 
(10)  Funeral homes. 
(11)  Hotels, motels, and transient lodging. 
(12)  Medical services. 
(13)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(14)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(15)  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.8(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-989. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.8(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-990. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the historic planned redevelopment and development district (HPRD) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 22 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 50 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 1 acre. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 5 feet. 
b.  Side: 2.5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: 5 feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.5.8(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-04, § 18, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-991-122-995. - Reserved. 
DIVISIONS 12.1-12.4. - RESERVED 

Secs. 122-996-122-1000. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12.5. - HISTORIC LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HCL) 

Sec. 122-1001. - Intent. 
    The historic limited commercial district (HCL) is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas designated HCL on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The purpose of the HCL district is to provide a management framework for the "market place" adjacent to Bahama Village, south of the extension of Petronia Street. The HCL district shall accommodate limited commercial land uses including shops catering primarily to the following markets: 
(1)  Neighborhood residential markets within the immediate vicinity as opposed to city-wide or regional markets; 
(2)  Specialized markets with customized market demands; or 
(3)  Tourist oriented markets in the immediate vicinity. 
    In order to manage the impacts of future development on transportation and public facilities, the city shall limit the intensity of development in the HCL district to activities generating no more than 100 trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per day. Areas designated for residential and limited commercial development shall not accommodate large scale retail sales and trade activities generally serving a city-wide or regional market. Such stores usually differ from limited commercial shops since the former generally require a larger floor area, carry a relatively larger inventory, and require a substantially greater off-street parking area. 
    Uses which are not accommodated within the historic limited commercial area include the following: large scale discount stores or supermarkets; department stores; wholesale and warehousing activities; sales, service or repair of motor vehicles, machine equipment or accessory parts, including tire and battery shops; automotive services centers; and fast food establishment primarily serving in disposable containers and/or providing drive-in or drive-through facilities; nor any commercial use which is affiliated with a regional, state or national concern, or which advertises by common theme of architecture, signage, or operations be allowed. In addition, the HCL designation shall not accommodate transient residential uses, including motels or hotels and conversions from permanent residential use to transient residential use. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(A))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-1002. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the historic limited commercial district (HCL) are as follows: 
(1)  Business and professional offices. 
(2)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity that generate less than or equal to 50 pm peak hour vehicle trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. 
(3)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities that generate less than or equal to 50 pm peak hour vehicle trips per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. 
(4)  Open air vending and mobile vending consistent with other city regulations. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(B))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-1003. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the historic limited commercial district (HCL) are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residential dwellings located over commercial. 
(2)  Public and private utilities. 
(3)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through, that generate between 50 and 100 pm peak hour vehicle trips per 1,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(C))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-1004. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the historic limited commercial district (HCL), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(D))), 9-8-1999) 
Sec. 122-1005. - Dimensional regulations. 
    The dimensional regulations in the historic limited commercial district (HCL) are as follows; however, construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines: 
(1)  Maximum density: 16 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Maximum FAR: 0.8. 
(3)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: Minimum of 5 feet. 
b.  Side: Minimum of 5 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1 (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(E))), 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 10-04, § 19, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 122-1006-122-1015. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC SERVICES DISTRICT (PS) 

Sec. 122-1016. - Intent. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of the public and semipublic services district (PS) is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan policies for areas located outside of Old Town which are designated "PS" or "M" on the future land use map. All public and semipublic services developed shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in chapter 102; articles III, IV, V and VII of chapter 108; section 108-956; and article II of chapter 110, as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
(b)  Development plans for sites within the PS district shall provide sufficient acreage and open space and shall be properly screened and buffered in order to minimize potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The maximum intensity of public and semi-public institutional structures and buildings on lands designated "PS," measured in terms of floor area ratio (FAR), shall not exceed eight-tenths (0.8), including floor area allocated to all uses. The maximum floor area ratio for structures and buildings accessory to principal uses recreation and open space both active and passive parks and recreation shall be two-tenths (0.2). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.6(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 122-1017. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the public and semipublic services district (PS) are as follows: 
(1)  Community centers, clubs and lodges. 
(2)  Educational institutions and day care. 
(3)  Golf course facilities. 
(4)  Hospitals and supportive care facilities. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(6)  Parks and recreation, active and passive. 
(7)  Business and professional offices. 
(8)  Medical services. 
(9)  Parking lots and vehicular storage facilities. 
(10)  Veterinary medical services with or without outside kennels. 
(11)  Government operated transit facilities. 
(12)  Governmental administration buildings. 
(13)  Essential public services and facilities inclusive of, but not limited to, drainage facilities, and emergency services; i.e., staging areas responsive to declared emergency, with the exception of shelters for the homeless, which are regulated as a conditional use. 
(14)  Non-recreational open spaces. 
(15)  Temporary storage, for less than six (6) months, of construction materials and debris generated by storms or other natural disasters. 
(16)  Other similar activities such as uses critical to government function, uses for essential public services, uses to serve social and cultural needs not otherwise listed. 
(17)  Government maintenance facilities and garages. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.6(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 12, 2-1-2000; Ord. No 07-18, § 1, 12-4-2007; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 122-1018. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the public and semipublic services district (PS) are as follows: 
(1)  Emergency shelters for the homeless, and shelters for temporarily housing the homeless which meet the following minimum standards for development review, site development and operation: 
a.  Fencing: The entire site shall have a six-foot opaque fence on all sides. 
b.  Landscape buffer: A minimum of a five-foot wide "D" buffer as specified in section 108-347(c). 
c.  Security lighting on the perimeter of the site and upon the interior of the fenced premises which shall be designed to "dark sky" lighting standards to protect adjacent residential uses. 
d.  Onsite security personnel licensed by the State of Florida for such role and activity provided by the operator of the facility during the hours of operation inclusive of nighttime or any time when clients of the facility are present. 
e.  An outdoor daytime congregation area inside the grounds of the site large enough to accommodate the maximum client population of the facility to prevent waiting and congregating off site. 
f.  Onsite facilities: 
i.  Sleeping facilities for 100% of the maximum client population; 
ii.  Dining facilities for at least 50% of the maximum client population; 
iii.  Shower and toilet facilities in a quantity necessary to serve the maximum client population; 
iv.  Intake and counseling offices; 
v.  Storage for client personal effects, food, sleeping linens, miscellaneous support materials; 
vi.  A loading zone and bus parking area. 
g.  All shelters for the homeless or for temporary housing [of] the homeless shall undergo review as a major development plan and meet the requirements of section 108-92 et seq. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Cultural and civic activities, inclusive of museums, theatres and stadiums. 
(4)  Protective services. 
(5)  Public and private utilities. 
(6)  Funeral homes and crematoriums. 
(7)  Marinas. 
(8)  Restaurants and food service facilities associated with recreational activities. 
(9)  Solid waste and recycling transfer and storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.6(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 122-1019. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the public and semipublic services district (PS), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.6(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1020. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the public and semipublic services district (PS) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: Not applicable; except where the capacity of transitional housing with supportive services shall be evaluated in terms of floor area ratio, only. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: Outside the historic districts, as designated on the future land use map, the maximum floor area ratio for all public and semi-public institutional structures and buildings services shall not exceed eight-tenths (0.8), except for structures and buildings accessory to principal uses and both active and passive parks and recreation and open space, which shall have a maximum floor area ratio of two-tenths (0.2). 
(3)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
b.  Impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Minimum width: 50 feet. 
b.  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet or 15 feet when abutting an alley. 
d.  Street side: 15 feet. 
(7)  Minimum setbacks for active and passive recreational uses: 
a.  Front: 10 feet. 
b.  Side: 10 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Street side: 10 feet. 
(8)  Additional regulations: Required street landscape buffers may be reduced to the setbacks enumerated in subsection (7) above when the principal and only use is passive and active recreation defined in chapter 86, section 86-9, definitions. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.6(E)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Secs. 122-1021-122-1045. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - AIRPORT DISTRICT (A) 

Sec. 122-1046. - Intent. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of the airport district (A) is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive plan policies for the Key West International Airport which is designated "A" on the future land use map. All development proposed for the airport district (A) district shall comply with the comprehensive plan and performance criteria in chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
(b)  Performance criteria within the land development regulations require that land use changes adjacent to the Key West International Airport avoid encroaching upon the airport hazard zone. Furthermore, land uses proposed within noise impact areas defined in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) noise control regulations shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration guidelines for managing noise impacts through land use regulation. The airport district regulations establish the permitted uses and applicable restrictions within the air operations area. The Federal Aviation Administration regulations shall govern the land use, specifications and placement of structures within the airport operations area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1047. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in the airport district (A) are airport facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1048. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the airport district (A) are as follows: 
(1)  Protective services. 
(2)  Public and private utilities. 
(3)  Business and professional offices. 
(4)  Commercial retail low and medium intensity. 
(5)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(6)  Restaurants, excluding drive-through. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1049. - Prohibited uses. 
    In the airport district (A), all uses not specifically or provisionally provided for in this division are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1050. - Dimensional requirements. 
    The dimensional requirements in the airport district (A) are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum density: not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.3. 
(3)  Maximum height: refer to division 9 of article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: not applicable. 
(5)  Minimum lot size: not applicable. 
(6)  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1051. - Airport height limitations. 
    For airport height limitations in the airport district (A), refer to division 9 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.7(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1052-122-1075. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-1076. - Applicability. 
    The city land development regulations shall apply uniformly to each district, class or kind of structure or land except as provided. In interpreting and applying land development regulations, all sections shall be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of the land development regulations are in conflict with requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or laws of other governments having jurisdiction in the subject issue, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.1), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1077. - Conformance required. 
    No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified in this subpart B. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.2), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1078. - Restrictions on buildings and structures, including entryways. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to exceed the height; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of building site area; or to have narrower or smaller rear yard setbacks, front yard setbacks, side yard setbacks or other open spaces than specified in the land development regulations or in any other manner contrary to the land development regulations. All habitable space shall be accessible from the interior of exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.3), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 122-1079. - Lots of record less than minimum size. 
    Any legally platted lot of record, which conformed with the regulations and procedures governing subdivision of lots, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives which contains less lot area or width than required in the district in which it is located may be used for a use permitted in such district. The provision shall not be construed to permit more than one dwelling unit on a lot with less area per family than required for the district in which such lot is located. However, if the substandard lot adjoins other land under the same ownership which if used could correct the nonconforming lot area or width: 
(1)  The substandard lot shall not be permitted a vested development right unless the nonconformity is remedied; and 
(2)  Any subsequent sale or ownership transfer of the substandard lot, adjoining lot, or portion thereof shall not result in a vested development right in the subject substandard lot unless the transaction corrects deficiencies in the substandard lot. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.4), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1080. - Street and road setbacks. 
(a)  Where right-of-way lines are established for streets, roads or highways, the front yards of lots and side yards of corner lots shall be measured from such right-of-way lines, effective on the date such right-of-way lines are officially established. 
(b)  Existing and proposed rights-of-way for street, road, and highway construction may be defined on a major street plan map and such other documents and materials as are necessary. These maps and documents may be adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rights-of-way and setback lines. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.5), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1081. - Erection of more than one principal structure on lot. 
    In any district, more than one structure accommodating a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of zoning shall be met for each such structure. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.6), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1082-122-1110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USES 

Sec. 122-1111. - Table of land use by districts. 
(a)  The table of land use by districts as set forth in this section stipulates the permitted and conditional uses by district. 
(b)  Permitted uses are uses allowed by right, provided all applicable sections within the land development regulations are satisfied as well as all other applicable laws and administration regulations. Conditional uses are allowable only if approved by the city pursuant to administrative procedures found in article III of this chapter. The applicant requesting a conditional use must demonstrate compliance with conditional use criteria set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(c)  No permitted use or conditional use shall be approved unless a site plan for such use is first submitted by the applicant. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in demonstrating compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances during the site plan review process. The site plan review process is set forth in article II of chapter 108. 
TABLE OF LAND USE BY DISTRICT 
LDR-C SF MDR MDR-C HDR HDR-1 CL CG CT RO PRD HMDR HSMDR HHDR HRCC-1 HRCC-2 HRCC-3 HPRD HNC-1 HNC-2 HNC-3 HCT HRO HPS HPS-1 PS C A5 Residential Uses Accessory residential units (reference section 122-171 P Single-family dwellings P P P P P C C P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4 Duplexes/two-family dwellings C1 P P P C C P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4 Multiple-family dwellings P P P P C C P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4 Foster homes/group homes with = to 6 residents2 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Group homes with 7-14 residents C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Approved home occupations P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory uses and structures P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4 C Community Facilities Airport facilities P Cemeteries C C Community centers, clubs and lodges C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P Cultural and civic activities P P P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Educational institutions and day care facilities C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P Golf course facilities6 C P Hospitals and extensive care P P P Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P C P Parks and recreation, active C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P Parks and recreation, passive C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P 4 Places of worship C C C P P P P C C C P P P C P P P P P P P Protective services C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Public and private utilities C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C 4 C Commercial activities Bars and lounges C C C C C C7 Boat sales and services C C C Business and professional offices P P P P C P P P P P P P P P P P C Commercial amusement C C C Commercial retail 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 Funeral homes C C C C C C C C Gasoline stations C C Hotels, motels and transient lodging P P P P C P10 P10 P Light industrial C C C C Marinas C C C C C Medical services P P P C C P P P C P P P P P P Parking lots and facilities C P P P P C C C C P P P C P P P P P P P C Restaurants, excluding drive-through P C C P P P C C C11 C C C Restaurants, including drive-through P Small recreation power-driven equipment rental C9 C9 C9 C C C C C9 Vehicular sales and related services, including maintenance and repair C Veterinary medical services, with outside kennels P Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels P P P P P P C P P P P  
Footnotes: 
1. Two-family dwellings (duplexes) shall not be allowed within the following areas: (i) The Venetian Subdivision located south of the Riviera Canal; and (ii) the area bounded on the north by Flagler Drive, on the south by Casa Marina Court, on the east by White Street and on the west by Reynolds Street. 2. Group homes shall meet provisions of section 122-1246. 3. Home occupations are permitted upon a finding by city staff that the proposed home occupation meets sections 122-1306 and 122-1307. 4. Development within the conservation (C) district is substantially restricted pursuant to division 2 of article IV of this 122. 5. Development within the airport (A) district is substantially restricted pursuant to division 14 of article IV of this chapter and division 9 of this article. 6. Golf courses shall maintain a minimum of ten percent of all native vegetative uplands. 7. Bars and lounges within the HCT district are allowed only as a conditional use and only if the bar or lounge is accessory to and located within a hotel, motel or other transient facility having at least 20 units. 8. Permitted and conditional commercial retail uses within each zoning district shall be determined based upon the criteria in section 122-1112. 9. Small recreation power-driven equipment rentals will only be allowed in CT and HCT districts as an accessory use to a hotel or motel. 10. Within the HNC districts, redevelopment or conversion of permanent housing structures to transient residential, office or other allowable commercial uses shall be permitted only if no on-site reduction in housing units for permanent residents occurs. 11. Restaurants are expressly excluded from lots fronting on the south side of Caroline Street west of William Street and extending west 50 feet past Peacon Lane to include the lot abutting both the west side of Peacon Lane and the south side of Caroline Street.  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.8), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-05, § 3, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 12-33, § 3, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 13-25, § 3, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 18-04, § 3, 2-7-2018) 
Sec. 122-1112. - Table of permitted and conditional commercial retail uses by district. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Low intensity means commercial retail uses that generate less than 50 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
    Medium intensity means commercial retail uses that generate between 50 and 100 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
    High intensity means commercial retail uses that generate above 100 average daily trips per 1,000 square feet. 
(b)  The table of permitted and conditional commercial retail uses by district shall be as follows: 
TABLE OF PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL COMMERCIAL RETAIL USES BY DISTRICT 
District Allowed by Right Allowed as Conditional Use CL, CT and HCT Low and medium intensity > 5,000 sq. ft. Low and medium intensity > 5,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity CG Low and medium intensity &lte; 10,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity &lte; 5,000 sq. ft. Low and medium intensity > 10,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity > 5,000 sq. ft. PRD None Low, medium and high intensity HRCC-1 Low and medium intensity &lte; 5,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity &lte; 2,500 sq. ft. Low and medium intensity > 5,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity > 2,500 sq. ft. HRCC-2 and HRCC-3 Low and medium intensity &lte; 5,000 sq. ft. Low and medium intensity > 5,000 sq. ft. 
High intensity HPRD None Low, medium and high intensity HNC-1 Low and medium intensity &lte; 2,500 sq. ft. Low and medium intensity > 2,500 sq. ft. 
High intensity HNC-2 and HNC-3 Low intensity &lte; 2,500 sq. ft. Low intensity > 2,500 sq. ft. to &lte; 5,000 sq. ft. A None Low and medium intensity  
Note: The total area as stated above includes both sales area under roof and any outside sales area. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.8(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1113-122-1140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AREA REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 122-1141. - Minimum lot or site requirements for all uses. 
    The table in section 122-1151 incorporates required size and dimension regulations which shall be applicable within each respective zoning district, and these standards shall be maintained in perpetuity. All developments shall have a total land area sufficient to satisfy all standards stipulated within the land development regulations, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Minimum lot, setback, and lot coverage requirements as provided in divisions 2 through 14 of article IV of this chapter and division 2 of this article and this division; 
(2)  Open space, buffers, and landscaping as provided in articles V and VI of chapter 108 and article VI of chapter 110; 
(3)  Surface water management and flood damage prevention as provided in article VIII of chapter 108; 
(4)  Public facilities requirements as provided in chapter 94; 
(5)  Access, internal circulation and off-street parking as provided in articles IV and VII of chapter 108; 
(6)  Wetland protection as provided in articles III, IV, V, VII and VIII of chapter 110; 
(7)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control standards as provided in division 3 of article III of chapter 110; 
(8)  Exterior appearance and structural quality as provided in sections 108-278 through 108-288; 
(9)  Shoreline protection as provided in article IV of chapter 110; 
(10)  Preservation of upland vegetation as well as marine, fishery and wildlife habitats, especially those supporting endangered flora and fauna species as provided in article IV of chapter 110; 
(11)  Preservation of historical and archaeological resources as provided in chapter 102 and article II of chapter 110; and 
(12)  Nuisance abatement criteria as provided in article III of chapter 106. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1142. - Density and intensity of land use. 
(a)  The density and intensity shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. Refer to the table in section 122-1151 for specific density and intensity maximums by type of land use. The density and intensity expressed in the table in section 122-1151 is the maximum density/intensity which can be achieved. However, the maximum density/intensity is not guaranteed by right and shall be subject to the performance criteria set forth in the land development regulations. 
(b)  Maximum gross residential density shall be determined by dividing the maximum allowable units by the gross acres of land (i.e., dwelling units/gross land area). Maximum gross density for hotel, motel and transient facilities shall be determined by dividing the maximum allowable units by the gross acres of land (i.e., dwelling units/gross land area). Units within hotels, motels, and other transient facilities shall be defined as any room accommodating beds, including conventional beds as well as sofa beds, Murphy beds, or other types of beds with unique multipurpose or space saving designs, which can be locked and keyed from the exterior of the premises or from a common hallway, foyer, or other common area and can be held out to the public as distinct sleeping quarters for overnight lodging or for a longer period of time. 
(c)  All residential densities stipulate the maximum gross densities. Gross land area shall be defined as those contiguous land areas under common ownership proposed for residential development. When developable land abuts wetlands, waters of the state or other environmentally sensitive land, including but not limited to those lands within state and/or federal jurisdiction, the boundary shall be delineated as established in section 110-88 or as established by the state or federal government. 
(d)  The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in determining that development shall not adversely impact wetlands, yellow heart hammocks, and other environmentally fragile natural systems. Where the state and federal governments have jurisdiction, the applicant for development must obtain all necessary permits, including but not limited to a dredge and fill permit, prior to requesting a determination of development rights from the city. Maximum density in the conservation district shall not exceed one unit per ten acres. In addition, site alteration shall be limited to ten percent of the entire site. Such determinations shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations. These determinations shall be predicated on findings rendered by professionals competent in producing data and analyses necessary to support impact assessments, including findings regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological value and function of environmentally sensitive lands. This section shall not prevent, as a minimum, a single-family home from being built on a legal lot of record where state and federal agencies having jurisdiction approve such development. 
(e)  In reviewing applications/site plans for development of particular building sites, the specific residential density approved by the city shall meet all applicable performance criteria of chapters 94, 102 and 106; articles I and III through IX of chapter 108; and chapters 110 and 114, as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
(f)  The maximum intensity stipulated for nonresidential activities is stated in terms of floor area ratio as defined in section 86-9. 
(g)  The city shall reserve the power to mandate changes in the site plan as well as mandate reductions in the density and/or intensity of development proposed by an applicant/developer if the city finds that the proposed site plan does not satisfy provisions of the comprehensive plan and/or the land development regulations. The maximum floor area ratios are further restricted by quantitative and qualitative criteria included in the land development regulations, including but not limited to such factors as the following: 
(1)  Minimum open space. 
(2)  Concurrency management and level of service standards for traffic circulation. 
(3)  Stormwater management and other public facilities and services. 
(4)  Off-street parking and internal circulation. 
(5)  Height restrictions. 
(6)  Landscaping. 
(7)  Other required on-site improvements and design amenities required to achieve land use compatibility. 
(h)  Furthermore, the calculations of floor area ratios for determining allowable intensity in mixed use developments on sites greater than one-half acre at the time of adoption of the comprehensive plan (January 1994) shall apply the following specific procedures to avoid excessive intensity. Upon adoption of the comprehensive plan, where common ownership exists on contiguous parcels, applicants for development must aggregate the land under common ownership into a single site plan. 
_____
(i)  The maximum number of residential units which may be allocated to the residential component of a mixed use development shall be determined by following the procedures below: 
Step 1. State the allowable commercial FAR _______ = Maximum allowable commercial FAR Step 2. State the proposed commercial FAR _______ = Proposed commercial FAR Step 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 _______ = Unused commercial FAR Step 4. Divide line 3 by line 1 _______ = % of unused commercial FAR Step 5. Multiply line 4 by the maximum allowable units per acre _______ = Allowable units per acre Step 6. Multiply line five by the number of acres on the total site _______ = Maximum residential units allowed  
(j)  The maximum square footage which may be allocated to the commercial component of a mixed use development shall be determined by following the procedures as follows: 
Step 1. State the maximum allowable units per acre _______ = Maximum allowable units per acre Step 2. State total number of units per acre on the total site _______ = Total number of units per acre Step 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 _______ = Unused residential density Step 4. Divide line 3 by line 1 _______ = % of unused residential density Step 5. Multiply line 4 by allowable commercial FAR _______ = Maximum commercial FAR Step 6. Multiply line five by the square footage of the total site _______ = Maximum commercial square footage  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-04, § 13, 2-1-2000) 
_____
Sec. 122-1143. - Impervious surface requirements for all uses. 
(a)  Definition; scope. The term "impervious surface" is defined as that portion of the land which is covered by buildings, pavement, nonporous fill, or other cover through which water cannot penetrate. The impervious surface ratio requirement controls the intensity of development, by restricting the amount of the land covered by any type of impervious surface. 
(b)  Calculation. The impervious surface ratio (ISR) is calculated for the gross site by dividing the total impervious surface by the gross site area. Waterbodies are impervious and shall be included as such in the ISR calculation. 

Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) Illustration 
ISR = Total Impervious Surface / Total Lot Area = 2,000 + 4,000 / 10,000 = 60% 
Cluster development or other site design alternatives may result in individual lots exceeding the ISR, while other lots may be devoted entirely to open space. The city may require, as a condition of approval, deed restrictions or covenants which guarantee the maintenance of such open space in perpetuity. The ISR requirement shall not be bypassed or reduced. However, the intent is to allow maximum flexibility through calculating ISR on the gross site, and not on a lot-by-lot basis. 
(c)  Use of porous material. Porous concrete, porous asphalt, turf block, or similar materials may be used subject to approval of the city engineer. 
(d)  Compliance with ISR. All proposed development shall comply with the standards given in the table of impervious surface ratios in the table in section 122-1151. Where a proposed development is donating or dedicating land based on a plan approved by the city, the gross site before dedication or donation shall be used to calculate ISR. This does not relieve the applicant from providing all required on-site buffers, landscaping, stormwater management areas, minimum, and other required project amenities. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1144. - Building setbacks. 
    The table in section 122-1151 provides minimum building setbacks for all zoning districts within the city. The minimum building setback shall be measured from the subject lot lines of the building site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(D)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1145. - Required yards. 
(a)  Purpose, use and maintenance of yards. The purpose of yards required in the land development regulations is to provide open space around and between structures for health, safety and aesthetic purposes. The purpose is also to prevent the location of structures within dedicated easements. All required yards and landscaped areas shall be planted and maintained in lawn, sod, or landscaping, including flower beds, shrubs, hedges or other generally accepted landscaping material approved by the city. Landscaping material, including trees, shall not obstruct the vision of the motoring public. The landscape requirements of article VI of chapter 108 shall further regulate development within all zoning districts, excepting single-family zoned districts. 
(b)  General encroachments into required yards. Encroachments into required yards shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Projections and obstructions. Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as follows or as otherwise permitted in divisions 2 through 14 of article IV of this chapter or in division 2 of this article or in this division: 
a.  Movable awnings may project not over three feet into a required yard, provided that where the yard is less than five feet in width the projection shall not exceed one-half the width of the yard. 
b.  Awnings, canopies, or marquees outside the historic district may not project over three feet into a required yard. The location of exterior open stairs must be approved by the building department, and such exterior open stairs can be no closer than 30 inches to an adjacent property line. 
c.  Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in required yards subject to the land development regulations. 
d.  Accessory parking may be located in a required front, rear or side yard. 
(2)  Exceptions. Typical play equipment, wires, lights, mailboxes, ornamental entry columns and gates, and outdoor furniture are not considered as encroachments. 
(c)  Yards. A yard shall be defined as an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied, open to the sky and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in the land development regulations. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the structure shall be used (a driveway or off-street parking area may be a portion of a "yard"). 
(1)  Front yard. Front yards shall be defined as the yard abutting a street (i.e., street frontage lot). The depth of required front yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the front lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the front (street frontage) property line. The front yard regulations shall apply to all lots fronting on a street. 
(2)  Rear yard. A rear yard is a yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than projections or encroachments specifically provided for in the land development regulations. For all corner lots, the rear yard shall be as indicated in subsection (c)(4) of this section for corner lots. The depth of required rear yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the rear property line. 
(3)  Side yard. A side yard is a yard between the main building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard, which is the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereof. For all corner lots, the side yard shall be as indicated in subsection (c)(4) of this section. The width of required side yards shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of at least the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. Such yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, including the roof, to the side property line. 
(4)  Determining yards on corner lot. On corner lots abutting two intersecting streets, the setbacks shall be measured as described in subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section with the front, side and rear lot lines being determined as follows: 
a.  One street frontage shall be declared a front yard. 
b.  The other street frontage shall be a street side yard. 
c.  The rear yard shall be the yard opposite the declared front yard. 
d.  The remaining yard shall be the interior side yard. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(E)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1146. - Yard and building site requirements. 
    Yards or building sites created after the effective date of the ordinance from which the land development regulations derive shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements established in the schedule of district regulations located in divisions 2 through 14 of article IV of this chapter, in division 2 of this article and in this division. No yard or building site existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(F)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1147. - Independent yard or open space. 
    No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building or site for the purpose of complying with the land development regulations shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(G)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1148. - Coastal construction control line. 
(a)  No building or other structure shall be constructed: 
(1)  Within 50 feet of the mean high water along the Atlantic Ocean, southwest from the Cow Key Channel Bridge to the southeast corner of the Truman Annex property, inclusive of the Fort Taylor State Park, which fronts on the Atlantic Ocean; or 
(2)  Within 30 feet of the mean high water along the main ship channel, Key West Harbor, Garrison Bight, and the Bay of Florida, which shoreline is generally described as running north and east from the southeast corner of Truman Annex property, inclusive of the Fort Taylor State Park property which fronts on the Bay of Florida, to the north end of the Cow Key Channel Bridge and also extending along the entire outer limits of North Stock Island. 
(b)  Restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be applicable to any pier, dock, seawall, or other water-dependent use, or to any construction on property not within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  If any portions or applications of subsection (a) of this section are judicially determined to be legally improper or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the remaining portions or applications thereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(H)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1149. - Height. 
(a)  The term "building height" as used in the land development regulations shall mean the vertical distance from the crown of the nearest adjacent street to the highest point of the proposed building. 
(b)  Height limitations contained in the schedule of district regulations located in divisions 2 through 14 of article IV of this chapter, in division 2 of this article and in this division shall apply to all construction unless otherwise stated herein below and/or in section 122-1151. 
(c)  These height regulations may be waived subject to the variance criteria found in section 90-391 in order to accommodate nonhabitable hardware and utility structures typically associated with the principal structure, including spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy or use. 
(d)  Flood Protection Building Height Exception: An exception to the building height regulations as referenced in subsection (b) above, may be permitted in cases where a building is raised above ground to meet or exceed FEMA established base flood elevation levels under the following conditions: 
1.  Only the equivalent measure of distance from the existing ground level, prior to infill, to the required base flood elevation of the building, and up to a maximum of four (4) feet above the base flood elevation, may exceed the building height regulations. 
2.  No exception shall result in a building height that would exceed 40 feet. 

(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(I)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 122-1150. - Structures to have access. 
    Every building erected or moved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9(J)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1151. - Size and dimension. 
    Size and dimension regulations for zoning districts shall be as follows: 
TABLE OF SIZE AND DIMENSION REGULATIONS 
Minimum Setback Requirements District Minimum Area 
(sq. ft.) Minimum Width 
(sq. ft.) Minimum Depth 
(sq. ft.) Impervious Surface Ratio Maximum Building Coverage Front 
(feet) Street Side 
(feet) 1 Side 
(feet) Rear 2 
(feet) Maximum Height 
(feet) Maximum Floor Area Ratio Maximum Density 
(du/acre) Residential LDR-C low density residential coastal 1 acre 100 100 50 40 30 15 15 3 25 30 n/a 1 MDR-C medium density residential coastal 4 1/2 acre 70 5 100 50 40 30 6 
30 10 
20 7 3 
20 20 
25 30 n/a 8 SF single-family residential 4 6,000 7 
1/2 acre 4 50 
100 100 
100 50 
60 35 7 
40 30 6 
30 10 
20 5 
15 25 
25 25 20 
25 n/a 
n/a 8 MDR medium density residential 1/2 acre 
1 acre 70 5 
80 100 
100 50 
60 35 
40 30 6 
30 10 
25 7 
25 20 
25 35 n/a 16 HDR high density residential 1 acre 
1 acre 70 5 
80 100 60 40 30 6 
30 10 
25 7 
25 20 
25 40 n/a 22 HDR-1 high density residential college road 1 acre 80 100 60 40 20 10 10 10 25* NA 40 *Unless otherwise increased by referendum Commercial CL limited commercial 10,000 70 100 60 40 25 8 20 15 3 25 8 40 0.8 16 CG general commercial 15,000 150 100 60 40 25 8 20 15 3 25 8 40 9 0.8 16 CT tourist commercial 30,000 150 100 60 40 25 8 20 15 3 25 8 40 0.8 16 RO residential/office 10,000 70 100 60 40 30 15 15 25 35 0.8 16 PRD planned redevelopment/development 10 1 acre n/a n/a 60 40 25 8 20 20 40 35 0.8 8 HMDR historic medium density residential 21 4,000 40 90 60 40 10 7.5 5 15 30 1.0 16 HSMDR historic special medium density residential 5,000 50 100 60 40 10 7.5 5 15 30 1.0 22 8.6 HHDR historic high density residential 21 4,000 40 90 60 50 10 5 5 11 20 30 1.0 22 HRCC-1 historic commercial core, Duval GS 21 4,000 40 100 70 50 0 0 2.5 10 35 19 1.0 22 HRCC-2 historic commercial core, KW Bight 12, 21 5,000 50 100 60 12 50 10 7.5 5 15 2 35 12 0.5 8 13 HRCC-3 historic commercial core Duval OS 21 4,000 40 90 60 50 5 7.5 5 15 35 19 1.0 22 HRCC-4 historic residential commercial core-4 n/a n/a n/a 50 30 7.5 7.5 7.5 7.5 35 0.8 n/a HNC-1 historic neighborhood commercial 21 4,000 40 100 60 50 5 7.5 5 15 35 1.0 14 16 HNC-2 historic neighborhood commercial 21 4,000 40 90 60 40 10 7.5 5 15 30 1.0 14 16 HNC-3 historic neighborhood commercial 21 4,000 40 90 60 40 0 7.5 5 15 30 1.0 14 16 HCT historic commercial tourist 17, 21 10,000 75 100 70 50 5 5 5 10 35 1.0 22 HRO historic residential office 21 5,000 50 100 60 50 5 5 5 10 30 1.0 14 16 HPS historic public/semipublic service 21 5,000 50 100 50 40 20 10 5 11 20 2 25 1.0 n/a HPS-1 historic public and semi-public service-1 n/a n/a n/a 50 30 7.5 7.5 7.5 7.5 25 0.8 n/a HPRD historic planned redevelopment/development 21 1 acre 50 100 50 40 5 5 2.5 10 35 1.0 22 PS public/semipublic service 6,000 50 100 50 40 20 15 15 20 2 25 0.8 15 n/a A airport n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 16 0.3 n/a C conservation 10 acres n/a n/a 5 5 18 18 18 18 25 0.01 0.1  
Footnotes: 
1. Reference section 122-1181. 2. The minimum setback on an alley may be five feet less than the rear setback given. 3. Greater of number listed on table or ten percent of the lot width to a maximum of 20 feet. 4. For the MDR-C, SF, MDR and HDR districts, the first line sets forth the requirements for single-family and two-family residential uses; the second line sets forth the requirements for all other uses including community facilities; except that in the SF district, educational institutions shall have a minimum lot area of one acre. 5. The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet or the prevailing lot width on developed lots within 200 feet of the subject lot, but not less than 50 feet. 6. The front setback shall be 30 feet or the average depth of front yards on developed lots within 100 feet on each side, but not less than 20 feet. 7. Single-family and two-family residential dwelling units shall have minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet, except in the following areas the minimum shall be 8,000 square feet: a. The Venetian Subdivision located south of the Riviera Canal. b. The area bounded on the north by Flagler Avenue, on the south by Casa Marina Court, on the east by White Street and on the west by Reynolds Street. Additionally, within this area the maximum lot coverage shall be 30 percent. 8. The front and rear setbacks given on the table are the minimum setback. As an alternative the front and/or rear setback may be ten percent of the lot depth for buildings up to 25 feet in height, or 20 percent of the lot depth for buildings over 25 feet in height; provided, however, the maximum setback shall be 50 feet. 9. The maximum height along North Roosevelt Boulevard, from SeventhAvenue west to Eisenhower Drive and Jose Marti Drive, shall be 30 feet. 10. All setbacks in the planned redevelopment and development (PRD) district shall be established based on planned amenities to be provided by the developer, the terms of which shall be negotiated through a development agreement acceptable to the city commission. The design parameters, including setbacks, shall be consistent with acceptable principles and practices of urban design. 11. Greater of the number given in the table or ten percent of the lot width to a maximum of 15 feet. 12. In the HRCC-2 district, within the 100-foot setback from mean high water (mean high water), the following restrictions apply: a. The minimum open space ratio shall be 0.5. b. The height of the building shall be restricted to one habitable story/floor above base flood elevation. c. The listed dimensions shall apply landward of the 100-foot setback. 13. Reference subdivision III of division 7 of article IV of this chapter. 14. Reference divisions 8 and 10 of article IV of this chapter for additional restrictions that regulate the square footage of gross leasable floor area based on trip generation within the HRO and HNC land use districts. 15. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) outside the historic districts, as designated on the future land use maps, shall be 0.8, except for recreation and open space which shall have a maximum floor area ratio of 0.2. 16. Reference division 9 of article V of this chapter. 17. For single-family and two-family residences, minimum lot area in the HCT shall be 5,000 square feet. 18. All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from wetlands and open water established in section 110-89. 19. Maximum height may be increased five feet if the structure has a pitched roof, the design of which is approved by the historic architectural review commission. 20. Maximum height may be increased five feet for nonhabitable purposes if the structure has a pitched roof. 21. Construction may be limited by proportion, scale and mass considerations as expressed through the historic architectural review commission design guidelines. 22. Maximum Floor Area Ratio applies to all development and redevelopment including residential: 1.0.  
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-5.9), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, §§ 3-5, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 10-04, §§ 20, 21, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 12-33, § 4, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 13-25, § 3, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 18-04, § 4, 2-7-2018) 
Secs. 122-1152-122-1180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 122-1181. - Permitted and restricted uses. 
    Accessory uses or structures as defined in section 86-9 shall be allowed in all districts. Such accessory uses or structures shall be permitted by right in a subject district if the principal use is a permitted use; however, the accessory use or structure shall be a conditional use if the principal use is a conditional use. No accessory uses or structure shall be erected in any required front or side yard, and the accessory uses or structure shall not cover more than 30 percent of any required rear yard. No separate accessory structures shall be erected less than five feet of any lot line. Accessory buildings must be constructed simultaneously with, or following, the construction of the main building and shall not be used until after the principal structure has received a certificate of occupancy. Erection of tents is prohibited. Hot tubs, whether fixed or movable, shall be considered accessory structures for the purpose of setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.7), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1182. - Carports. 
    An open carport may be erected adjacent to interior lot lines within one foot of the front and side property lines. Rooftop runoff shall be contained on the subject site. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.8), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1183. - Walls and fences. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of the land development regulations, the term "fence" shall be used to describe a manmade structure erected for separation, security or privacy purposes through the means of intermittent posts supporting vertical or horizontal members made of wood, metal, chain link, or barbed wire. While the opacity may vary, the height and location are dictated by the regulations within this subpart B. A wall may be erected for the same purposes but shall include only those structures with continuous footers. The main structure of the wall may be constructed with brick, stone or concrete block. The latter may be used in combination with decorative veneers of brick, rock, stone, stucco or any other material meeting accepted aesthetic performance criteria. Any wall or fence erected within the city shall meet professionally accepted building standards and the regulations cited in this section. 
(b)  Building permit; review. Notwithstanding other sections of the land development regulations, fences, walls, hedges, landscaped berms, and minor structures such as lampposts (standards) or flagpoles (permanent type) may be permitted in any district subject to issuance of a building permit. Fences in the historic district shall also be subject to review by the historic architectural review commission as part of the permitting process. 
(c)  Application procedure. Application for approval of any fence should be made in the same manner as for authorization of a building permit with a full description of materials to be used and dimensions and placements clearly stated on the plans. The building official will inspect the area and judge the application on the basis of the guidelines for fences and other minor structures set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Standards for fences and hedges. Fences shall be erected on the lot of the applicant and shall not extend into a public right-of-way. The fence may abut but shall not be located on any property line. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a fence within the city except in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In the city's residential areas the following restrictions as to fence height and construction shall apply: 
a.  Solid or open fences not exceeding four feet in height constructed of wood, rock, concrete block, chain link or wrought iron may be permitted on the front, rear and side yard property lines of any parcel of land. 
b.  If there are located utility electrical transformer banks, water towers or other facilities owned or leased by a public utility in residential zones which require the fencing of such for safety precautions, the fence around such facilities shall be at least six feet in height, and barbed wire may be used on the top of such six-foot fence. 
c.  Fences up to six feet in height may be constructed on the front, rear and side yard property lines of any parcel of land, provided that the upper two feet of such six-foot fence has openings of at least 50 percent or more in the construction of the fence. Solid fences up to six feet in height may be constructed on rear and side yard property lines of any parcel of land provided such solid six-foot fence is not constructed on property lines intersecting at street corners and that the adjoining property owners file their written consent with the building department consenting to the construction of such six-foot solid fence. 
d.  The fence shall be located so as to avoid interference with traffic visibility pursuant to section 122-1406. 
(2)  In nonresidential areas of the city, wire-mesh or chainlink fences may be constructed at any height on any property lines, and barbed wire may be used on such fences, provided the barbed wire portion of the fence does not extend outside and beyond the property line of such property, and such fence is at least six feet high. 
(3)  Hedges and landscaped berms located within a front yard shall be maintained so as not to obstruct the view of vehicular traffic at intersections. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.9), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1184. - Air conditioning and heating units in residential districts. 
    In all residential districts, the exhaust or mechanical part of any air conditioning or heating unit, other than window units, shall not be placed or installed within five feet of any side or rear property line. No air conditioning or heating unit shall be placed or installed in a front yard. Where feasible, air conditioning units should be baffled for noise. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.10), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 02-18, § 1, 7-2-2002) 
Sec. 122-1185. - Swimming pools. 
    Prior to commencing construction of swimming pools, a building permit must be obtained. The following shall be enforced in regulating construction of swimming pools: 
(1)  Application. The building department will receive and act on applications for a building permit. The application shall be accompanied by detailed pool plans, illustrating the location of mechanical equipment and also safety barriers, fences, screening, or other improvements to be constructed. The plans shall comply with the Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(2)  Setbacks for in-ground swimming pools. Setback requirements for in-ground swimming pools are five feet from all property lines. 
(3)  Setbacks for aboveground swimming pools and spas. Aboveground swimming pools and spas are considered structures and shall meet the setback requirements of the land development regulations. An aboveground pool or spa is defined as any pool or spa structure which extends more than 30 inches above the existing ground level. Setback requirements are five feet for the side and rear yards. Additionally, there shall be a minimum setback from the principal structure on the lot of five feet. 
(4)  Required fencing. All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall at least four feet high and so constructed as to not be readily climbable by small children. 
(5)  Gates and doors. Every gate or door providing access to the pool area shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device installed on the pool side for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when the pool area is not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(6)  Lighting. Lighting for swimming pools shall be shielded in a manner that will confine illumination to the area of the pool. 
(7)  Wastewater. Elimination of wastewater from such swimming pools shall be arranged in a manner which will avoid septic tanks and/or drainfields, contamination of adjacent bodies of water or the flooding of adjacent bodies of water or the flooding of adjacent properties owned by others. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.11), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1186. - Waterways, watercraft and marine-related structures. 
(a)  Regular mooring of watercraft. As used in this subsection, the term "regularly moored" shall mean moored to the shoreline or a shoreline structure in the same general area at least eight hours a day for ten days in any month. Watercraft shall not be regularly moored along any shore without the consent of the riparian landowner. Regularly moored watercraft shall not be used as dwellings, except in public marinas or on private sites. Watercraft shall not be permitted as business offices or other related commercial enterprises unless located within a duly permitted marina. This subsection shall not preclude the regular mooring of watercraft used for fishing operations, charters and other water-dependent uses, provided such mooring is at a commercial marina. Regularly moored watercraft shall be kept in seaworthy condition when not in a permitted repair area. 
(b)  Maximum permitted projection of waterfront structures. Docks, piers, or wharves shall not be permitted without approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or any other agency having appropriate jurisdiction. Such structures shall only be permitted where a continuous channel having a mean low water depth of four or more feet is available and links the structure with deep water. Deep water shall be defined as greater than four feet. Refer to sections 122-132 through 122-143. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.12), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Waterways, ch. 82. 
Secs. 122-1187-122-1215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPECIFIC USE REGULATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-1216. - Adverse impacts of development on historic or archaeological sites. 
    For the purposes of this section, refer to chapter 102 and article II of chapter 110. Within any historic preservation district, prior to obtaining a building permit, an applicant for development shall comply with the city's historic architectural review commission's Design Guidelines in Key West's Historic District, as well as the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, pursuant to procedures stipulated in chapter 102. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.19), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1217-122-1245. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Group Homes And Foster Care Facilities[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 122-1246. - State licensed homes; site standards. 
(a)  Consistent with F.S. ch. 419, a group home of six or fewer residents licensed as a community residential home by the state department of children and families shall be deemed a single-family unit and shall be allowed in single-family or multifamily zoning districts, provided that such home shall not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another existing duly licensed group home of six or fewer residents. Similarly foster care facilities duly licensed by the state department of children and families shall be allowed in both single-family and multifamily zoning districts. Pursuant to F.S. ch. 419, measurements stated in this section shall be structure to structure, except for the 500-foot restriction, where the measurements shall be from structure to boundary. 
(b)  A group home duly licensed by state department of children and families as a community residential care facility which has from seven to 14 unrelated residents operating as a family, including supportive staff as defined in F.S. § 419.001, shall be allowed wherever multifamily residential structures are allowed unless the city finds that the group home siting as proposed: 
(1)  Does not otherwise conform to existing zoning regulations applicable to other multifamily uses in the city. 
(2)  Does not meet applicable licensing criteria established and determined by the state department of children and families, including requirements that the home be located and designed to ensure the safe care and supervision of all clients in the home. 
(3)  Would result in excessive concentration of community residential homes. A home that is located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another existing community residential home in a multifamily area shall be an overconcentration of such homes that substantially alters the nature and character of the area. A home that is located within a radius of 500 feet of an area of single-family zoning substantially alters the nature and character of the area. 
(c)  All sites for foster care and group care facilities shall contain requisite infrastructure including potable water, adequate surface water management, an approved system of wastewater disposal, and an adequate system for solid waste collection and disposal. The sites shall also be free of safety hazards, and all structures shall comply with city ordinances and applicable state laws including applicable state licensing and program requirements. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.18), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1247-122-1275. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Manufactured Housing 

Sec. 122-1276. - Standards. 
    Manufactured housing may be permitted in the city if the units comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The city's adopted building codes; 
(2)  The state building standards of F.S. chs. 320 and 553; 
(3)  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards of 1974 (i.e., F.S. § 320.823); 
(4)  All applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations; 
(5)  Adopted city fire codes; and 
(6)  All manufactured housing shall be designed in a manner compatible with conventional housing including roofline, fenestration, foundation and similar features impacting compatibility. The finished floor elevation for manufactured housing shall be designed with site improvements necessary to preserve compatibility with surrounding structures. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.17), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1277-122-1305. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Home Occupations[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 122-1306. - Conditions. 
    Home occupations shall only be allowed, provided the following specified conditions are met: 
(1)  Character of use. In any district where a home occupation is allowed, it shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the character thereof or the character of the neighborhood. When permitted to qualify as a home occupation, a use must demonstrate compliance with each and all of the following criteria: 
a.  No person other than the members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. No persons other than permanent residents of the subject premises shall be engaged in such occupation. 
b.  There shall be no display of goods visible from any street. 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation from any right-of-way, except that a nonilluminated nameplate, not exceeding two square feet in area, may be displayed providing the nameplate is affixed against the exterior surface at a position not more than two feet from the main entrance to the residence. 
d.  No home occupation shall occupy more than 20 percent of the total living area of the residence, exclusive of the area of any open porch or attached garage or similar space not suited for or intended for occupancy as living quarters. No rooms which have been constructed as an addition to the residence, nor any attached garage or porch which has been converted into living quarters, shall be considered as floor area until two years after the date of completion thereof. 
e.  No home occupation shall be conducted in an accessory building; such occupation must be conducted in the principal of the proprietor. 
f.  No motorized power other than electric motors shall be used in conjunction with home occupations. The total horsepower of such motors shall not exceed three horsepower, or one horsepower for any single motor. 
g.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit, if conducted in other than a single-family residence. For electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates a visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
h.  No occupation shall generate traffic exceeding volumes normally expected in a residential neighborhood. Occupations which rely on client contact at the premises are not permitted. 
i.  No home occupation shall include the following: cosmetology, barbering, or beauty shop; restaurant; retail sales; fortunetelling or clairvoyance; food processing for sale; kennels; animal grooming; radio or television repair; furniture repair, refinishing or building; cabinet making; boatbuilding; automobile or other vehicle servicing; rebuilding or repair shops; metal fabrication or other similar activity, including use of welding or cutting torches; funeral homes; medical or dental laboratories; showroom or display area; or any activity similar to any of the listed activities. 
(2)  Application. Any person desiring to conduct a home occupation in a district where such use is permitted shall first apply to the building department for a home occupation. Such application shall be on a form prepared by the building department and shall include but not be limited to the following data: 
a.  Name of the applicant and an affidavit from the owner of the premises expressing that the owner is aware of the applicant's request for a home occupation and has no objection to the home occupation being sought. Each applicant shall submit to the city building department a sworn application on a standard form and a recent photo of the residence showing the entire front yard and all driveways and carports, if any. 
b.  Location of residence wherein the home occupation, if approved, will be conducted. 
c.  Total floor area of the residence. 
d.  Area of the room to be utilized for the conduct of the home occupation. 
e.  A sketch showing the floor plan and the area thereof to be utilized for the conduct of the home occupation. 
f.  The nature and character of the home occupation sought to be approved and equipment to be used in operations associated with the occupation. 
(3)  Standards. Each home occupation will be evaluated on the basis of its meeting the criteria, and once approved must adhere to the following standards: 
a.  A home occupation shall be subject to all applicable city business tax receipts and other business taxes. 
b.  If any home occupation requires a license or permit from the state or any agency thereof, the applicant for a home occupation permit shall provide the building official with a current, valid copy of any such permit or license before any such occupation shall be conducted. Any such license or permit from the state of any agency thereof shall be kept active and current. 
c.  Failure to continuously comply with this division and all other sections of the land development regulations applicable to conditional uses generally and all conditions of any permit or license issued by the state or any agency thereof shall be grounds for revocation of the home occupation permit by the building official after due notice and a public hearing. 
d.  The city may attach reasonable conditions to a permit granting approval of a home occupation permit in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to preserve the stability and tranquility of residential areas. Such conditions may include but are not limited to placing limits on the hours of operation. Such permit shall be renewable annually. 
e.  A permit for a home occupation shall be granted to the occupant of the premises and shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable. If the applicant granted a home occupation vacates the premises, the home occupation permit shall automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.20), 7-3-1997; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 122-1307. - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon compliance with the procedure described in section 122-1306, the building official shall issue a home occupation permit. Any such permit may be revoked by the building inspector at any time when it has been determined that the home occupation has become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.20), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1308-122-1335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TRANSIENT UNITS 

Sec. 122-1336. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the transfer of existing transient units and transient licenses in order to reduce noncomplying density, structures and uses; remove legal nonconforming transient uses from zoning districts that now prohibit them; encourage permanent residential housing by relocating transient licenses; provide for the conversion of transient units to single-family dwellings by the transfer of units; allow for redevelopment without increasing the population requiring evacuation during emergencies or increasing other public services; protect environmentally sensitive lands; and encourage redevelopment under the existing rate of growth ordinance ("ROGO") that limits the allowable number of residential and transient units. This division is only for the purpose of the transfer of transient units and shall not be construed to create new residential or transient units. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1337. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affordable housing shall mean housing as defined in section 122-1466 of the land development regulations (LDRs) and amendments thereto. 
    Receiver site shall mean the property where the unit or license is desired to be transferred and relocated pursuant to this division. 
    Residence or residential unit shall mean a single-family, multifamily, accessory, or affordable housing unit. 
    Sender site shall mean the property where the transient unit or license is currently located and recorded prior to application for transfer. 
    Transient unit shall mean a transient living accommodation as defined in section 86-9 of the LDRs. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, 4-19-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-1338. - Transfer of transient units. 
(1)  The unit being transferred must currently be counted as a unit for purposes of calculating evacuation time under the hurricane model set forth in the comprehensive plan, and must have been obtained in accordance with all applicable regulations, including building permits, at the time of approval or have been otherwise validly obtained if unbuilt at the time of transfer. A transfer pursuant to this division shall not cause a net increase of units in the city. 
(2)  Transient use must be an allowed zoning use on the receiver site, unless the units are to be converted into non-transient units as contemplated by subsection (3) of this section. Further, no transient unit shall be recognized for transfer purposes, regardless of whether it will be used transiently or non-transiently, unless accompanied by a business tax receipt duly issued pursuant to section 66-109(10). When units are transferred for non-transient use, the licenses will be extinguished. 
(3)  Transient units may be converted to residential units at the appropriate exchange rate as determined by the comprehensive plan so as not to increase hurricane evacuation time. Where a residential unit is created by the transfer of a transient unit and the new residential unit is 600 square feet or less, the transient unit may be transferred at its .58 ROGO unit equivalency into a residential unit with transient use prohibited. 
(4)  The transferred units shall not operate to increase density of the receiver site above the maximum allowed density. 
(5)  Unless the planning board determines that special conditions exist at the receiver site that warrant otherwise, the transient unit may not include more than two rooms, excluding bathrooms, and excluding porches and decks that are clearly not enclosed or habitable. 
(6)  At the sender site, any remaining transient units that are remodeled or combined may not increase the existing number of rooms, excluding bathrooms. All such units shall not have "lockout" capacity. 
(7)  There shall be no transfer of units into a "V" zone as depicted on the most current flood insurance rate map, if the transfer would produce new construction. 
(8)  Existing nonconforming buildings may receive units providing their nonconforming aspects are not increased. 
(9)  Development plans for both sites shall be processed as provided in the LDRs, according to the magnitude and type of development. 
(10)  No building permit shall be granted for the receiver site until the city has verified that the transient use at the sender site unit(s) has been extinguished. A person or entity who has lawfully terminated or extinguished legal transient units existing as of January 1, 1999, may preserve the right to transfer the units and then transfer such units pursuant to this section, provided the transient licenses have been maintained. Furthermore, the city shall conduct on-site inspections at both the sender site and receiver site to verify that the terms of this ordinance are being met in the proposed transfer application. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 3, 4-19-2005; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 122-1339. - Transfer of transient business tax receipt. 
(a)  A business tax receipt for transient use of a unit may itself be transferred from an area where transient uses are prohibited to a receiver site without the accompanying transfer of the unit. In addition, licenses may be transferred from the HNC-1 and HNC-3 zoning districts. A transfer of a license under this section shall not result in a loss of affordable housing at the receiver site. 
(b)  Where a license alone is transferred, the planning board shall consider whether the receiver site is suitable for transient use in the zoning district, shall consider the relative size of the unit from which the license is transferred, and shall consider the room configuration of both sites to maintain approximately the same or less net number of occupants. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 4, 4-19-2005; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 122-1340. - Development review committee and planning board review. 
    The development review committee (DRC) shall review each application for transfer. The planning board will receive comments from the DRC and the recommendation of the planning department and may deny an application on the grounds of inconsistency with the purpose of the ordinance or a violation of the specific provisions of the ordinance. When approving an application, the planning board may impose conditions, including but not limited to: physical modifications and the filing of deed restrictions, in order to assure the continuation of permanent residential housing, the preservation of community character and that the transfer advances the purposes of this division. The decision of the planning board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 5, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1341. - Compliance with codes. 
    All structures proposed to be used on a transient basis must comply with codes and requirements of the building department, fire department, and all other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 6, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1342. - Historic structures. 
    Proposals to change the interior of contributing or altered historic structures located within the historic district shall be subject to the review of the historic architectural review commission (HARC) for the proposed interior renovations. If the receiver site is an historic structure, the planning board may consider retaining the room layout (notwithstanding sections 122-1338(5) and 122-1339(b) hereof), and may further consider all guidelines adopted by the historic architectural review commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 7, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1343. - Tracking system; enforcement. 
    The city manager shall establish a tracking system for all sender sites and receiver sites. On an annual basis, the building department shall certify that each such site is being put to the use(s) represented in the transfer application. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 8, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1344. - Application, notice and fees. 
    Applications for transient unit transfer and transient license transfer may be obtained from the planning department and must be completed in the form and manner required by the department. Notice of any such transfer shall be given for the planning board meeting at which the transfer will be considered, pursuant to section 90-60 of the LDRs. Notices shall be sent to the property owners at both the sender and receiver sites. An appropriate fee schedule shall be established by resolution. The amount of the fee shall take into consideration, among other things, the cost of the tracking system and the cost of enforcement of this ordinance. The transfer must occur within 18 months of planning board approval, although the applicant may apply to the planning board for an extension(s). 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 9, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1345. - Consent by mortgagee and condominium/homeowner's association. 
    When a sender site is subject to a mortgage that references the transient license or use, the application must be accompanied by a consent executed by the mortgagee. If the receiver site is governed either by a condominium association or a homeowners' association, such association must approve the transfer by a majority vote as defined by the governing documents of the association. Proof of approval shall accompany the application for transfer. 
(Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-09, § 10, 4-19-2005) 
Sec. 122-1346. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-06, adopted March 15, 2011, deleted § 122-1346, which had contained sunset provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 99-26, adopted Dec. 7, 1999; Ord. No. 02-05, adopted Feb. 5, 2002; Ord. No. 05-09, adopted April 19, 2005; and Ord. No. 10-08, adopted April 6, 2010. 
Secs. 122-1347-122-1370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - TRANSIENT LIVING ACCOMMODATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-06, § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 2002, pertained to transient living accommodations in residential dwellings-regulations, designated as § 2-7.21. In order to conform to the numbering system used in this Code, such provisions were redesignated herein as div. 7, § 122-1371 by the editor with the concurrence of the city. Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 02-06 provides that: "All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances of said City in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby superseded to the extent of such conflict." 

Sec. 122-1371. - Transient living accommodations in residential dwellings; regulations. 
(a)  Intent. These regulations apply only to the transient use of residential dwellings. In 1986, the city enacted former zoning code section 35.24(44) which provided the following definition of a transient living accommodation: "Commercially operated housing principally available to short-term visitors for less than twenty-eight (28) days." (This definition shall hereinafter be referred to as the "former transient definition.") Some property owners and developers interpreted the former transient definition to mean that an owner could rent his or her residential dwelling for less than half the year without the dwelling losing its residential status, and therefore without the need for a city-issued transient license (so long as state licensing requirements were met). This interpretation went unchallenged by the city. Three categories of transient use of residential dwellings resulted: (1) some owners obtained a transient license allowing unrestricted transient use; (2) some owners followed the former transient definition and, accordingly, rented their properties less than half the year; and (3) some owners put their residences to a transient use without city or state license and without regard to existing regulations. In addition, many residential dwelling owners never put their properties to a transient use and they no longer have the opportunity to do so under the city's current rate of growth ordinance. 
    The city commission finds that short-term or transient rentals affect the character and stability of a residential neighborhood. The home and its intrinsic influences are the foundation of good citizenship; although short-term tenants no doubt are good citizens generally, they do not ordinarily contribute to activities that strengthen a community. 
    Therefore, the city intends by these regulations to establish a uniform definition of transient living accommodations, and to halt the use of residences for transient purposes in order to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods. The city has provided only a brief phase-out period in recognition that in many instances investment expectations have already been met either through rental income or rising market value. 
    Finally, certain guest houses currently hold a number of the city's category 10C business tax receipt which denotes transient use of a residential property. The city intends to develop a uniform guest house business tax receipt category, and then to redesignate all 10C licenses held by guest houses accordingly. 
(b)  Unlicensed residential transient use; prohibition. Except as provided in section 122-1372, all unlicensed transient rental use of residential dwellings is prohibited. 
(c)  Application. The holder of a business tax receipt allowing residential transient use must annually provide or comply with the following information: 
(1)  The complete street address and RE number of the property. 
(2)  Proof of ownership, including the name, address and phone number of each person or entity with an ownership interest in the property. 
(3)  An approved inspection report of the fire marshal verifying compliance with the fire marshal's criteria for a residential dwelling transient lodging use. 
(4)  The gross square footage of the property, including the number of rooms, bedrooms, kitchens and on-site parking spaces attributable to transient lodging use. 
(5)  A valid and current federal employer tax identification number (or Social Security number) for the owner(s) of the property. 
(6)  A valid and current Florida Department of Revenue sales tax identification number under Chapter 212, Florida Statutes, and a valid and current license under Chapter 509, Florida Statutes. 
(7)  The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person who will be operating the property's transient accommodations. 
(8)  The application shall bear the signatures of all owners, authorized agents and authorized property managers. 
(d)  General regulations. The following regulations shall pertain to transient lodging use of or within a residential dwelling. 
(1)  Except as provided herein, each residential property where transient lodging use is in effect shall prominently display on the outside of the property a medallion alerting the public of the transient use. The medallion and instructions for its posting shall be issued by the licensing division. 
(2)  A contact person must be available 24-hours per day, seven days per week for the purpose of responding promptly to complaints regarding the conduct of the occupants of the residential dwelling transient lodging. The name and phone number of the contact person must be posted on exterior of the dwelling in a place accessible to the public. 
(3)  As a condition of application approval, the fire marshal shall conduct an inspection of each dwelling unit and issue to the applicant written approval based on applicable life safety criteria. 
(4)  Occupancy of individual units shall conform to the occupancy limits of the Florida Building Code. Units shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable. 
(5)  The owner or manager shall maintain a tenant and vehicle registration which shall include the name and address of each unit's tenant, and the make, year and tag number of the tenant's vehicle. 
(6)  Parking. The owner shall provide one off-street parking space per residential dwelling transient lodging unit, except where the unit is in the city's historic district; provided, however, that the owner or manager must instruct all tenants of the historic district's residential parking program and if the vehicle is not eligible to park on the street, then the owner or manager shall ensure that the tenant is directed to a lawful and appropriate parking space. 
(7)  There shall be a written lease between a residential dwelling owner and a tenant, and it shall contain the tenant's agreement to the regulations contained in this section. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of these regulations to enter into a long-term lease with a mutual intent to subvert the regulatory goals of this section. It shall also be a violation of these regulations for a property owner to lease space to "roommates" for a period of less than 30 days or one calendar month when not licensed as provided hereunder. For the purposes of enforcement, a rebuttable presumption shall exist that roommates use a common entrance to a dwelling. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, broker, realtor, agent or other representative of the owners to hold out or advertise a residential dwelling for transient rental if the property is not permitted, as provided hereunder. A broker or realtor who is found in violation of this regulation shall be subject to business tax receipt revocation. 
(10)  Nothing in this section is intended to exclude the application of any ordinance of the City of Key West. 
(e)  Fees; application schedule. 
(1)  A person or entity who holds a transient rental business tax receipt shall pay the customary annual business tax receipt fee, plus an annual inspection and enforcement fee of $125.00 upon the filing of the application set forth in subsection (c). 
(2)  Fee revenues raised under this section shall be used to fund a position in the code enforcement division, and to provide enforcement and processing personnel as needed. The officer holding this position shall have as his or her primary responsibility the enforcement of the terms and conditions of this ordinance, and other city regulations relating to the transient use of properties. 
(3)  For a period of 90 days after the effective date of this section [September 22, 2003], the licensing division will receive initial applications pursuant to subsection (c), and related fees. There shall be a $25.00 per dwelling unit late fee payable to the city upon application filing. In all subsequent years after the initial application, annual processing fees shall be paid at the same time as the business tax receipt. The city manager may determine to pro-rate the initial processing fee. 
Editor's note- The city has advised that the effective date of Ord. No. 02-06 actually occurred upon final DCA approval, which was September 22, 2003. 
(f)  Enforcement; penalties. A violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and by a fine of up to $500.00 per day, per unit, per violation. The code enforcement division may also enforce the terms of this section by bringing a case to the code enforcement special master pursuant to its authority under law and ordinance. In addition, any license or permission granted hereunder may be revoked for cause, upon notice and opportunity to be heard, by the city commission. In addition to any other remedy available to the city, the city or any adversely affected party may enforce the terms of this section in law or equity. Any citizen of Key West may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent a violation of this section. The city, by and through its code enforcement division, may apply for an administrative search warrant to enter upon the premises of any residence subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, § 2, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 5-17-2005; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 122-1372. - Transient living accommodations in residential dwellings-Truman Annex. 
(a)  Findings. In Rollison v. City of Key West, the Third District Court of Appeal ruled that a unit owner in the Truman Annex established a legal nonconforming use of Shipyards unit 271 as a transient rental, subject to the "50% Rule," because the property was put to a transient use before the city changed the law in 1998. In particular, the city of Key West enacted Ordinance No. 97-20, which was approved by the Florida Department of Community Affairs and became effective on December 26, 1997 (Because the Court identified 1998 in its Opinion, subsection (b) hereof sets a January 1, 1998 date for application eligibility). 
    Ordinance No. 97-20 established the current definition of "Transient Living Accommodation" and thereby terminated the ability of Truman Annex property owners to rely on the "50% Rule." This rule, a creation of the developers and marketers of the Truman Annex in the early 1990's, provided that a property owner in the Truman Annex could rent his or her unit for fewer than 26 weeks per year, maintaining its residential status and obviating the need for a city-issued transient rental license. The creators of the "50% Rule" based it on their reading of the definition of "transient housing" set forth in section 35.07(14)(b) of the former Key West zoning code, which applied to the Truman Annex development (the "planned redevelopment district"). 
    The city commission finds that it is fair and reasonable to extend the Rollison ruling to other property owners in the Truman Annex. Accordingly, it hereby establishes an application process to determine similarly situated properties. 
(b)  Application. All owners of eligible residential units in the HPRD zoning district may apply to the city of Key West for a "Truman Annex residential transient rental permit." An application for eligibility of a unit hereunder shall be filed with the city of Key West only one time. The following regulations pertain to this application. 
i.  An eligible residential unit is one whose owner used it as a transient rental between the date of its original sale and January 1, 1998 (hereinafter the "Eligibility Period"). 
ii.  The current property owner shall file an application with the Key West city attorney's office. The application must include the following information; name of owner; address; owner's telephone number; date of purchase; purchase price; copy or copies of Monroe County transient rental business tax receipt(s) during the Eligibility Period; copy or copies of State of Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Hotel and Restaurant ("DBPR") lodging license(s) during the Eligibility Period; State of Florida sales tax records during the Eligibility Period; and a sworn affidavit of the current market short-term rental rate(s) for the unit. If a property owner intends to provide a blanket DBPR transient license roster for a real estate broker that includes the owner's address, then the owner shall supplement it with an agreement between the property owner (at the time) and the real estate broker for the year(s) of the blanket DBPR lodging license. 
iii.  All applications shall be bound and paginated, and contain a table of contents. 
iv.  The deadline for receipt by the city of a completed application is ninety (90) days from the effective date of this ordinance. 
v.  Shipyards unit 271 was established as legally nonconforming by a court of law on April 14, 2004. On April 20, 2005, the city of Key West confirmed that the owner was entitled to rent the unit on a transient basis within the scope of the "50% Rule." 
vi.  If an application is denied for any reason by the city, the property owner may appeal to the code enforcement special magistrate. The appeal must be filed with the code enforcement clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the denial. The special magistrate shall conduct a public hearing, give notice and opportunity to be heard, receive evidence, and issue written findings and an order. 
(c)  Once a unit is determined to be legally nonconforming under the procedures set forth in this section 122-1372, the property owner shall be entitled to rent the unit on a transient basis cumulatively for less than a total of twenty-six (26) weeks per year. The city of Key West cedes to each Truman Annex homeowners' association management responsibility of the 26-week cap; provided, however, that the city of Key West shall retain enforcement responsibility. 
(d)  The property owner of each unit determined to be legally nonconforming hereunder shall be subject to the general regulations set forth in section 122-1371(d)(1)-(7) and the fee schedule set forth in section 122-1371(e)(1). The medallion required in section 122-1371(d)(1) must be removed on any day that the unit is not within its lawful rental period. 
(e)  The cost of a "Truman Annex residential transient rental permit" shall be the equivalent of that of a business tax receipt per section 66-109(10)c., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 2, 5-17-2005; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Secs. 122-1373-122-1405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LAND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 122-1406. - Obstructions to visibility. 
(a)  Obstruction to traffic and traffic visibility. There shall be no structure or planting which materially obstructs traffic and traffic visibility. 
(b)  Corner lots. In any district where a corner or front yard setback is required, no structure, fence, planting or sign shall be located so as to interfere with traffic visibility across a corner between a height of 21/2 and ten feet above the average grade within a triangle bounded by the curblines adjacent to the corner lot lines and a straight line drawn between points on each such curbline 20 feet from the intersection of such curblines or extension thereof. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. There shall be no structure or planting on city or public right-of-way without prior approval of the planning board and city commission, and then only after due consideration is given to the type, height and size of such structure and planting. 
(d)  Vision clearance. Notwithstanding any part of the land development regulations or any permit granted or variance granted by the city, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, planting, vegetation, sign or fence or any type of obstacle or any portion thereof shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct vision clearance at corners, curb cuts or railroad crossings in any zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.13), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1407. - Division of land. 
    No tract, parcel, or lot shall be divided or split into two or more parcels, lots, or other subunits of land without first complying with the city's subdivision regulations. No person shall divide any land in a manner that would result in any portion of such land failing to meet the minimum requirements established in the land development regulations for the zone in which such land is located. Any subdivision of land shall comply with the land development regulations, including chapter 118. All subdivisions shall be required to obtain approval from the city planning office as to compliance with applicable land development regulations in the form of a signed approved subdivision plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.14), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1408. - Land excavation or fill. 
(a)  No site work which: (i) impacts the 100-year floodplain or which impacts a designated conservation area; or (ii) redirects and/or increases or reduces off-site natural drainage or runoff from a site shall be undertaken without prior development plan approval based on recommendations of the city engineer. The city shall require plans prepared by a state-registered engineer and other competent professionals as may be required which shall demonstrate compliance with the city's surface water management performance criteria in article VIII of chapter 108. In addition, the plans for land excavation or fill shall demonstrate that the proposed site alterations shall include mitigation techniques designed to comply with performance criteria addressing the following: 
(1)  Native habitat protection as provided in articles III, IV, V and VII of chapter 110; 
(2)  Site reclamation, including restoration of vegetative cover within disturbed upland open space; planting and stabilizing banks of drainageways with vegetation which is tolerant to anticipated changes in water levels, including hydric conditions as provided in articles III, IV, V and VII of chapter 110; 
(3)  Sedimentation and soil erosion control as provided in division 3 of article III of chapter 110; 
(4)  Protection of freshwater lens as provided in division 4 of article III of chapter 110; 
(5)  Flood damage prevention as provided in article VIII of chapter 108; and 
(6)  Tree and native vegetation protection as provided in article VI of chapter 108 and article VI of chapter 110. 
(b)  The city shall not permit borrow pits or mining activities. Borrow pits and mining activities may cause adverse impacts to the city's freshwater lens and/or adversely impact water quality, surface water management, and flood damage prevention. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.15), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1409. - Construction of driveways, swales and other improvements affecting drainage. 
    The design of new or existing driveways or other elements of the circulation system potentially impacting drainage shall be approved by the city engineer prior to commencement of construction or excavation activity. Review by the city engineer is necessary in order to ensure that: (i) new driveways and other elements of the circulation system provide adequate drainage, swales, ditches or similar stormwater channels; and (ii) improvements to existing driveways or other elements of the circulation system are designed to protect and/or enhance existing or planned drainage improvements, as deemed appropriate by the city engineer. Culverts shall be designed to meet accepted engineering standards. The city engineer shall administer this section based on best management principles and practices. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.16), 7-3-1997) 
Secs. 122-1410-122-1435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AIRPORT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 122-1436. - Airport height limitations. 
    No structure shall be erected within the approach zones of an active runway on the Key West International Airport with a height in excess of those permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration or by the city commission. All structures shall comply with the city comprehensive plan and this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.23), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1437. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means Key West International Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the highest point of the airport's usable landing area measured in feet above sea level. 
    Airport hazard means any structure, street, or use of land which would exceed the federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR 77.21, 77.23, 77.25 and 77.28, revised March 4, 1972, or which obstructs the airspace required for landing or takeoff at the airport or which is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft. 
    Control zone means airspace extending upward from the surface of the earth which may include one or more airports and which is normally a circular area of five statute miles in radius, with extension where necessary to include instrument approach and departure paths. 
    Decision height means the height at which decision must be made, during an instrument landing system (ILS) approach, to either continue the approach or to execute a missed approach. 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this division, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Instrument runway means a runway having an existing or planned instrument procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area-type navigation equipment. 
    Landing area means the area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff, or taxing of aircraft. 
    Minimum descent altitude means the lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is provided. 
    Minimum en route altitude means the altitude in effect between radio fixes which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 
    Minimum obstruction clearance altitude means the specified altitude in effect between radio fixes on visual omnirange (VOR) airways, off-airway routes, or route segments which meet obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22 miles of a VOR. 
    Runway means the defined area of an airport prepared for aircraft landing/takeoff along its length. 
    Visual runway means any runway other than an instrument runway. 
    Zoning administrator means the administrative office or agency responsible for administering land development regulations within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.23(A)), 7-3-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-1438. - Airport zones and airport height limitations. 
    In order to carry out this division, there are created and established certain zones which are depicted on the airport height restriction zoning maps on file in the city clerk's office, Zoning Map A, Key West International and NAS Key West. An area located in more than one zone of the described zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various public civil airport height zones and limitations are established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Primary zone. The area longitudinally centered on a runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end of that runway with the width so specified for each runway for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of the runway. No structure will be permitted within the primary zone that is not part of the landing and takeoff area that is a greater height than the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary zone for runway 09/27 at Key West International is 500 feet. 
(2)  Horizontal zone. The area encompassing the runways, primary zone, approach zones and transitional zone of each airport with the boundary formed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The radius specified for Key West International is 10,000 feet. No structure will be permitted in the horizontal zone that is higher than 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
(3)  Conical zone. The area extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal zone for a distance of 4,000 feet. Height limitations for structures in the conical zone are 150 feet above airport elevation at the inner boundary of the zone with permitted height increasing one foot vertically for every 20 feet of horizontal distance measured outward from the inner boundary of the zone to a height of 350 feet above airport elevation at the outer boundary of the zone. 
(4)  Approach zone. The area longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and proceeding outward from each end of the primary surface for a specified distance as follows: Key West International runway 9, 5,000 feet and runway 27, 10,000 feet. The width of that approach zone is the same at the inner boundary as the primary zone it adjoins and expands uniformly to a width at the outer boundary as follows: Key West International runway 9, 1,500 feet and runway 27, 3,500 feet. Permitted height limitations within the approach zones for runway 9 at Key West International are the same as the height of the runway end at the inner boundary and increase at the rate of one foot vertically for every 20 feet horizontal distance. Permitted height limitations within the approach zone for runway 27 at Key West International are the same as the runway end at the inner boundary and increase one foot vertically for every 34 feet horizontally. 
(5)  Transitional zone. The area extending outward from the sides of the primary zones and approach zones connecting them to the horizontal zone. Height limits within the transitional zone are the same as the primary zone or approach zone at the boundary line where it adjoins and increases at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally, with the horizontal distance measured at right angles to the runway centerline and extended centerline, until the height matches the height of the horizontal zone, which forms the outer boundary. 
(6)  Other zones. In addition to the height limitations imposed in subsections (1) through (5) of this section, no structure will be permitted that exceeds 500 feet above airport elevation within ten nautical miles of the Key West International Airport, and no structure will be permitted within the city that would cause a minimum obstruction clearance altitude, a minimum descent altitude or a decision height to be raised. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.23(B)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1439. - Airport land use restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this division, no use may be made of land or water within the city in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of an airborne aircraft. The following special requirement shall apply to each permitted use: 
(1)  All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking, signs, or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from a public airport or in the vicinity thereof. 
(2)  No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare or other visual hazards within three statute miles of any usable runway of a public airport. 
(3)  No operations from any use in the city shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication between an airport and an aircraft. 
(b)  Notwithstanding sections 122-1436 through 122-1438 and subsection (a) of this section, the owner of any structure over 200 feet above ground level must install on that structure lighting in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-ID and any amendments thereto. Additionally, any structure exceeding 749 feet above mean sea level must install on that structure high intensity white obstruction lights. The high intensity white obstruction lights must be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-ID and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  Any permit or variance granted may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or growth in question to permit the city at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain thereto such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.23(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1440. - Administration. 
    It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer and enforce this division within the territorial limits over which the political subdivision the administrator represents has zoning authority. For any violation of this division, the person responsible for such violation shall be given notice in writing by the zoning administrator. Such notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and the necessary action to correct or abate the violation. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the city planning board. An administrative official shall order discontinuance of use of the land or building; removal of trees to conform with height limitations set forth in this division; removal of buildings, additions, alterations or structures; discontinuance of any work being done; or shall take any or all other actions necessary to correct violations and obtain compliance with all the sections of this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.23(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-04, § 28, 5-20-2008) 
Secs. 122-1441-122-1464. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - WORK FORCE HOUSING[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 05-27, adopted Oct. 18, 2005, amended the title of Div. 10, Affordable Housing to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Fair housing, § 38-26 et seq. 

Sec. 122-1465. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this division to create affordable housing categories to facilitate the development of housing designed and priced to meet the needs of people employed by the local economy in a manner that reflects the percentage of the workforce at each income level and mixes people of all incomes together and does not create high and low-income enclaves. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 2, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 122-1466. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affordable housing shall be defined as provided in the following classifications: 
    Affordable housing (low income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 80 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size). For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (low income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed two and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable housing (median income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 100 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (median income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed three and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. The definition of "affordable housing (median income)" applies to and encompasses all affordable housing under construction or built pursuant to this ordinance prior to July 1, 2005, for which deed restrictions are required. 
    Affordable housing (middle income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 140 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (middle income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed six and one-half times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable housing (moderate income) for a rental dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit whose monthly rent, not including utilities, does not exceed 25 percent of that amount which represents 120 percent of the monthly median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County. For an owner-occupied dwelling unit, affordable housing (moderate income) shall mean a dwelling unit whose sales price shall not exceed five times the annual median household income (adjusted for family size) for Monroe County, in accordance with section 122-1472. 
    Affordable work force housing shall include low income, median income, moderate income and middle income housing. 
    Affordable work force housing trust fund shall mean the trust fund established and maintained by the city for revenues from fees in lieu of constructing affordable work force housing, and revenues from any other source earmarked for the trust fund by land development regulation, ordinance or donation. 
    Annual Household Income means all amounts, monetary or not, which are received by any family member of the household, except income from employment of children (including foster children) under the age of 18 years. Family shall include the traditional family, (married or not) as well as domestic partnerships. 
    Median household income shall mean the median household income published for Monroe County on an annual basis by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 3, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 8-16-2017; Ord. No. 18-13, § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-1467. - Requirements of affordable work force housing; ratio of new construction. 
(a)  New market-rate multifamily residential housing. At least ten percent of all new multifamily residential units constructed each year shall be low income affordable housing of at least 400 square feet each, as defined herein and 20 percent shall be affordable housing (median income) housing of at least 400 square feet each, as defined herein. Residential or mixed use projects of less than ten residential or mixed use units shall be required to develop at least 30 percent of units of at least 400 square feet each as affordable (median income), but may contribute a fee in lieu for each unit to the affordable work force housing trust fund, if approved by the city commission. The per unit fee shall be $200,000.00 (representing construction cost, less land cost, of a 400 square foot unit). The 30 percent affordability requirement shall be determined on a project by project basis and not on a city-wide basis. Vested units shall be subject to this subsection if not otherwise governed by law or agreement. For every required affordable housing (median income) unit, a developer may increase the sales or rental rates to affordable housing (middle income) so long as another unit's sales or rental rate is decreased to affordable housing (low income). 
(b)  Linkage of projects. Two development projects may link to allow the affordable housing requirement of one development project to be built at the site of another project, so long as the affordable housing requirement of the latter development is fulfilled as well. Written proof of the project linkage shall be supplied by the developer to the city commission at the time of the first site plan approval. The project containing the affordable units must be built either before or simultaneously with the project without, or with fewer than, the required affordable units. In addition, if a developer builds more than the required number of affordable units at a development site, this development project may be linked with a subsequent development project to allow compliance with the subsequent development's affordable unit requirement. Written proof of the linkage must be supplied by the developer to the city commission at the time of the subsequent development's site plan approval. Linkage shall not be available if either development is entirely or in part to be constructed by public funds. Finally, all linkages under this subsection may occur within the city or on a site within the city and on a site on Stock Island in the unincorporated part of the county. 
(c)  New affordable work force housing. The maximum total rental and/or sales price for all new affordable work force housing units in a single development shall be based on each unit being affordable housing (moderate income). The rental and/or sales price may be mixed among affordable housing (low income), (median income), (middle income) and (moderate income) in order that the total value of rental and/or sales does not exceed ten percent of the rental and/or sales of all the units at affordable housing (moderate income). 
(d)  Demonstration of continuing affordability. Demonstration of continuing affordability shall be by deed restriction or any other mutually acceptable method that effectively runs with the land and is binding on owners, successors in ownership, or assigns. The deed restriction shall be in a form provided by the city and shall be for a period of at least 50 years. It shall be recorded in the county records. During the final year of the deed restriction, the city commission may act by Resolution to renew the affordability restriction for an additional 50-year term. 
(e)  Reporting requirements. Owners of affordable work force housing projects or units shall furnish the city manager or his designee with annual information necessary to ensure continued compliance with affordability criteria, beginning one year after the date of building permit issuance and on each anniversary date thereafter. Reporting requirements shall include sworn tenant household verification information. Property owners subject to this subsection may contract with the Key West Housing Authority to perform annual tenant eligibility verification. 
(f)  Compliance with antidiscrimination policy. All property owners offering housing under this division shall comply with the antidiscrimination policy of article II of chapter 38. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 4, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 122-1468. - Affordable work force housing trust fund. 
(a)  The affordable work force housing trust fund (referred to as the "trust fund") is established. The trust fund shall be maintained with funds earmarked for the trust fund for the purpose of promoting affordable work force housing in the city and its immediate environs. Monies received by the trust fund shall not be commingled with general operating funds of the city. The trust fund shall be in a separate dedicated fund used only for the following: 
(1)  Financial aid to developers as project grants for affordable housing (low income) to (moderate income) construction; 
(2)  Financial aid to eligible homebuyers of affordable housing (low income) to (moderate income) as mortgage assistance; 
(3)  Financial incentive for the conversion of transient units to affordable housing (low income) to (moderate income) residential units; 
(4)  Direct investment in or leverage to housing affordability through site acquisition, housing development and housing conservation; or 
(5)  Other affordable work force housing purposes from time to time established by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 122-1471, the city commission shall determine all expenditures from the trust fund upon the advice of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 5, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 122-1469. - Applicant eligibility requirements. 
    The following eligibility requirements shall be required of households or persons to qualify for affordable work force housing units to the extent lawful: 
(1)  The household or person shall derive at least 70 percent of its or his/her total income from gainful employment in the county. This section shall not disqualify an individual previously and continuously qualified who reaches the age of retirement, or becomes disabled, and is otherwise income qualified. 
(2)  At the time of sale or lease of an affordable housing (low income) unit, the total income of eligible household or persons shall not exceed 80 percent of the median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). 
(3)  During occupancy of any an affordable housing (low income) rental unit, a household's income may increase to an amount not to exceed 120 percent of the median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). In such event, the tenant's occupancy shall terminate at the end of the existing lease term. 
(4)  At the time of sale or lease of an affordable housing (median income) unit, the total income of eligible households or persons shall not exceed 100 percent of the median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). 
(5)  During occupancy of any affordable housing (median income) rental unit, a household's annual income may increase to an amount not to exceed 140 percent of median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). In such event, the tenant's occupancy shall terminate at the end of the existing lease term. 
(6)  At the time of sale or lease of an affordable housing (moderate income) unit, the total income of eligible households or persons shall not exceed 120 percent of the median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). 
(7)  During occupancy of an affordable housing (moderate income) rental unit, a household's annual income may increase to an amount not to exceed 160 percent of median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). In such event, the tenant's occupancy shall terminate at the end of the existing lease term. 
(8)  At the time of sale or lease of an affordable housing (middle income) unit, the total income of eligible households or persons shall not exceed 140 percent of the median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). 
(9)  During occupancy of an affordable housing (middle income) rental unit, a household's annual income may increase to an amount not to exceed 180 percent of median household income for the county (adjusted for family size). In such event, the tenant's occupancy shall terminate at the end of the existing lease term. 
(10)  Eligibility is based on proof of legal residence in the county as demonstrated by a valid State of Florida driver license or identification card, voter registration card if eligible, and an employer verification form signed by the employer or sufficient evidence, satisfactory to the City or its designee, demonstrating income qualification through self-employment. 
(11)  Priority shall be given to families of four or more members for larger sized affordable work force housing units. 
(12)  The applicant shall execute a sworn affidavit stating the applicant's intention to occupy the dwelling unit. 
(13)  The income of eligible households shall be determined by counting the full amount, before any payroll deductions, of wages, salaries, overtime pay, commissions, fees, tips, bonuses, Social Security, annuities, insurance policies, retirement funds, pensions, disability or death benefits, unemployment compensation, disability compensation, worker's compensation, severance pay and any net income from the operation of a business or profession of all household members. Expenditures for business expansion or amortization of capital indebtedness shall not be used as deductions in determining net income from operation of a business or profession. Unrelated adults may be qualified individually for rental purposes provided the total lease payment to the Owner does not exceed the rent limits established by the City. 
(14)  In the event that a tenant's income shall exceed the maximum allowable income under this section and such shall occur for the first time during the last three months of a tenancy, then the landlord and tenant may extend a lease for a period of one year at the affordable rental rate. 
(15)  The planning board may review a household's income and unique circumstances to determine eligibility and conformance with the intent of this ordinance to assure that people in need are not excluded and people without need are not included. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 6, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 08-04, § 29, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 17-09, § 2, 8-16-2017) 
Sec. 122-1470. - Accessory unit infill. 
(a)  In all mixed use zoning districts of the city, the city shall encourage the addition of affordable work force housing on the same site as commercial properties and institutions to promote employee housing. Such development shall be known as accessory unit infill. Tenants shall be eligible persons under section 122-1469. Applicants under this section may provide two bicycle or scooter parking spaces per unit as an alternative to applying to the planning board for parking variances. Provided that units of 600 square feet or less are treated as an 0.78 equivalent unit and all units provided must be made available through the city's building permit allocation system. 
(b)  The maximum total rental and/or sales price for accessory unit infill in a single development shall be based on each unit being affordable housing (moderate income). The rental and/or sales price may be mixed among affordable housing (low income), (median income), (middle income) and (moderate income) in order that the total value in rental and/or sales does not exceed ten percent of the rental and/or sales of all the units at affordable housing (moderate income). 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 9, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 08-04, § 30, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-11, § 3, 11-6-2013) 
Sec. 122-1471. - Community housing development organization. 
    The city commission may promote the establishment of a nonprofit community housing development organization (CHDO), pursuant to federal regulations governing such organizations, to serve as developer of affordable workforce housing units on city-owned property located in both the city and in the community redevelopment areas, including excessed U.S. Navy property, or located in Key Haven and Stock Island in the unincorporated part of the county, upon interlocal agreement. In such event, the city may delegate to the community housing development organization all or partial administration of the affordable housing trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-3-1998; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 10, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 122-1472. - Family size. 
    When establishing a rental or sales amount, one shall assume family size as indicated in the table below. This section shall not be used to establish the maximum number of individuals who actually live in the unit. 
Size of Unit Assumed 
Family Size Minimum 
Occupancy Efficiency (no separate bedroom) 1 1 One bedroom 2 1 Two bedroom 3 2 Three bedroom 4 3 Four or more bedrooms 5 1 per 
bedroom  
(Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 2-20-2002; Ord. No. 05-27, § 11, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 122-1473. - Affordable workforce liveaboard vessels. 
    Notwithstanding the permitted and conditional uses of Chap. 122. Art. IV. Land Use Districts, liveaboard vessels within duly permitted marinas/docking facilities subject to the provisions of the affordable workforce housing requirements of sections 122-1465, 122-1466, 122-1467, and 122-1469 may be allowed as a conditional use. Schedule of off-street parking requirements by use generally per Sec. 108-572(6) Marinas and offshore activities is 1 space per liveaboard boat. Any owner or his authorized agent may submit an application for a variance to off-street parking requirements, upon which the planning board shall hold a public meeting in accordance with the procedures cited in section 90-393. 
(Ord. No. 18-26, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Secs. 122-1474-122-1500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - RETAIL SALES IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 102. 

Sec. 122-1501. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult entertainment business. See division 12 of this article. 
    Combination business means a licensed business offering for retail sale items of adult entertainment, discount jewelry, electronics merchandise, camera merchandise, or T-shirts, which items in combination total 30 percent or more of inventory on the premises, as measured by dimensions of display area, including but not limited to floors, walls, ceiling, counters, doors, windows, and panel displays. 
    Discount jewelry store means a licensed business offering for retail sale jewelry, over 30 percent of which, as measured by dimensions of display area, including but not limited to floors, walls, ceiling, counters, doors, windows, and panel displays, is not fashioned of 14 karat or higher grade gold. Any business advertising or holding itself out as a discount jewelry store shall be presumptively included in this category. 
    Electronics/camera store means a licensed business offering for retail sale merchandise, over 30 percent of which, as measured by dimensions of display area, including but not limited to floors, walls, ceiling, counters, doors, windows, and panel displays, consists of electronic and camera merchandise. 
    Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described with sufficient particularity that its location and boundaries may be established, including those areas designated with real estate numbers in the records of the county and also including those areas falling within the definition of the term "lot, zoning" set forth in section 86-8. 
    T-shirt shop means a licensed business offering for retail sale merchandise where inventory content on the premises, as measured by dimensions of display area, including but not limited to floors, walls, ceiling, counters, doors, windows, and panel displays, consists of over 30 percent T-shirts, sweatshirts, muscle shirts, or similar apparel featuring logos, decals, transfers, appliques, iron-on designs, or other designs applied to the surface of such garment or wearing apparel. The following are not included in this definition: apparel featuring embroidery or silk screened designs and licensed businesses whose sales consist, as measured by annual gross sales figures, of 70 percent or greater of either sales to other retailers for resale or quantity sales (at least 12 items per sale) to individuals and groups or both. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.7.27(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 2, 9-18-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-1502. - Location criteria. 
    Within the HRCC, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, and HRCC-3 districts (when the uses are permitted or conditional), the location of the following retail activities shall be governed by the criteria listed: 
(1)  Discount jewelry store. No discount jewelry store is permitted on a parcel of land located within 200 feet of any parcel of land upon which another discount jewelry store is located. 
(2)  Electronics/camera store. No electronics/camera store is permitted on a parcel of land located within 200 feet of any parcel of land upon which another electronics/camera store is located. 
(3)  T-shirt shop. No T-shirt shop is permitted on a parcel of land located within 200 feet of any parcel of land upon which another T-shirt shop is located. As of March 21, 1995, no new T-shirt shops shall be located in the HRCC, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, and HRCC-3 districts. A T-shirt shop licensed by the city and in operation in the HRCC, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, or HRCC-3 district as of March 21, 1995 may continue in existence as a nonconforming use. A change in ownership of an existing T-shirt shop shall not affect such nonconforming use status. If an existing T-shirt shop is enlarged or is increased in size or undergoes a structural alteration that exceeds 50 percent of the value of its building or structure as shown on the county tax assessment records or is abandoned in use as a T-shirt shop for a period of six months, its nonconforming use status shall terminate, and the use of the building or structure shall conform to this division and the restrictions of the HRCC, HRCC-1, HRCC-2, and HRCC-3 districts. The requirements of this subsection shall supersede conflicting requirements, if any, of section 122-1504. 
(4)  Combination business. No combination business is permitted on a parcel of land located within 200 feet of any parcel of land upon which another combination business is located or upon which a business is located which offers for retail sale any component of the combination business; merchandise regulated in this division (i.e., one or more of the following: discount jewelry store, electronic/camera store, or T-shirt shop, as defined by section 122-1501). 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.7.27(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 2, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 03-05, § 5, 1-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-14, § 3, 7-7-2004) 
Sec. 122-1503. - Measurements of distance. 
    For purposes of this division, distance between business locations shall be measured by airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.7.27(C)), 7-3-1997) 
Sec. 122-1504. - Grandfather clause. 
    Any business use that predates these regulations and otherwise would be in violation of this division may continue to operate and be licensed as a legal nonconforming use; provided, however, that the business location of the use shall not be enlarged or increased in size or abandoned in use for a period of more than 30 days. In such event, the nonconforming use shall cease and the business shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this division. All material and equipment associated with the abandoned nonconforming use shall be completely removed from the premises by its owner. Abandonment shall occur when the property owner has an intent to abandon the property's nonconforming use either by an act or a failure to act that indicates the owner retains no interest in the use. Wherever this division is in conflict with article II of this chapter this division shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2.7.27(D)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 9-18-2001) 
Secs. 122-1505-122-1530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 122-1531. - Adult entertainment establishments-Findings. 
(a)  The city commission's recital (the whereas clauses) is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this division. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to regulate adult entertainment establishments for the health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents and visitors of Key West; and to establish reasonable regulations for adult entertainment establishments currently located and to be located in Key West, in order to eliminate or reduce adverse secondary effects of such establishments upon both residents and visitors. Unless there is a determination of obscenity or other illegality, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit constitutionally protected expression or speech or to deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or performances that are protected by the First Amendment. These regulations shall be construed consistently with Florida's obscenity law, chapter 847, Florida Statutes. Finally, nothing herein is intended to prohibit or to regulate works of serious artistic or literary value. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.28(A)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-14, § 4, 7-7-2004) 
Sec. 122-1532. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any commercial activity, whether conducted intermittently or full time, that involves either the sale, display, exhibition, or viewing of adult material or an adult performance, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual or sexually oriented activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult entertainment establishment" includes but is not limited to adult bookstores, adult-themed merchandise stores, adult performance establishments, adult motion picture theaters, limited adult cabarets and adult businesses, or any combination thereof. These terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Adult bookstore/video store means an establishment having at least 25 percent of its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection, or viewing, books, films, videocassettes, compact discs, magazines, or other adult material that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult performance establishment means any establishment where any worker (an employee or independent contractor) engages in a private performance, acts as an adult model, or displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a customer, regardless of whether the worker engages in dancing or any particular activity; or wears and displays to a customer any covering, tape, pasties, or other device that simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing; or offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with or for a customer and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
(3)  Adult-themed merchandise store means a commercial establishment in which at least ten percent of the unused individual items publicly displayed in the establishment as stock in trade, for sale or rent, constitute adult material. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting films and/or videos which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. 
(5)  Adult business means a commercial enterprise that offers or provides for any form of consideration, physical contact between persons of the opposite sex or of the same sex in the form of a massage or rubdown or washing or scrubbing, where one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is seminude; provided, however, that a massage therapist licensed by the State of Florida pursuant to chapter 480, Florida Statutes, or a person licensed by the State of Florida as a physician, nurse, physical therapist or athletic trainer are not deemed to be engaged in an adult business. An adult business shall also mean any other similar adult entertainment establishment not specifically described herein, including but not limited to: a business whose customers are or are invited to be in a state of nudity for sexually oriented purposes (but not for mere sunbathing), and a business that offers the use of adult booths. 
(6)  Limited adult cabaret means an adult performance establishment where live performers provide adult-themed entertainment and do so either clothed or seminude, without exposing specified anatomical areas and without engaging in specified sexual activities. 
    Adult booth means a separate booth inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a "peep show" booth or arcade; or a booth used to view "adult material" or engage in adult performance; or a booth used for sexual contact between persons in a public location. 
    Adult material means one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, video cassettes, compact disks, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other visual representations, tape recordings, disks or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(b)  Instruments, novelties, devices, merchandise or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; provided, however, that adult material shall not be interpreted to include bona fide birth control devices. 
    Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Parcel means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be or are established. See also the definition of "Lot" in section 86-9. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and/or areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and/or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals, covered or uncovered, in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, simulated sexual intercourse, sexual bestiality, sadomasochistic abuse, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts. 
(4)  Any act or conduct constituting sexual battery. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.28(B)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 04-14, § 5, 7-7-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-1533. - General regulations. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to limit the number of adult entertainment establishments within the corporate boundaries of Key West in order to address their adverse secondary effects. The city commission finds the potential and actual adverse secondary effects to be: The incidence of crime inside and around adult entertainment establishments (the city commission reaches no conclusion as to whether adult entertainment establishments cause a disproportionate increase to crime); detrimental effects on minors; the potential deterioration of a preserved historic district; pornographic litter; an increase in the incidence of obscenity; an increase in the incidence of disease; and land use incompatibilities. Regarding the latter, due to the small geographic size of Key West, there is no commercial district that does not also contain residences and houses of worship; therefore, the city commission recognizes that there can be no substantial separation between these amiable uses and adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  As of May 1, 2004, there are nine* adult entertainment establishments in the HRCC-1 zoning district. This number establishes a cap in HRCC-1. An existing adult entertainment business may move its location within HRCC-1 so long as it complies with section 122-1535. The city shall extinguish any surrendered adult entertainment licenses so that, by attrition, only five of them shall remain in the HRCC-1 zoning district. Thereafter, the city shall re-issue a surrendered license via a lottery devised by the city manager, so long as the winning applicant for the license is capable of complying and does comply with all federal, state and local regulations. 
Note- *As of the effective date of this Ordinance No. 04-14, the proprietor of a tenth location -507 Southard Street- is in litigation with the City of Key West. If the plaintiff prevails, then the city will license it as the tenth location in HRCC-1. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment that either is not located in the HRCC-1 zoning district** or does not comply with the separation requirements set forth in section 122-1535 is legally nonconforming and is subject to the regulations set forth in chapter 122, article II; provided, however, that the abandonment of an adult entertainment use shall occur when such use has ceased for a period of 120 days. Section 122-30 shall be interpreted consistent herewith. Nothing in this subsection is intended to alter nonconformities previously established. 
** As of the effective date of this Ordinance No. 04-14, the City of Key West and the property owner of 1125 Duval Street are engaged in determining whether zoning supports partial use of the property as a cabaret. If it does then the property may obtain a limited adult cabaret license. 
(d)  Within 60 days after the effective date of this Ordinance No. 04-14, all adult entertainment establishments existing in Key West shall provide the licensing division with a drawing showing the dimensions of the adult entertainment use on the parcel as of May 1, 2004. If the adult entertainment use occupies a portion of a parcel, the total floor area devoted to adult entertainment use shall not be increased above the floor area in use as of May 1, 2004, but may be relocated within the parcel. Except as provided in subsection (e), the operator of an adult entertainment establishment may change the adult entertainment use at the parcel. The operator shall notify the licensing division and the business tax receipt shall be reclassified accordingly. Any proposed change of adult entertainment use at a parcel is subject to all applicable codes and laws. 
(e)  An adult-themed merchandise store, adult bookstore, adult business or limited adult cabaret shall not be entitled to change to another classification of adult entertainment establishment and shall not obtain licensing therefor. 
(f)  If an existing adult entertainment establishment is operating pursuant to a set of conditions, either imposed by a governmental agency or bargained for in a contract, those conditions shall remain in effect to the extent that they are consistent with sections 122-1531 through 122-1536. 
(g)  An adult entertainment establishment of any classification shall not display or exhibit any adult material on the exterior of the premises, including in doors and windows. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be permitted to allow specified sexual activities to occur on the premises. 
(i)  This section 122-1533 shall sunset automatically, and the city commission shall enact new adult entertainment regulations consistent with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, when there exist no functioning adult entertainment establishments in the HRCC-1 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1(2-7.28(C)), 7-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 04-14, § 6, 7-7-2004; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 122-1534. - Licensing. 
(a)  The owner or operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall obtain a business tax receipt pursuant to section 66-87. The licensing official shall notate the license as "adult entertainment establishment: _______," filling in this blank by reference to the following classifications: adult bookstore/video store, adult-themed merchandise store, adult performance establishment, limited adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult business. 
(b)  Adult entertainment businesses existing and recognized by the city as of May 1, 2004, are granted a de facto temporary license to continue in operation while they comply with the terms of section 122-1533. 
(c)  Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the licensing official, either by the choice of adult entertainment classification(s) or by the refusal to license a business as adult entertainment, may appeal the decision to a special master (other than the code enforcement special master) appointed by the city commission. The appeal shall be made in writing not later than ten days from the date the decision of the licensing official is rendered to the applicant. The special master shall conduct a hearing at the earliest mutually convenient time, giving notice and opportunity to be heard to the applicant. The applicant may be represented by counsel. The special master shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing. The decision of the special master shall constitute final administrative agency action. 
(d)  All city licensing approvals shall be provided to an owner of an adult entertainment establishment not later than 45 days from the date of application for a business tax receipt and the applicant's compliance with all building codes. 
(e)  In addition to the business tax set forth in section 66-109(1), the owner of an adult entertainment establishment shall pay to the city on or before each October 1 an annual fee of $200.00 to defray the expense of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 04-14, § 7, 7-7-2004; Res. No. 06-292, § 1, 9-6-2006) 
Sec. 122-1535. - Separation requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), an adult entertainment establishment in the HRCC-1 zoning district shall not be located within 250 feet of any parcel upon which any of the following uses is located: 
i.  Any public park or playground; 
ii.  Any public or private school; 
iii.  Any licensed day care facility; 
iv.  Any church, synagogue or other place that is used primarily for purposes of religious worship. 
v.  Any publicly owned building, including but not limited to a government building and a library. 
vi.  Any other adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  The separation requirement for an adult-themed merchandise store only shall be 150 feet from the uses set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  The separation requirements set forth above shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary fare from the nearest point of the parcel of the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment to the other parcel (as listed above). 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 04-14, § 8, 7-7-2004) 
Sec. 122-1536. - Judicial review. 
    Any person or entity denied licensing for an adult entertainment establishment may apply, in the manner provided by law, to the circuit court for relief from such decision. 
(Ord. No. 04-14, § 9, 7-7-2004) 
Secs. 122-1537-122-1540. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 122-1541. - Tattoo establishments-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to regulate tattoo establishments for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Key West; and to establish reasonable regulations for tattoo establishments to be located in Key West, in order to eliminate or to reduce secondary effects of such establishments upon both residents and visitors. These regulations shall be construed consistently with F.S. chs. 458 and 459, or 466. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 122-1542. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Tattooing means the creation of an indelible mark, figure, word, or graphic illustration upon a human body by the insertion of pigment under the skin or by the production of scars. This definition does not include the application of henna tattoos. 
(2)  Tattoo establishment means any commercial activity, whether conducted intermittently or full-time, that involves the application of permanent tattoo material. 
(3)  Tattoo artist means a person that applies an indelible mark, figure, work, or graphic by the insertion of pigment under the skin or by the production of scars. This term shall also apply to body illustrations. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 122-1543. - General regulations. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to limit the number of tattoo establishments within the corporate boundaries of Key West in order to address their adverse secondary effects. The city commission finds the potential and actual adverse secondary effects to be: the potential deterioration of a preserved historic district; an increase in the incidence of disease; and land use incompatibilities. 
(b)  There are no tattoo establishments in the City of Key West; therefore, all tattoo establishments shall be established in compliance with all city regulations. 
(c)  All tattooing shall be performed inside the principal structure. 
(d)  All tattooing shall be performed by a person licensed to practice medicine or dentistry under F.S. chs. 458 and 459 or 466, or by a person under his general supervision. As used in this section, the term "general supervision" shall mean the supervision of the tattooist by a supervising physician, osteopathic physician, or dentist, which supervision shall not require the physical presence of the supervisor when procedures are performed, but shall require the following items: 
(1)  The supervising physician, osteopathic physician, or dentist, initially upon assuming duties as the supervisor and semi-annually thereafter, shall review and inspect the techniques, procedures, and equipment utilized by the tattooist in the performance of tattooing. 
(2)  The supervising physician, osteopathic physician, or dentist shall provide semi-annual training for the tattooist in the areas of infection control, sterilization, and emergency procedures. 
(3)  The supervising physician, osteopathic physician, or dentist and the tattooist shall develop jointly written procedures regarding the medical condition for individuals to receive tattoos, treatment of routine minor problems resulting during or from tattooing, and detailed procedures to be followed in the event of emergency situations developing during the performance of or as a result of tattooing. These written procedures will be maintained in a readily available location on the premises of the tattooist and a copy shall be maintained by the supervising physician, osteopathic physician, or dentist. Such written procedures will be readily available for inspection and review by agents of any or all of the following: the agency for health care administration, the board of medicine, the board of osteopathic medical examiners, the board of dentistry, and the city license officer. 
(e)  A person certified in the use of a defibrillator, CPR, first aid, and blood borne pathogens shall be present on-site during the time tattooing is performed. All certificates must be prominently displayed in the establishment and copies of all certificates shall be submitted each year at the time of city licensing renewal. 
(f)  A Florida Department of Health (FDOH) biomedical waste permit shall be prominently displayed at all time. 
(g)  All biomedical waste shall be disposed of in compliance with the FDOH permit. 
[(h)  Reserved.] 
(i)  Smoking shall be prohibited in the tattoo establishment. 
(j)  Food or drink shall not be permitted in the work area. 
(k)  Autoclave equipment shall be spore tested monthly or every 40 hours of use, whichever occurs first. All testing and maintenance records shall be available for inspection. 
[(l)  Reserved.] 
(m)  There shall be a separate sink located away from restroom facilities for all tattoo establishment personnel for hygiene purposes. 
(n)  Floor area in the tattoo application work area shall be a sealed hard-surface tile, concrete, etc. 
(o)  The removal of tattoos shall be prohibited in any tattoo establishment. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 122-1544. - Licensing. 
(a)  All city licensing approvals shall be provided to an owner of a tattoo establishment not later than 45 days from the date of the submittal of a complete application for a business tax receipt and the applicant's compliance with all building codes. 
(b)  In addition to the business tax set forth in section 66-109(1), the owner of a tattoo establishment shall pay to the city, on or before each October 1, an annual fee of $1,000.00 to defray the expense of regulation. 
(c)  Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the licensing official, either by the choice of tattoo classification(s) or by the refusal to license a business as a tattoo establishment, may appeal the decision to a special master (other than the code enforcement special master) appointed by the city commission. The appeal shall be made in writing not later than ten days from the date the decision of the licensing official is rendered to the applicant. The special master shall conduct a hearing at the earliest mutually convenient time, giving notice and opportunity to be heard to the applicant. The applicant may be represented by counsel. The special master shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing. The decision of the special master shall constitute final administrative agency action. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 122-1545. - Separation requirements. 
(a)  The proposed site shall be at least 500 feet from any other such use. 
(b)  The proposed site shall be at least 500 feet from the nearest house of worship, school (public or private), child care center, library, or public park. The beach area adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean shall not be considered a public park for the spacing criteria. 
(c)  The separation requirements set forth above shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary fare from the nearest point of the parcel of the proposed tattoo establishment to the other parcel (as listed above) in subsections (a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 122-1546. - Additional policies and procedures. 
(a)  Customer shall present identification. 
(b)  Customer shall sign a consent form. 
(c)  Customer shall not be visibly impaired by any substance, intoxicated or under the influence of any substance and shall sign a waiver attesting to such. 
(d)  Records for each customer shall be kept for five years. 
(e)  Customer shall receive oral and written instructions required for the receiving of and care of each tattoo. 
(f)  Tattoo artist shall use only single-use disposable ink containers. 
(g)  Tattoo artist shall only use sterile disposable one-time use needles. 
(h)  All artists shall wear medical grade gloves. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-18-2007) 
DIVISION 14. - PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS 

Sec. 122-1547. - Pain management clinics-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance [division] is to regulate pain management clinics for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, residents, and businesses of the City of Key West: and to establish reasonable regulations for pain management clinics to be located in Key West. 
    The State of Florida has implemented a prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) throughout the state and in Key West to be an effective tool to reduce successful doctor shopping, multiple prescriptions, and multiple fillings of pharmacy prescriptions and dispensing of potentially dangerous opiate drugs requiring local physicians to carefully check the state database before prescribing potentially dangerous opiate drugs. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 3, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1548. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acute pain is the normal, predicted physiological response to an adverse chemical, thermal or mechanical stimulus and is associated with surgery, trauma, or illness. It is generally short-lived. Acute pain responses may vary between patients and between pain episodes within an individual patient. Acute pain episodes may be present in patients with chronic pain. 
    Chronic pain means pain, which includes one or more of the following characteristics: 
(a)  The pain persists beyond the usual course of a disease that is the cause of the pain; 
(b)  The pain persists beyond the expected time for healing from an injury or trauma that is the cause of the pain; and 
(c)  The pain is associated with a long-term incurable or intractable medical illness or disease and is not amenable to routine pain control methods. 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance listed in Schedule II, Schedule III, or Schedule IV in Section 893-03, Fla. Stat., recognized as effective for pain relief such as, but not limited to, buprenophine, butorphenol, codeine, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, levorphanol, methadone, morphine, oxycodone, propoxyphene, and fentanyl. 
    Health care physician or physician means any practitioner who is subject to licensure or regulation by the Florida Department of Health under Chapters 458 (physician) or 459 (osteopathic physician) of the Florida Statutes. 
    Pain means an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage. Categories of pain include acute pain or chronic pain. 
    Pain management means the use of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions to control the patient's identified pain. Pain management often extends beyond pain relief, encompassing the patient's quality of life, ability to work productively, to enjoy recreation, and to function normally in family and society. 
    Pain management clinic and/or pain clinic means a privately owned pain management clinic, facility or office, whatever its title, including, but not limited to, a "wellness center," "urgent care facility," or "detox center," which engages in pain management and holds itself out as providing, or advertises in any medium as providing, any type of pain management services and that the primary business purpose of such clinic, medical office, or practitioners' office is to prescribe or dispense pain medication including, but not limited to, opioids, including fentanyl, hydrocodone, morphine, and oxycodone, to individuals for payment by cash, check or charge; and includes an entity that employs a physician who is primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing or dispensing controlled substance medications, and is required to register with the Florida Department of Health pursuant to § 458.309(4) or § 459.005(3), Fla. Stat. (2009), or any successor state law. 
    In determining whether a clinic, medical facility, practitioner's office, or pharmacy is a pain clinic or pain management clinic, the city manager may also consider the following: whether it employs one or more physicians licensed under Chapter 458 or 459, Florida Statutes, who, in a single day, issues in excess of twenty-five (25) prescriptions for controlled substances for the treatment of pain; whether major medical insurance is accepted; whether the owner/operator is a physician; whether the medical director is board certified in pain medicine and; whether the owner/operator has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to an offense that constitutes a felony or a misdemeanor. 
    Permit shall mean a certificate issued by the City of Key West acknowledging the submission and accurate completion of the pain management clinic registration forms required in order to conduct business in the City of Key West as a pain management clinic. 
    Pharmacy shall mean the same as that term is defined in Section 465.003, Fla. Stat., as may be amended from time to time, and includes community pharmacy, internet pharmacy, and special pharmacy, but does not include institutional pharmacy or nuclear pharmacy, as each of those terms are used in that section. 
    Pill mill is an entity employing a doctor, clinic, or pharmacy that is prescribing or dispensing controlled substances inappropriately, unlawfully, or for nonmedical reasons. Its operations and practices do not comply with the requirements of federal law, Florida Statutes and regulations, or this article. 
    Surgical services shall mean the practice that deals with the diagnosis and treatment of oral health, injury, deformity, and disease in which part of the body is entered by puncture or incision and treatment takes place through manual and instrumental means. This includes interventional pain management procedures such as spinal injections, spinal cord stimulators, intrathecal pumps, and similar procedures. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 4, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1549. - General regulations. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to limit the number of pain management clinics within the corporate boundaries of Key West in order to address their adverse secondary effects. 
(b)  A physician shall be designated as responsible for complying with all requirements related to operation of the pain management clinic. The designated physician, and all other persons operating the pain management clinic, shall ensure compliance with the following regulations. Failure to so comply shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable as provided in section 122-1553. 
(c)  All licensed pain management clinics shall be subject to the supplemental regulations provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP): All physicians licensed under Chapters 458 and 459, Fla. Stat., shall, prior to the prescribing of a controlled substance, request a "patient advisory report" from the PDMP, review its contents, and shall document same by placing a printout of the report in each patient's file. A copy of that printout shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officers or code enforcement officers. 
(e)  All new pain management clinics shall be subject to a review coordinated with the Key West Police Department. The police department shall provide a written confirmation to the planning department that it has reviewed the conditional use application. 
(f)  Any pain management clinic shall be validly registered with the State of Florida, if required, and with the city, and shall prominently display in a public area near its main entrance copies of all state licenses, Monroe County license, and city business tax receipt, and the name of the owner and designated physician responsible for compliance with state and city law. 
(g)  A pain management clinic may operate only Monday through Friday and only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. unless surgical procedures are being performed. 
(h)  For the purpose of studying the patterns of health and illness and prescriptions issued within the City of Key West, and to verify that a pain management clinic is operating in compliance with the requirements of federal law, Florida Statues, and this article, pain management clinics shall make and maintain monthly operational records for a period of two (2) years. Operational records shall consist of a monthly register of the following information for the previous calendar month: 
1.  The total number of prescriptions written for controlled substances listed separately by each physician; 
2.  The total number of persons seen by the pain management clinic; 
3.  The state of residence of each person to whom controlled substances were prescribed or dispensed; 
4.  A log of all attempts, whether successful or unsuccessful, to access and review the state-maintained prescription drug monitoring program. 
    Copies of this monthly register shall be made available to any law enforcement and/or code compliance officer upon demand. 
(i)  Pain management clinics shall maintain personnel records for all owners, operators, employees, and volunteers on site for each pain management clinic, and make them available during any inspection. Personnel records shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: (a) the person's full name and title; (b) current home address, telephone number, and date of birth; (c) a list of all criminal convictions whether misdemeanor or felony; and (d) a copy of a current driver's license or a government issued photo identification. 
(j)  A pain management clinic shall at all times be in compliance with all federal and state laws and regulation and the Key West Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 5, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1550. - Requirements for new pain management clinics. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of Ordinances that allow medical clinics, doctor's offices, or pharmacies as a permitted use in any other zoning district, pain management clinics, as defined in section 122-1548, in existence prior to the effective date of the Zoning in Progress established by Ordinance 12-35, shall be deemed to have a valid conditional use approval as required by section 122-61. The establishment of any new pain management clinic use shall require a conditional use approval, and may be established only within the commercial general (CG) zoning district, and shall be prohibited as a home occupation. Following the granting of a conditional use approval as required by this division and its satisfaction of sections 122-61 through 122-65, any new pain management clinic applicant shall complete the appropriate building permit or business tax receipt and submit these application(s) to the city building division for review and approval prior to issuance of any permits. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 6, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1551. - Separation requirements. 
(a)  The proposed site of a pain management clinic shall be at least 500 feet from any other pain management clinic. 
(b)  The proposed pain management clinic shall be at least 500 feet from the nearest house of worship, school (public or private), pharmacy, and child care center. 
(c)  A pain management clinic shall not co-locate on the same property as a preexisting pharmacy, nor shall a pain management clinic be allowed to co-locate on the same parcel as a proposed pharmacy, nor shall a pain management clinic be allowed within 500 feet of a proposed pharmacy. 
(d)  The separation requirements set forth above shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary fare from the nearest point of the parcel of the proposed pain management clinic to the other parcel (as listed above) in subsections (a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 7, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1552. - Licensing. 
(a)  All city licensing approvals shall be provided to an owner of a pain management clinic no later than 45 days from the date of the submittal of a complete application for a business tax receipt and the applicant's compliance with all building codes following the effective date of conditional use approval. 
(b)  In addition to the business tax set forth in section 66-109(1), the owner of a pain management clinic shall pay to the city, on or before each October 1, an annual fee of $2,000.00 to defray the expense of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 8, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 122-1553. - Penalty. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to prosecution and fine under the civil citation procedures of sections 2-676 through 2-680, or section 1-15 of the Key West Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 9, 7-2-2013) 
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLE 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within these Land Development Regulations of those sections of the 1986 Code, as updated through November 21, 2000, which are included herein. 
LDR Code 
Section Section  
this Code 34.1371 108-987 34.1372(1)- 
34.1372(5) 108-988- 
108-992 34.1373 108-993 34.1374 108-986 34.1375(1)- 
34.1375(7) 108-1056- 
108-1062 34.1376(1)- 
34.1376(3) 108-1026- 
108-1028 34.1377(1)(a)- 
34.1377(1)(g) 108-1092- 
108-1098 34.1377(2) 108-1091 34.1377(3), 
34.1377(4) 108-1099, 
108-1100 34.1378 108-994 34.1379 108-1127 34-1380(2), 
34-1380(3) 108-1128, 
108-1129 34.1381 108-1126 34.1382, 
34.1383 108-1131, 
108-1132 34.1384(1), 
34.1384(2) 108-1133, 
108-1134 34.1385 108-1135 34.1386 108-1130  
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within these Land Development Regulations of those ordinances relating to land development. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 97-10  7- 3-1997 1(1-1.1)- 
1(1-1.6) 86-1- 
86-6 1(1-1.9) 86-14 1(1-1.10)- 
1(1-1.13) 86-10- 
86-13 1(1-2.1(A)) 90-211 1(1-2.1(B)) 90-241 1(1-2.1(B)(1))- 
1(1-2.1(B)(3)) 90-242- 
90-244 1(1-2.1(C)(1))- 
1(1-2.1(C)(4)) 90-272- 
90-275 1(1-2.1(C)) 90-271 1(1-2.2) 90-301 1(1-2.2(A))- 
1(1-2.2(D)) 90-302- 
90-305 1(1-2.3(A))- 
1(1-2.3(J)) 90-356- 
90-365 1(1-2.4(A))- 
1(1-2.4(F)) 90-51- 
90-56 1(1-2.4(G)) 90-57 1(1-2.4(G)(1))- 
1(1-2.4(G)(9)) 90-58- 
90-66 1(1-2.4(H)), 
1(1-2.4(I)) 90-67, 
90-68 1(1-2.5(A))- 
1(1-2.5(D)) 90-96- 
90-99 1(1-2.6) 90-391 1(1-2.6(A))- 
1(1-2.6(G)) 90-392- 
90-397 1(1-2.7(A))- 
1(1-2.7(E)) 90-126- 
90-130 1(1-2.7(F)) 90-131 1(1-2.7(F)(1))- 
1(1-2.7(F)(9)) 90-132- 
90-140 1(1-2.7(G)) 90-141 1(1-2.7.1(A)) 90-171 1(1-2.7.1(B)(1))- 
1(1-2.7.1(C)(6)) 90-172- 
90-181 1(1-2.7.1(D)) 90-182 1(1-2.8) 90-426 1(1-2.8(A))- 
1(1-2.8(H)) 90-427- 
90-434 1(1-2.9(A)), 
1(1-2.9(B)) 90-486, 
90-487 1(1-2.10(A))- 
1(1-2.10(I)) 90-516- 
90-524 1(1-2.11) 86-7 1(1-2.12(A))- 
1(1-2.12(I)) 90-551- 
90-558 1(1-2.13(A))- 
1(1-2.13(D)) 90-586- 
90-589 1(1-3.1)- 
1(1-3.17) 90-676- 
90-692 1(2-4.1)- 
1(2-4.6) 122-91- 
122-96 1(art. V) 122-97 1(2-5.1(A))- 
1(2-5.1(F)) 122-126- 
122-131 1(2-5.1(G)) 122-132 1(2-5.1(G)(1)), 
1(2-5.1(G)(2)) 122-133, 
122-134 1(2-5.1(G)(3)) 122-135 1(2-5.1(G)(3)(d)) 122-136 1(2-5.1(G)(4)) 122-137 1(2-5.1(G)(4)(a))- 
1(2-5.1(G)(4)(e)) 122-138- 
122-142 1(2-5.1(G)(5)) 122-143 1(2-5.2) 122-171 1(2-5.2.1(A))- 
1(2-5.2.1(E)) 122-201- 
122-205 1(2-5.2.2(A)) 122-231 1(2-5.2.2(A)(1))- 
1(2-5.2.2(A)(3)) 122-232- 
122-234 1(2-5.2.2(B))- 
1(2-5.2.2(E)) 122-235- 
122-238 1(2.5.2.3(A))- 
1(2.5.2.3(E)) 122-266- 
122-270 1(2-5.2.4(A))- 
1(2-5.2.4(E)) 122-296- 
122-300 1(2-5.2.5(A))- 
1(2-5.2.5(E)) 122-326- 
122-330 1(2-5.3) 122-356 1(2-5.3.1(A))- 
1(2-5.3.1(E)) 122-386- 
122-390 1(2-5.3.2(A))- 
1(2-5.3.2(E)) 122-416- 
122-420 1(2-5.3.3(A))- 
1(2-5.3.3(E)) 122-446- 
122-450 1(2-5.4) 122-476 1(2-5.4.1(A))- 
1(2-5.4.1(E)) 122-506- 
122-510 1(2-5.4.2(A))- 
1(2-5.4.2(E)) 122-536- 
122-540 1(2-5.5) 122-566 1(2-5.5.1(A))- 
1(2-5.5.1(E)) 122-596- 
122-600 1(2-5.5.2(A))- 
1(2-5.5.2(E)) 122-626- 
122-630 1(2-5.5.3) 122-656 1(2-5.5.3(1)(A))- 
1(2-5.5.3(1)(E)) 122-686- 
122-690 1(2-5.5.3(2)(A))- 
1(2-5.5.3(2)(E)) 122-716- 
122-720 1(2-5.5.3(3)(A))- 
1(2-5.5.3(3)(E)) 122-746- 
122-750 1(2-5.5.4) 122-776 1(2-5.5.4(1)(A))- 
1(2-5.5.4(1)(E)) 122-806- 
122-810 1(2.5.5.4(2)(A))- 
1(2.5.5.4(2)(E)) 122-836- 
122-840 1(2-5.5.4(3)(A))- 
1(2-5.5.4(3)(E)) 122-866- 
122-870 1(2-5.5.5(A))- 
1(2-5.5.5(E)) 122-896- 
122-900 1(2-5.5.6(A))- 
1(2-5.5.6(E)) 122-926- 
122-930 1(2-5.5.7(A))- 
1(2-5.5.7(E)) 122-956- 
122-960 1(2-5.5.8(A))- 
1(2-5.5.8(E)) 122-986- 
122-990 1(2-5.6(A))- 
1(2-5.6(E)) 122-1016- 
122-1020 1(2-5.7(A))- 
1(2-5.7(F)) 122-1046- 
122-1051 1(2-5.8) 122-1111 1(2-5.8(A)) 122-1112 1(2-5.9) 122-1151 1(2-5.9(A))- 
1(2-5.9(J)) 122-1141- 
122-1150 1(2-6.1)- 
1(2-6.5) 122-61- 
122-65 1(2-7.1)- 
1(2-7.6) 122-1076- 
122-1081 1(2-7.7)- 
1(2-7.12) 122-1181- 
122-1186 1(2-7.13)- 
1(2-7.16) 122-1406- 
122-1409 1(2-7.17) 122-1276 1(2-7.18) 122-1246 1(2-7.19) 122-1216 1(2-7.20) 122-1306, 
122-1307 1(2-7.23(A))- 
1(2-7.23(D)) 122-1437- 
122-1440 1(2-7.23) 122-1436 1(2-7.28(A))- 
1(2-7.28(C)) 122-1531- 
122-1533 1(2.7.27(A))- 
1(2.7.27(D)) 122-1501- 
122-1504 1(3-9) 94-39 1(3-9.1)- 
1(3-9.5) 94-1- 
94-5 1(3-9.6) 94-31 1(3-9.6(A))- 
1(3-9.6(G)) 94-32- 
94-38 1(3-9.7) 94-40 1(3-9.8) 94-66- 
94-73 1(3-9.9(A)), 
1(3-9.9(B)) 94-101, 
94-102 1(3-9.10) 94-103 1(art. X) 108-276 1(3-10.1) 108-277 1(3-10.2) 108-278 1(3-10.2(A)) 108-279 1(3-10.2(B)(1))- 
1(3-10.2(B)(9)) 108-280- 
108-288 1(3-10.3(A)(a)-(r)) 102-1 1(3-10.3(A)(s)) 102-186 1(3-10.3(B)(1))- 
1(3-10.3(B)(4)) 102-61- 
102-64 1(3-10.3(C)(1))- 
1(3-10.3(C)(3)) 102-91- 
102-93 1(3-10.3(D)) 102-94 1(3-10.3) 102-2 1(3-10.3(E)(1)) 102-151 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(a))- 
1(3-10.3(E)(1)(f)) 102-152- 
102-157 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(g)) 102-190 1(3-10.3(E)(1)(h)) 102-158 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(a))- 
1(3-10.3(E)(2)(c)) 102-216- 
102-218 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(d)(i)) 102-187 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(d)(ii)) 102-188, 102-189 1(3-10.3(E)(2)(e))- 
1(3-10.3(E)(2)(g)) 102-219- 
102-221 1(3-10.3(E)(3)(a)), 
1(3-10.3(E)(3)(b)) 102-251, 
102-252 1(3-10.3(F)) 102-121 1(3-10.3(F)(1))- 
1(3-10.3(F)(4)) 102-122- 
102-125 1(3-10.3(G)) 102-282 1(3-10.3(H))- 
1(3-10.3(K)) 102-3- 
102-7 1(3-10.3(L)) 102-281 1(3-10.3(M)) 102-283 1(3-10.3(M)(1)), 
1(3-10.3(M)(2)) 102-284, 
102-285 1(3-10.4(A))- 
1(3-10.4(J)) 110-26- 
110-35 1(3-10.5) 108-316 1(3-10.5(A))- 
1(3-10.5(C)) 108-317- 
108-319 1(3-10.6) 108-289 1(3-10.7) 108-346 1(3-10.8) 108-347 1(3-10.8(A)), 
1(3-10.8(B)) 108-348, 
108-349 1(3-10.8(C)) 108-350 1(3-10.8(C)(1)), 
1(3-10.8(C)(2)) 108-351, 
108-352 1(3-10.9) 108-956 1(3-11.1) 110-86 1(3-11.1(A))- 
1(3-11.1(E)) 110-87- 
110-91 1(3-11.2(A))- 
1(3-11.2(D)) 110-121- 
110-124 1(3-11.3) 110-151 1(3-11.4(A))- 
1(3-11.4(L)) 110-181- 
110-192 1(3-11.5) 110-221 1(3-11.5(A))- 
1(3-11.5(C)) 110-222- 
110-224 1(3-11.6) 108-1 1(3-11.7) 110-461 1(3-11.7(A))- 
1(3-11.7(C)) 110-462- 
110-466 1(3-11.8) 110-92 1(3-11.9) 108-717 1(3-11.10) 108-957 1(3-11.11) 110-496- 
110-498 1(3-12.1)- 
1(3-12.6) 108-711- 
108-716 1(3-12.7) 108-776 1(3-12.7(A)), 
1(3-12.7(B)) 108-777, 
108-778 1(3-12.7(C)) 108-779 1(3-12.7(C)(1))- 
1(3-12.7(C)(7)) 108-780- 
108-786 1(3-12.7(C)(7)) 108-888 1(3-12.7(C)(8))- 
1(3-12.7(C)(14)) 108-787- 
108-793 1(3-12.7(D)) 108-794 1(3-12.8) 108-881 1(3-12.8(1))- 
1(3-12.8(6)) 108-882- 
108-887 1(3-12.8(8))- 
1(3-12.8(14)) 108-889- 
108-895 1(3-12.9(1)- 
(10)) 108-851 1(3-12.9(11)) 108-897 108-926, 
108-927 1(3-12.10) 108-821 108-896 1(3-12.11(A))- 
1(3-12.11(C)) 108-746- 
108-748 1(3-12.12) 108-718 1(3-12.13(A)), 
1(3-12.13(B)) 108-719, 
108-720 1(3-13.1), 
1(3-13.2) 108-381, 
108-382 1(3-13.3)- 
1(3-13.8) 108-411- 
108-416 1(3-13.9) 108-446 1(3-13.9(A))- 
1(3-13.9(H)) 108-447- 
108-454 1(3-13.10), 
1(3-13.11) 108-481, 
108-482 1(3-13.12(A))- 
1(3-13.12(E)) 108-511- 
108-517 1(3-14.1)- 
1(3-14.4) 110-251- 
110-254 1(3-14.5(A)), 
1(3-14.5(B)) 110-255, 
110-256 1(3-14.6(A))- 
1(3-14.6(D)) 110-321- 
110-324 1(3-14.6(E)) 110-325 1(3-14.6(E)(1))- 
1(3-14.6(E)(5)) 110-326- 
110-330 1(3-14.6(F))- 
1(3-14.6(K)) 110-331- 
110-336 1(3-14.7(A))- 
1(3-14.7(D)) 110-431- 
110-435 1(3-14.8(A)(1))- 
1(3-14.8(A)(3)) 110-366- 
110-368 1(3-14.8(B)) 110-369 1(3-14.9) 110-337 1(3-14.10) 110-258 1(3-14.11(A)), 
1(3-14.11(B)) 110-286, 
110-287 1(3-14.11(C)) 110-288 1(3-14.11(C)(1))- 
1(3-14.11(C)(3)) 110-289- 
110-291 1(3-14.11(C)(4)) 110-292 1(3-14.11(C)(4)(a))- 
1(3-14.11(C)(4)(c)) 110-293- 
110-295 1(3-14A.1)- 
1(3-14A.6) 110-396- 
110-402 1(3-15.1) 108-571 1(3-15.2(A))- 
1(3-15.2(C)) 108-572- 
108-574 1(3-15.3) 108-575 1(3-15.3(F))- 
1(3-15.3(H)) 108-576- 
108-578 1(3-15.4(A))- 
1(3-15.4(C)) 108-609- 
108-611 1(3-15.4(D))- 
1(3-15.4(F)) 108-606- 
108-608 1(3-15.5(A)) 108-641 1(3-15.5(A)(1))- 
1(3-15.5(A)(6)) 108-642- 
108-647 1(3-15.5(B))- 
1(3-15.5(D)) 108-648- 
108-650 1(3-15.6) 108-677 1(3-15.7(A)) 108-676 1(3-15.7(B)) 108-678 1(3-15.7(B)(1))- 
1(3-15.7(B)(3)) 108-679- 
108-681 1(3-15.7(C)), 
1(3-15.7(D)) 108-682, 
108-683 1(3-16.1(A)), 
1(3-16.1(B)) 114-2, 
114-3 1(3-16.1(C)(1))- 
1(3-16.1(C)(4)) 106-51- 
106-54 1(3-16.1(D)) 106-55 1(3-16.1(E)) 114-4 1(3-16.1(F)) 106-56 1(3-16.1(G)) 114-5 1(3-16.2(A)) 114-1 1(3-16.2(B)) 114-71 1(3-16.2(B)(1))- 
1(3-16.2(B)(4)) 114-72- 
114-75 1(3-16.2(C))- 
1(3-16.2(M)) 114-31- 
114-41 1(3-16.3(A))- 
1(3-16.3(F)) 114-101- 
114-106 1(3-16.4(A))- 
1(3-16.4(F)) 114-136- 
114-141 1(3-16.5(A))- 
1(3-16.5(G)) 106-86- 
106-92 1(3-17.1), 
1(3-17.2) 106-121, 
106-122 1(3-17.3(A)) 106-151 1(3-17.3(B)) 106-152 1(3-17.3(B)(1))- 
1(3-17.3(B)(4)) 106-153- 
106-156 1(4-18.1) 108-31 1(4-18.2) 108-91 1(4-18.2(A)) 108-92 1(4-18.2(A)(1))- 
1(4-18.2(A)(5)) 108-93- 
108-97 1(4-18.2(B))- 
1(4-18.2(E)) 108-98- 
108-101 1(4-18.3) 108-161 1(4-18.3(A)(1))- 
1(4-18.3(B)(2)) 108-162- 
108-166 1(4-18.3(C)) 108-167 1(4-18.4(A))- 
1(4-18.4(D)) 108-196- 
108-199 1(4-18.5) 108-226 1(4-18.5(A)(1))- 
1(4-18.5(A)(6)) 108-227- 
108-232 1(4-18.5(B)) 108-233 1(4-18.5(C)) 108-234 1(4-18.5(C)(1)) 108-235 1(4-18.5(C)(2)) 108-236 1(4-18.5(C)(2)(a))- 
1(4-18.5(C)(2)(c)) 108-237- 
108-239 1(4-18.5(C)(3)), 
1(4-18.5(C)(4)) 108-240, 
108-241 1(4-18.5(D))- 
1(4-18.5(J)) 108-242- 
108-248 1(4-18.6(A))- 
1(4-18.6(D)) 108-61- 
108-64 1(4-18.7(A))- 
1(4-18.7(D)) 108-131- 
108-134 1(4-18.8) 108-32 1(4-19.1(A))- 
1(4-19.1(C)) 118-1- 
118-3 1(4-19.1(D)) 118-66 1(4-19.1(D)(1)) 118-67 1(4-19.1(D)(2)), 
1(4-19.1(D)(3)) 118-70, 
118-71 1(4-19.1(D)(4)), 
1(4-19.1(D)(5)) 118-68, 
118-69 1(4-19.1(E))- 
1(4-19.1(L)) 118-4- 
118-11 1(4-19.2) 118-291 1(4-19.2(A)) 118-326 1(4-19.2(A)(1))- 
1(4-19.2(A)(4)) 118-327- 
118-330 1(4-19.2(B)) 118-457 1(4-19.2(C)) 118-293 1(4-19.2(D)) 118-458 1(4-19.2(E)) 118-294 1(4-19.2(F)), 
1(4-19.2(G)) 118-392, 
118-393 1(4-19.2(H)) 118-292 1(4-19.2(I)) 118-456 1(4-19.2(J)) 118-421 1(4-19.2(J)(1))- 
1(4-19.2(J)(6)) 118-422- 
118-427 1(4-19.2(K)) 118-394 1(4-19.2(L)) 118-356 1(4-19.2(L)(1))- 
1(4-19.2(L)(5)) 118-357- 
118-362 1(4-19.2(M)) 118-295 1(4-19.2(N)) 118-395 1(4-19.2(O)) 118-296 1(4-19.2(P)) 118-459 1(4-19.2(Q))- 
1(4-19.2(T)) 118-297- 
118-300 1(4-19.2(U)) 118-460 1(4-19.2(U)(1))- 
1(4-19.2(U)(19)) 118-461- 
118-479 1(4-19.2(V)) 118-480 1(4-19.2(W)) 118-482 1(4-19.2(X)) 118-391 1(4-19.3(A)), 
1(4-19.3(B)) 118-522, 
118-523 1(4-19.4(A))- 
1(4-19.4(F)) 118-101- 
118-106 1(4-19.5(A))- 
1(4-19.5(D)) 118-166- 
118-169 1(4-19.6(A)) 118-196 1(4-19.6(A)(1)), 
1(4-19.6(A)(2)) 118-197, 
118-198 1(4-19.6(B)) 118-226 1(4-19.6(B)(1))- 
1(4-19.6(B)(3)) 118-227- 
118-229 1(4-19.6(C)) 118-256 1(4-19.6(C)(1))- 
1(4-19.6(C)(4)) 118-257- 
118-260 1(4-19.6(D))- 
1(4-19.6(F)) 118-261- 
118-263 1(4-19.6(G)) 118-264 1(4-19.6(G)(2)) 118-265 1(4-19.7) 118-511 1(4-19.7(A))- 
1(4-19.7(F)) 118-512- 
118-517 1(4-19.8)- 
1(4-19.11) 118-518- 
118-521 1(4-20.1) 107-1 1(4-20.1(A))- 
1(4-20.1(E)) 107-2- 
107-6 1(4-20.1(F)) 107-196 1(4-20.1(F)(1))- 
1(4-20.1(F)(8)) 107-197- 
107-204 1(4-20.1(G))- 
1(4-20.1(I)) 107-166- 
107-168 1(4-20.1(J)) 107-26 
107-169 1(4-20.1(J)(1))- 
1(4-20.1(J)(11)) 107-27- 
107-37 1(4-20.1(K)) 107-170 1(4-20.2(A)) 107-66 1(4-20.2(A)(1))- 
1(4-20.2(A)(4)) 107-67- 
107-70 1(4-20.2(A)(5)) 107-71 1(4-20.2(A)(5)(a))- 
1(4-20.2(A)(5)(c)) 107-72- 
107-74 1(4-20.2(B)) 107-75 1(4-20.3(A)) 107-101 1(4-20.3(A)(1))- 
1(4-20.3(A)(4)) 107-102- 
107-105 1(4-20.3(B)) 107-106 1(4-20.4(A)) 107-136 1(4-20.4(A)(1))- 
1(4-20.4(A)(4)) 107-137- 
107-140 1(4-20.5), 
1(4-20.6) 107-7, 107-8 1(4-20.8) 107-9 1(5-21.1), 
1(5-21.2) 86-8, 
86-9 1(App. XIII-A) 108-518 1(Table XIX-A) 118-136 97-20  9-16-1997 1(Exhs. A, B) 86-9 98-14  5- 5-1998 1 86-14 3 90-363 4 90-552 5 94-4 6 110-186 7 110-496 98-16  6- 2-1998 1 86-9 98-18  6- 3-1998 1 122-1466- 
122-1472 98-31 11-10-1998 1 86-9 2 122-1371- 
122-1376 98-32 12- 1-1998 1 86-9 99-08  5-18-1999 1-3 110-252-110-254 4 110-255 
110-257 5 110-322 110-324 99-18  9- 8-1999 § 1(Exh. A(2-5.2.3(1)(A)-(E)) 122-276-122-280    (Exh. A(2-5.5.3(4)(A)-(E)) 122-756-122-760    (Exh. A(2-5.5.4(2)(A)-(E)) 122-836-122-840    (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(1)(A)-(E)) 122-966-122-970    (Exh. A(2-5.5.7(2)(A)-(E)) 122-976-122-980    (Exh. A(2-5.5.9(A)-(E)) 122-1001-122-1005    (Exh. A(4-18.3(1)(A)) 108-166    (Exh. A(4-18.4(E)) 108-200    (Exh. A(4-18.5(K)) 108-249    (Exh. A) 86-9 99-26 12- 7-1999 1 122-1336-122-1343 00-04  2- 1-2000 1 90-301 2 90-98 3 90-393 4 90-126 90-130 90-133 90-136 5 90-178 6 90-430, 
90-431 7 90-522 90-524 8 90-558 9 90-589 10(1-2.14) 90-641 10(1-2.14(A))- 
10(1-2.14(E)) 90-642- 
90-646 11 122-566 12 122-1017 13 122-1142 14 122-64 15 102-152 16 108-573 17 108-607 18 108-645 21 108-162- 
108-164 22 108-199 24 107-74 25 107-105 26 107-137 27 86-9 00-10  6- 6-2000 3 86-9 
122-26 4-9 122-27-122-32 00-14  7- 5-2000 1(Exh. A) 122-757 122-759 108-249 86-9 00-21  9-20-2000 1 90-130 01-12  5- 7-2002 1 90-142 01-13  9-18-2001 1 122-62 2 122-1501 122-1502 3 122-1504 122-1532 122-1534 122-1535 02-01  1- 2-2002 1 90-394, 90-395 02-05  2- 5-2002 1 122-1336-122-1346 02-06  2-20-2002 1 86-9 2 122-1371 02-08  2-20-2002 1 122-1466-122-1473 02-18  7- 2-2002 1 122-1184 02-20  8- 6-2002 2 114-103(11) 3 114-104 02-22  9- 4-2002 1 90-142 90-428 2 90-431(1), (4) 3 90-434 02-26 11- 6-2002 1-4 108-61-108-64 5 122-63 03-05  1- 7-2003 1-4 122-657-122-660 5 122-1502 03-09  3- 4-2003 1 90-395 2 90-397 04-01  1- 6-2004 1 90-646 04-02  1-21-2004 1, 2 122-537, 122-538 3 122-540 4-6 122-541-122-543 04-06  4- 6-2004 1 90-52(b) 04-07  4- 6-2004 1 86-9 04-09  5-18-2004 1 122-627 2 122-957 04-14  7- 7-2004 1, 2 122-687, 122-688 3 122-1502 4-9 122-1531-122-1536 04-20 11- 3-2004 1 90-172 2 90-178 3 90-429(a)(2)a. 4       Rpld 90-181 5-7 110-252-110-254 8 110-255(b) 9 110-256(b)-(d) 10, 11       Added 110-259, 110-260 12-14 110-291-110-293 15-18 110-321-110-324 19-21 110-326-110-328 22       Rpld 110-329 23-25 110-330-110-332 26-28 110-334-110-336 29 110-366 30 110-431 31       Rpld 110-432 05-03  1- 4-2005 1 114-103 05-04  1-19-2005 1-11       Rpld 108-91-108-101 12-14       Rpld 108-132-108-134 15-21       Rpld 108-161-108-167 22       Added 108-91 23       Rnbd 108-93       as 108-92 24-26       Added 108-93-108-95 27-31 108-196-108-200 32       Rnbd 108-131       as 108-201 33       Rnbd 108-133       as 108-202 34       Rnbd 108-32       as 108-203 35       Added 108-228(8) 05-09  4-19-2005 1-11 122-1336-122-1346 05-11  5-17-2005 1 122-1371(b), (d)(4) 2       Added 122-1372 05-27 10-18-2005 1 Ch. 122, Art. V, Div. 10(title) 2       Added 144-1465 3-6 144-1466-144-1469 9-11 144-1470-144-1472 12       Rpld 144-1473 05-28 11- 2-2005 1       Added 114-42 06-09  5- 2-2006 1 106-52(1), (2) 06-10  5- 2-2006 1 90-51 2 90-54 3 90-58 4 90-62 06-12  7- 5-2006 1 122-63(f) 06-292(Res.)  9- 6-2006 1 86-9, 114-104, 122-28(b), 122-1306(3)a., 122-1338(2), 122-1339, 122-1371, 122-1372, 122-1533(d), 122-1534(a), (d), (e) 06-14  8- 1-2006 1 90-127(a), (b) 2 90-141(a) 3 90-431(1), (2), (4)-(6) 4 102-1 5       Added 102-62(3) 6 102-63(b)(2) 7 102-125 8       Added 102-159 9 102-216 10 102-217 12 102-218, 102-220(d) 06-22 11- 8-2006 1 114-102(3), (4) 06-24 12- 5-2006 1 90-431(1)-(3) 2 90-432 07-14  9-18-2007 1       Added 122-418(21) 2       Added 122-1541-122-1546 07-18 12- 4-2007 1       Added 122-1017(12) 08-04  5-20-2008 1 90-52(a), (b) 2       Added 90-55(a)(7)       Rnbd 90-55(a)(7)-(9)       as 90-55(a)(8)-(10) 3 90-97 4 90-182 5 90-391 6 90-392(b) 7 90-393 8 90-394 9 90-395(a), (b) 10 90-397 11 90-426 12 90-427 14 90-641 15 102-3(b) 16 106-51 17 106-52 18 108-574 19 108-987(Table note) 20 108-1061 21 110-260 22 110-337 23 114-140(a) 24 122-28(b), (d), (g) 25 122-30 26 122-32(e) 27 122-234 28 122-1440 29 122-1469(15) 30 122-1470(a) 09-05  4- 7-2009 1 90-140 2 90-142 09-06  4- 7-2009 1 86-9 2 122-238(3) 3-5 122-1151(Table) 09-07  5- 5-2009 1 Ch. 108, Art. X(title) 2 108-986 3 108-987 4 108-988 5 108-989 6       Added 108-991(3) 7 108-992 8       Dltd 108-993 9       Rnbd 108-994       as 108-993 10       Dltd Ch. 108, Art. X, Div. 2 11-13       Dltd 108-1026-108-1028 14       Rnbd Ch. 108, Art. X, Div. 3       as Ch. 108, Art. X, Div. 2 15       Rnbd/Am 108-1056       as 108-994 16       Dltd 108-1057 17       Rnbd/Am 108-1058       as 108-995 18, 19       Dltd 108-1059, 108-1060 20, 21       Rnbd/Am 108-1061, 108-1062       as 108-996, 108-997 22       Dltd Ch. 108, Art. X, Div. 4 23-31       Dltd 108-1091-108-1099 32       Rnbd 108-1100       as 108-998 10-02  1- 5-2010 1 114-1 2       Added 114-43 10-04  1- 5-2010 1 86-9 2 102-1 3 122-600 4 122-630 5 122-660 6 122-690 7 122-720 8 108-760 9 122-750 10 122-810 11 122-840 12 122-870 13 122-900 14 122-930 15 122-960 16 122-970 17 122-980 18 122-990 19 122-1005 20, 21 122-1151 10-05  1- 5-2010 1       Added 122-968(6) 2 122-970(2) 3 122-1111(Table) 10-08  4- 6-2010 1 122-1346 10-10  5-18-2010 1 108-995 2 108-996 10-16  7-20-2010 1       Added 109-1-109-6 10-20 10- 5-2010 1 110-255 11-06  3-15-2011 1 122-1338(2)       Dltd 122-1346 11-10  8- 2-2011 1 90-127 2 90-128 3 90-135 11-11  8- 2-2011 1 90-133 2 90-136 3 90-138 4       Added 90-143 5 102-217 6 102-215 12-02  2- 7-2012 1 122-926 2 122-928(2) 12-13  6- 5-2012 1 90-553 12-14  6- 5-2012 1 102-216, 102-217 12-15  6- 5-2012 1       Added 108-999 12-16  6- 5-2012 1 122-1016, 122-1017, 122-1018, 122-1020 12-18  7-17-2012 1 122-26 2       Added 122-33 3       Added 122-34 12-19  7-17-2012 1       Added 110-467 12-27  8-21-2012 1 108-680 2 108-681 3 108-682(2), (4) 4 108-683 5       Added 108-684 12-33  9-18-2012 1 122-92 2       Added 122-611-122-616 3 122-1111 4 122-1151 13-01  1- 8-2013 1 108-999 13-05  3-19-2013 1       Rpld 108-821-108-927 13-12  7- 2-2013 2       Added 122-418(22) 3-9       Added 122-1547-122-1553 13-16  9- 4-2013 1 110-251-110-256, 110-258-110-260, 110-287-110-291, 110-293, 110-294, 110-321-110-324, 110-326, 110-327, 110-331, 110-332, 110-334-110-336 110-366, 110-396, 110-402, 110-431, 110-433, 110-434 13-18 10-16-2013 1 90-392(b) 2       Added 90-398 3 122-28(b) 4       Added 122-32(g) 13-19 11- 6-2013 1 86-9 2 108-986, 108-987, 
109-989-108-991, 
108-994, 108-995       Added 108-996       Rnbd 108-996-108-1000       as 108-997-108-1001 3 122-1470 13-25 12- 3-2013 1 122-756-122-760 2 122-966-122-970 3 122-1111, 122-1151 15-07  4- 7-2015 1 122-1149 16-10  6-21-2016 1 90-142 16-11  6-22-2016 1 90-142 16-12  7- 6-2016 1 90-61 2 90-62 16-22  4-21-2016 1 114-1       Added Ch. 14, Art. II, Div. 3, § 14-100 114-101       Rpld 114-102       Added 114-102 114-103       Rpld 114-104       Added 114-104 114-105       Rpld 114-106       Added 114-106       Added 114-107, 114-108 16-23 11- 1-2016 90-142 16-24 11- 1-2016 102-217 17-02  5- 3-2017 1       Added 108-991(3)d. 17-09  8-16-2017 1 122-1466 2 122-1469(1), (10), (13) 18-01  1- 4-2018 1 108-997 18-04  2- 7-2018 1 122-92 2       Added Ch. 122, Art. IV, Div. 3, Subdiv. VIII, §§ 122-331-122-335 3 122-1111 4 122-1151 18-07  4- 3-2018 1 108-680 2 108-681 3 108-683(3), (4) 18-11  6- 5-2018 1 108-987(4) 2 108-994 3, 4 108-995 5 108-997 6 108-998 18-13  7- 3-2018 1 86-9 2 122-1466 18-15  8- 7-2018 1 122-926-122-928 18-16  8- 7-2018 1 122-926-122-928 18-18  9- 5-2018 1-3 90-172-90-174 18-19  9- 5-2018 1       Added 110-331(4) 18-20  9- 5-2018 1       Added 110-331(3)(d), (e) 18-26 10-16-2018 1       Added 122-1473  
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within these Land Development Regulations either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 161.021 86-9 ch. 162 109-6 162.09(2)(a) 110-293 162.21 108-1130 ch. 163 90-551 90-552 90-683 94-3 ch. 163, pt. II 86-4 86-9 90-487 94-1 108-989 108-1127 163.3174 90-51 90-55 163.3174(4)(a) 90-55 163.3174(4)(c), (d) 90-55 163.3175(5) 90-51 163.3177(1) 90-51 163.3180 94-4 94-103 163.3180(2)(b), (c) 94-103 163.3181 90-65 163.3181(3)(a) 90-641 163.3184(10) 108-1127 163.3184(16) 108-1127 163.3187(8) 94-3 163.3191 90-55 90-64 163.3201 86-4 122-91 163.3202 86-2 86-4 90-486 90-487 163.3202(1) 108-989 108-1127 163.3215(2) 90-398 163.3220 90-676 94-5 94-38 94-103 163.3220 et seq. 122-536 163.3220-163.3243 90-677 163.3225 90-683 90-684 90-689 163.3225(2) 90-641 163.3227 90-682 163.3229 90-684 163.3231 90-685 163.3233 90-687 163.3233(2) 90-687 163.3235 90-688 90-689 163.3237 90-689 163.3239 90-690 90-691 163.3241 90-687 163.3243 90-692 166.033 110-467 166.041 Ch. 90, Art. VI, Div. 2, Subdiv. II 90-524 166.041(3)(a), (c) 90-641 ch. 177 118-136 118-166 118-169 118-259 118-260 ch. 212 122-1371 316.131 118-481 316.1958 108-650 ch. 320 122-1276 320.0842 108-650 320.0843 108-650 320.0845 108-650 320.0848 108-650 320.823 122-1276 327.40 122-139 ch. 380 86-9 94-5 94-103 107-106 380.01 94-3 380.04 90-356 380.06 118-229 ch. 419 122-1246 419.001 122-1246 420.0004 86-9 420.9071(3) 108-1132 420.9071(20) 122-716 122-720 ch. 458 122-1541 122-1543 122-1548 122-1549 458.309(4) 122-1548 ch. 459 122-1541 122-1543 122-1548 122-1549 459.005(3) 122-1548 465.003 122-1548 ch. 466 122-1541 122-1543 ch. 471 108-238 ch. 481 108-238 ch. 509 122-1371 513.01 86-9 ch. 553 122-1276 775.083 122-139 893.03 122-1548  
