CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MONTICELLO, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: November 1, 2005 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MONTICELLO, FLORIDA 
____________ 
John Jones, Mayor 
Idella Scott, Vice-Mayor 
Linda Butler 
George Evans 
Tom Vogelgesang 
Council Members 
____________ 
Bruce A. Leinback 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Emily Anderson 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
____________ 
Steve Wingate 
City Manager 
____________ 
Fred Mosley 
Police Chief 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MONTICELLO, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Julie S. Conley, Mayor 
Gerrold Austin, Vice-Mayor 
Tom Vogelgesang 
Luther Pickels 
Brian T. Hayes 
City Council 
____________ 
Bruce A. Leinback 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Emily Anderson 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Monticello. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through May 7, 1991, and the 1957 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1957 and 1982 Codes, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS CHT:1 CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLES CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Senior Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Bruce A. Leinback, City Attorney, Emily Anderson, City Clerk/Treasurer, and Patti Claiborne, Deputy City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Monticello, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Monticello, Florida. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Monticello, Florida. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-14 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MONTICELLO, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Monticello, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 7, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 7, 2005 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 1st day of November, 2005. 
/s/ Julie S. Conley 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Emily Anderson 
      City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Bruce A. Leinback 
      City Attorney   1 st Reading: 
Council Action 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 5 Current Officials - Include 2010-01 - Omit 2010-02 - Omit 2010-03  6- 3-2010 Include 2010-04  6- 3-2010 Include 2010-05  6- 3-2010 Include 2010-06  6- 3-2010 Include 2010-07 - Omit 2010-08 10- 5-2010 Include 2010-09 10- 5-2010 Include 2010-10 10- 5-2010 Include 2010-11 10- 5-2010 Include 2010-12 11- 1-2010 Include 2010-13 12- 7-2010 Include Supp. No. 6 2011-04  9- 6-2011 Include 2012-03  7- 3-2012 Include 2012-05 10- 2-2012 Include 2013-01  2- 5-2013 Include 2013-02  2- 5-2013 Include Supp. No. 7 2013-04  6- 4-2013 Include 2013-05  8- 6-2013 Include 2013-06  8- 6-2013 Include 2013-09  9- 3-2013 Include 2013-10  9- 3-2013 Include 2013-11  9- 3-2013 Include 2013-12 10- 1-2013 Include 2013-13 11- 5-2013 Include 2013-14  1- 7-2014 Include Supp. No. 8 2014-01  5- 6-2014 Include 2014-02  6- 3-2014 Include 2014-03  9- 2-2014 Include 2014-04  9- 2-2014 Include 2015-01  3- 3-2015 Include 2015-02  2- 3-2015 Include Supp. No. 9 2015-04 11- 2-2015 Include 2015-05 12- 1-2015 Include 2016-01 10- 4-2016 Include 2017-01  5- 2-2017 Include Supp. No. 10 2018-01  1- 9-2018 Include 2018-02  1- 9-2018 Include 2018-03  1- 9-2018 Include 2018-06  4- 3-2018 Include 2018-07  6- 5-2018 Include  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter herein compiled consists of Chapter 9026, Laws of Florida, 1921, and all subsequent acts relating to the City of Monticello, as amended. Where a section or an act has been amended, superseded or repealed by a later act, the amended, superseded or repealed section or act has been omitted. The origin of each amended section is given in parentheses following the section. 
The section numbers herein are the official numbers from section 1 through 47, with the exception of § 1.1. See note following said section. Beginning with section 48 the sections have been renumbered to conform to numerical sequence. 
The catchlines for the sections have been supplied by the editors to facilitate use of the compilation. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation, and a uniform format has been employed for citations to state law. Any other changes to the text are enclosed in brackets. Per the city's instructions, the provisions of the Charter have been degenderized by adding "[she]," "[her]" and "[herself]" as appropriate, and by adding "[councilmembers]" after the word "councilmen." 

Sec. 1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of the Charter, which abolished the former municipal government of the city, has been deleted. 
Sec. 1.1. - Town designated city. 
    The name of the Town of Monticello located in Jefferson County is hereby changed to the City of Monticello, and wherever the word "Town" appears in Chapter 9026, Laws of 1921 [Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921)], as amended, where applicable the word "City" shall be substituted in lieu thereof. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1592, § 1) 
Editor's note- Section "1.1" amended Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921) generally, and not by specific section; therefore it is included herein as § 1.1 at the editor's discretion. Such section became effective upon approval of the voters on December 1, 1959. 
Sec. 2. - Boundaries of municipality established. 
    That the territorial boundaries constituting the municipality known as the City of Monticello, in the County of Jefferson, State of Florida, shall be as follows, to-wit: 
    Beginning at a point One Thousand Three Hundred and Seventy yards due North of the Court House, of Jefferson County, Florida, and running thence East One Thousand Three Hundred and Seventy yards, thence running due South Two Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty yards, thence running due West Two Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty yards, and thence running due North Two Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Yards, and thence running One Thousand Three Hundred and Seventy yards due East to the starting point. 
Editor's note- The boundaries of the city have been changed by the following ordinances: 
Ord. of Ordinance No. Adoption Date  3- 4-1973 89-03.5  5- 2-1989  1-14-1974 89-04  6- 6-1989  2-13-1978 89-08 11- 7-1989  9- 5-1978 89-10 12- 5-1989  2-28-1978 90-04  3- 6-1990  3- 5-1985 90-08  5- 1-1990 90-09  9- 4-1990 91-08  1- 7-1992 92-05  9- 1-1992 2000-02  3- 7-2000 2000-09 11- 7-2000 2001-01  4- 3-2001 2001-01A 11- 6-2001 2005-01  1- 4-2005 2005-03  5- 3-2005  
Sec. 3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 3, "Obligations assumed by new municipality," which derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted as obsolete. 
Sec. 4. - Rights, interest, etc., vested in new municipality. 
    That the title, right and ownership of property, uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, decrees and choses in action held or owned by the said municipality of the City of Monticello shall pass and be vested in the municipal corporation hereby organized to succeed such municipality. 
Sec. 5. - Perpetual succession; right to sue; seal. 
    That said corporation shall have perpetual succession, shall sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and shall have a common seal which may be changed by the City Council at pleasure. 
Sec. 6. - Corporate powers. 
    That said Corporation may ... own[,] purchase, lease, receive, acquire and hold property, real and personal, beyond the limits of said corporation to be used for any and all such public purposes as the Mayor and City Council may deem necessary or proper; and may sell, lease or otherwise dispose of such property for the benefit of the City to the same extent as a natural person may; and the City Council may prescribe by ordinance the manner of making such conveyance. 
Editor's note- A portion of this section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted. 
Sec. 7. - Corporate officers. 
    That the government and corporate authority of said City shall be vested in the City Council to consist of five Councilmen, a Clerk-Treasurer, a Chief of Police and such other officers as may be appointed or elected in pursuance of law and the ordinances of said City. No person shall be eligible to hold an office herein provided for, except he/she be a resident and qualified elector of the City at the time of qualifying for said office and throughout the duration of his/her term. 
(Amended Res. No. 04-95, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 8. - Mayor-Duties, powers. 
    That the Mayor shall be elected annually at the first meeting following the general election from among the current, elected City Councilmen [Councilmembers] to serve for one year, subject to removal or dismissal as a member of said Council, and shall hold his [her] office until his [her] successor is elected and qualified. He [she] shall attend all regular meetings of the council: Further, no additional salary shall be payable to the Mayor so elected. He [she] shall have power to preserve peace and order. The Mayor shall see that the ordinances are faithfully executed and the orders of the Council duly observed and enforced and exercise all the powers incident and usual to the due enforcement of his [her] jurisdiction. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1592, § 3; Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 2; Ref. of 1-12-1981) 
Sec. 9. - Same-Power of suspension. 
    That the Mayor shall have power to suspend any officer, except Councilmen [Councilmembers], for misconduct in office or neglect of duty, reporting his [her] action in writing with the reasons therefor to the next regular meeting of the Council for its approval or disapproval. 
Sec. 10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of § 10, pertaining to access to books and records and other powers of the mayor, which derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), have assumed ordinance status by virtue of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) and their inclusion in the Monticello Code of Ordinances. Such provisions are included in the Code of Ordinances as § 2-1. 
Sec. 11. - Same-Approval of ordinance; failure to approve. 
    That every ordinance passed by the Council, before becoming a law, shall be presented to the Mayor under the certificate and seal of the Clerk. If the Mayor approves the same, he [she] shall sign it and return it to the Clerk, but if not, he [she] shall return it to the Clerk with his [her] objections in writing at or before the next regular meeting of the Council for reconsideration, and if the Council shall pass the ordinance by a two-thirds vote of all members present, it shall go into effect. If the Mayor shall fail to return any ordinance or shall return the same unsigned without objections in writing at or before the next regular meeting of the Council after its passage, he [she] shall be deemed to have approved the same and it shall become a law without his [her] signature. All ordinances receiving the approval of the Mayor, or becoming a law without his [her] approval, shall go into effect within five days after its first publication. 
Sec. 12. - Same-Communication with council; special meeting. 
    That the Mayor shall communicate from time to time to the Council such information and recommend such measures touching the public service as he [she] may deem proper and shall perform such duties as the ordinances may prescribe. He [she] may call special meetings of the Council and when called he [she] shall state the objects for which called, and the business of such meetings shall be confined to the subject so stated. 
Sec. 13. - Same-Appointment of special police officers. 
    When in his [her] opinion the public good requires it, the Mayor may appoint and discharge special policemen and detectives. 
Sec. 14. - Same-Impeachment. 
    That the mayor may be impeached by the Council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, for drunkenness, habitual intoxication or gross immorality. In the event that charges be preferred against the Mayor, the Council shall furnish him with a copy of the articles of impeachment and shall proceed without unnecessary delay to investigate and decide them. It shall require a two-thirds vote of the entire Council to remove him from office. 
Sec. 15. - Filling vacancies of corporate offices other than mayor or council. 
    That should there occur a vacancy in any of the offices of said municipality, except Mayor or Council, it shall be the duty of the Council to fill said vacancy as soon as possible by appointing a qualified elector of said municipality who shall hold the office for the unexpired term. 
Sec. 16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to the referendum of January 13, 1986, adding a new § 26 to the Charter, former § 16 has been deleted pursuant to the request of the city. Former § 16 pertained to special elections to fill vacated council seats and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), as amended by a referendum of January 12, 1981. 
Sec. 17. - Town council-Composition, election, quorum, censure of fellow members, president of council. 
    The City Council shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be elected by the qualified electors for four years. Three Councilmen [Councilmembers] shall be elected hereunder at the general election to be held in 1922, and every four years thereafter, and four Councilmen [Councilmembers] shall be elected hereunder at the general election to be held in 1923 and every four years thereafter. The City Council shall be judges of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its own members and of the Mayor and other elective officers. A majority of the Councilmen [Councilmembers] shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time; and under the provisions of ordinances or rules of procedure may compel the attendance of absent members, and may prescribe penalties for the non-attendance or disorderly conduct of its members, and enforce the same, and may expel a member for improper conduct in office, drunkenness or gross immorality, by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership. The Council shall hold meetings at stated times, not less than one regular meeting each month, and may also hold special, called or adjourned meetings whenever occasions may require. The Council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to create such other and additional offices, and to provide for filling the same by election or appointment, as in its judgment may be necessary for the good government of such municipality; and shall have the power to abolish any such office so created whenever it may seem best for public interest to do so. The Council shall immediately after organization proceed to elect one of its members President, who shall preside over the Council, and who shall, in the case of the absence, disability, or death of the Mayor, act as Mayor for the time being. The President of the Council may call special meetings at any time on the request of three (3) members of the Council. 
(Ref. of 1-13-1986, § 1; Res. No. 91-01, § 1, 2-5-1991) 
Sec. 18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of § 18, which pertained to power of the city council to tax and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), were either repealed by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) or converted into an ordinance by such act which has not been readopted. The provisions of § 18 are adequately covered by such act. Property appraisals and tax collections are now provided by the county. See F.S. § 193.116. For municipal taxation generally, see F.S. § 166.201 et seq. 
Sec. 19. - Same-Police powers. 
    That the City Council shall have power to pass all necessary ordinances to ... make regulations to prevent the introduction of contagious or infections diseases into the City, and to make quarantine laws for that purpose and enforce the same within five miles of the City ... to provide for the enclosing, improving and regulating of the public grounds or parks belonging to the City ..., out of the corporate limits; ... 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 10915(1925), § 1) 
Editor's note- In general, limitations of municipal powers, such as those formerly provided in the above section, are no longer in effect. However, some of these provisions are still in force. One example is the subject of areas outside the city boundaries. See F.S. § 166.021. Under article III, section 11 of the Constitution of Florida, special laws may not pertain to punishment for crime. 
Sec. 20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 20, which pertained to compensation of councilmembers and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. The provisions of section 20 were either repealed by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) or converted into an ordinance by such act which has not been readopted. The provisions of section 20 are adequately covered by such act. 
Sec. 21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of § 21, which pertained to council committees and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), have assumed ordinance status by virtue of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) and their inclusion in the Monticello Code of Ordinances, except that "president'" has been changed to "mayor." Such provisions are included in the Code of Ordinances as § 2-2. 
Sec. 22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of § 22, which pertained to the council's authority as to sidewalks and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), have assumed ordinance status by virtue of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) and their inclusion in the Monticello Code of Ordinances. Such provisions are included in the Code of Ordinances as § 74-1. 
Sec. 23. - City clerk-treasurer. 
    Sec. 23a. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City of Monticello and shall hold office for the term of four years or until his/her successor is elected and qualified. He/She shall act as Clerk of the City Council and shall perform all the duties now imposed upon the Clerk by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this act. The Clerk's compensation shall be fixed by the Council. 
Editor's note- Amended Res. No. 04-95, adopted August 1, 1995, added § 57 to the Charter, providing that the clerk-treasurer is to be appointed by the council for a term of one year. 
    Sec. 23b. In addition to the duties outlined in Sec. 23a, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining funds, accounts, payroll records, making disbursements to creditors, employees and others, and otherwise discharging all financial obligations including maintaining books and records at City Hall for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1592, §§ 4, 5; Ref. of 1-13-1986, § 1; Amended Res. No. 04-95, 8-1-1995) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 24. 
Sec. 24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Amended Res. No. 04-95, adopted August 1, 1995, combined former §§ 23 (City Clerk) and 24 (City Treasurer) as 23a and 23b. Former § 24 was derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1592, § 5; and Ref. of 1-13-1986, § 1. 
Sec. 25. - Chief of police. 
    There shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City of Monticello, at the general election for city officers herein provided for, a Chief of Police, who shall hold office for four years or until his/her successor is elected and qualified. Such person shall give such bond as the council may require and shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by said council. The Chief of Police shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Council. It shall be his/her duty to aid in the enforcement of order under the direction of the presiding officer; to execute the commands of the Council from time to time; to aid in the enforcement of order under the direction of the Council and to perform such duties as may be appropriated [appropriate] to his/her office under the provisions of the law or as the same may not be inconsistent with this act, or may be hereafter required of him/her by ordinance. The Chief of Police shall have control of the police department, subject to the commands of the council, and shall have all police powers as established by law and arrest powers for violations involving the laws of the State of Florida or the Ordinances of the City of Monticello, as are or may be established by general law in the State of Florida. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1592, § 6; Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1593, § 1; Ref. of 1-13-1986, § 1; Amended Res. No. 04-95, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 26. - Procedure for replacement of councilmembers. 
    If, during the elected term or the appointed term of any member of the City Council, he or she should die, resign, be removed or otherwise become unable to fulfill his or her term for a period of forty-five continuous days, the Mayor shall, within thirty days of determination of such vacancy, submit the name or names of his [her] nominees for replacement of such council member. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such nomination, the City Council shall approve or disapprove such nominee by a vote of the majority of the existing council, exclusive of the vote of the Mayor. Upon approval said nominee shall be sworn in and shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term or until the next general election, whichever occurs first. However, should said nominee be rejected, additional nominees shall be made and presented at each successive regular meeting until approved. 
(Ref. of 1-13-1986, § 2) 
Editor's note- The chief of police is responsible for the duties prescribed for the city marshal. In 1972, the voters of Florida approved article V of the state constitution, which terminated municipal courts, municipal judges and the warrants and process issuing therefrom. Section 26 formerly pertained to taxation; see the editor's note following §§ 27-34. 
Secs. 27-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 27-34 and former section 26 of the Charter, relating to taxation, have been deleted. The subject of municipal tax collections is now governed primarily by general law. See F.S. § 166.201 et seq. and F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 
Sec. 35. - General election. 
    Sec. 35a. General election. A general election for municipal officers shall be held on the second Tuesday in November, or on such date in November as may be set by the State of Florida, Secretary of State, Division of Elections, as the general election date for Florida. The City Council may authorize the Jefferson County Supervisor of Elections to administer such election and shall pay a reasonable fee for those services. The officers elected shall be sworn in and take office at the first meeting of the council in January, following the election, and shall immediately thereafter assume the duties of office to which they have been elected. 
    Sec. 35b. [Primary election.] In the event more than two persons qualify for elective office, the Council shall schedule a primary election for the second Tuesday in September, or such other date to coincide with the primary election set by the State of Florida, Secretary of State. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall then appear on the ballot in the general election in November; however, such second primary will not be necessary should any candidate receive 50% plus 1 vote at the first primary. 
(Amended Res. No. 04-95, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 36, which pertained to financial interest by city officers and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. This section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted. 
Sec. 37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 37, which pertained to road duty ordinances and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. This section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted. 
Sec. 38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 38, which pertained to bonds and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. This section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted, since F.S. § 166.141 provides that "this part shall be full authority for the issuance of bonds authorized herein." 
Sec. 39. - Form of Ballot for City Elections. 
    The elections shall be held as near as may be in accordance with the law governing elections for State offices. The same form of ballot shall be used as is now provided for by law for use for elections of State officers. 
Editor's note- The first through third sentences of this section were either repealed or converted into ordinances by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which have not been readopted, since the first sentence is preempted by F.S. §§ 97.041 and 166.032, and the second and third sentences are preempted by F.S. §§ 101.031, 101.041, 101.21, 101.635 and 101.75. 
Sec. 40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 40, which pertained to adoption of state law relative to collection of taxes and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. This section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted, as the section appears to be obsolete in light of F.S. § 193.116. 
Sec. 41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 41, which pertained to adoption of state law relative to cities and towns and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted. This section was either repealed or converted into an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) which has not been readopted, since it is superfluous. 
Sec. 42. - Officers' interim power until successor elected. 
    The present officers of the City of Monticello shall hold their respective offices and perform all the functions thereunder until their respective terms have expired and the successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 43. - Ordinances not in conflict; in effect. 
    All ordinances of said City of Monticello heretofore in force, when not in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be and remain in full force and virtue until repealed by the Council. 
Sec. 44. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith shall be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 45. - Effect of act, time. 
    This Act shall take effect upon its ratification by the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast at an election to be held within the limits of the said City of Monticello as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 46, "Election for basic charter," which derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted as obsolete. 
Sec. 47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 47, "Canvass of results, filing," which derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), has been deleted as obsolete. 
Secs. 48-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Per F.S. § 166.21(5), sections 48-51, which pertained to license taxes on wholesale delivery vehicles and derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 19986(1939), §§ 1-4, have been converted into an ordinance and have been transferred to the Monticello Code of Ordinances. Such provisions are included in the Code of Ordinances as ch. 78, art. IV. 
Secs. 52-53.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 52 through 53.1, which pertained to delinquent taxes, have been deleted. F.S. ch. 173 and F.S. §§ 192.053 and 197.056 adequately cover the subject. Sections 52 and 53 were derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 18704(1937), §§ 1, 2, and section 53.1 was derived from Laws of Fla. ch. 65-1943, § 1. 
Sec. 54. - Method of alteration of boundaries-In general. 
    The boundaries of the City of Monticello, Florida, may be changed, altered, modified, enlarged, extended or contracted in the manner now, or which shall hereafter be, provided by the general law of the State of Florida for such purposes. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1594, § 1) 
Editor's note- Sections 54-56 became effective when ratified by the voters on January 11, 1960. The controlling general law on municipal annexation or contraction is found in F.S. ch. 171. The provisions of sections 54-56 are therefore subject to such statute and will be subject to subsequent legislation adopted by the legislature of the state. The provisions of any special act or municipal charter relating to the adjusting of municipal boundaries in effect on October 1, 1974 are repealed except as otherwise provided in F.S. § 171.022. 
Sec. 55. - Same-Procedure. 
    The boundaries of the City of Monticello, Florida, in addition to, and as an alternative to, the manner provided by section 1 [54] hereof and in addition to, and as an alternative to, any other lawful manner in which said boundaries may now, or may hereafter, be changed, altered, modified, enlarged, extended or contracted, may, in the discretion of the City Council of said City, be enlarged or extended by either of the following procedures and in either of the following manners to-wit: 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Monticello, Florida, may, upon written petition of one or more individual person or persons owning land lying contiguous to said City, by ordinance duly passed as provided by law, declare its intention to annex to said City any unincorporated tract of land owned by such individual or individuals lying contiguous thereto and within Jefferson County, Florida, after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date such ordinance becomes effective, which ordinance shall be published once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date such ordinance becomes effective in some newspaper published in the City of Monticello, Florida. In the event no newspaper is being published in said City at least once each week then at least three (3) typewritten or printed copies of said ordinance shall be posted for four (4) consecutive weeks prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date such ordinance becomes effective in some conspicuous places in said city and three (3) typewritten or printed copies posted in like manner on the tract of land to be annexed. If at any time before the expiration of said thirty (30) days from the date such ordinance becomes effective, any ten (10) or more registered voters of the City or any one or more owners of real estate in the tract of land proposed to be annexed, shall object to such annexation, they may apply by petition to the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Florida, setting forth in said petition the proposed proceedings of said City and the grounds of their objections thereto; whereupon the said Circuit Court shall designate a day for the hearing of said petition and shall order a copy of said petition, together with a notice of the hearing on same on the date designated, to be served upon the mayor of said City or in his [her] absence upon one (1) other member of the City Council of said City and all further action in the premises by said City shall be stayed until the further order of said court. If, upon the hearing of the said petition, the court shall find that valid legal reasons exist which would make it unlawful for said tract to be annexed and shall sustain the said objection, the said tract of land shall not be annexed; otherwise the petition shall be dismissed and the City Council may proceed at any time within one (1) year after the date of said order of dismissal to enact or adopt an ordinance annexing the said tract of land to said City and redefining the boundary lines of said City so as to include therein said tract of land. From and after the effective date of said ordinance of annexation said tract of land shall be legally and lawfully annexed to and shall be a part of said City. Such petition may be heard and determined by said court either in term time or in vacation, and questions of fact shall be determined by such court without a jury. If no petition is filed as aforesaid within the said thirty (30) days, the City Council may proceed at any time within one (1) year thereafter to enact or adopt an ordinance annexing the said tract of land to said City and redefining the boundary line of said City so as to include therein the said tract of land. From and after the effective date of said ordinance of annexation said tract of land shall be legally and lawfully annexed to and shall be a part of said City. Provided, however, that any unincorporated tract of land proposed to be so annexed shall, when annexed, constitute a reasonably compact addition to said City. The term "One individual person" as used hereinabove shall include a man and wife who own property jointly, in common, or in an estate by the entirety. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Monticello, Florida, may, by ordinance duly passed as provided by law, declare its intention to annex to said City any unincorporated tract of land lying contiguous thereto and within Jefferson County, Florida. The question of whether or not the registered voters of said City and the registered voters of Jefferson County, Florida, who reside on said tract of land are in favor of said tract of land being annexed to said City may be submitted to a separate vote of the registered voters of said City, and of the registered voters of Jefferson County, Florida, who reside on said tract of land. Such election shall be called and conducted in the manner as is now or shall hereafter be provided by ordinance of said City, and the expense thereof paid by the City. The polling place or places for such election shall be the same as those prescribed as the polling place or places for regular municipal elections in said City. Full authority is hereby granted to the City Council of said City, in addition to any other lawful authority that may be vested in it, to enact or adopt such ordinances as it, in its discretion, shall determine to be reasonably necessary or desirable to carry out the full intent hereof. Such election, in the discretion of the City Council, may be held at the same time as any regular or other special city election is held. In the event a majority of the registered voters of Jefferson County, Florida, who reside on said tract of land actually voting at such election and a majority of the registered voters of said City actually voting at such election shall vote in favor of such annexation then, at any time within one (1) year after date of said election, the City Council may proceed to enact an ordinance annexing the said tract of land to said City and redefining the boundary lines of said City so as to include therein said tract of land. From and after the effective date of said ordinance of annexation said tract of land shall be legally and lawfully annexed to and shall be a part of said city. In the event the City Council shall follow the procedure set forth in this subsection then said tract of land shall not, within one (1) year after the date of said election, be annexed by this or any other method unless such annexation is approved by a majority of the registered voters of said City actually voting in such election and a majority of the registered voters of Jefferson County, Florida, who reside on said tract of land actually voting in such election. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1594, § 2) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 54. 
Sec. 56. - Liability of inhabitants of annexed lands for prior debts and obligations of city. 
    In the event the City Council follows either of the procedures set forth in section 2 [section 55] hereof, then all of the real estate and other property which may be within the tract of land so annexed, and the inhabitants thereof, at the time such annexation becomes effective, shall be liable, in the same manner and to the same extent as the inhabitants of, and the real and personal property within, the City as it existed immediately prior to and at the time of such annexation, for all debts and obligations, including bond indebtedness, of said city and subject to every species of taxation imposed upon the real estate and other property within the City of Monticello as it existed immediately prior to and at the time of such annexation. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1594, § 3) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 54. 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE LAWS OF FLORIDA 
This table shows the location of references to the Laws of Florida within the Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter Number Section Section 
this Charter and 
Related Laws 10915(1925) 1 19 59-1592 1 1.1 3 8 4, 5 23 6 25 59-1593 1 25 59-1594 1-3 54-56  
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES/RESOLUTIONS 
This table shows the location of ordinances/resolutions that amend the sections of the Charter and Related Laws. 
Ordinances/Resolutions 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 10- 3-1972(Ord.) 2 8  1-12-1981(Ref.) 8  1-13-1986(Ref.) 1 17 23 1, 2 25, 26 91-01  2- 5-1991(Res.) 1 17 04-95(Amended)  8- 1-1995(Res.) 23 25 35 04-95  8- 1-1995(Res.) 7  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Boundaries of city, § 2. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Monticello, Florida" and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the "Monticello Code." 
(Code 1982, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Monticello" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Monticello. 
    Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" or "the Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Monticello, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day of the notice or act from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, a Sunday, nor a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Jefferson in the State of Florida. 
    Florida Statutes or F.S. The term "Florida Statutes" or "F.S." refers to the official statutes of the State of Florida as adopted by the state legislature, and amended from time to time. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies. Whenever reference is made to officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions and agencies by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "the treasurer," etc., it shall be deemed to refer to the officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the City of Monticello. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city, to the boundaries of the rights-of-way. 
    Subordinates. Reference to an officer or agent of the city includes all duly authorized deputies, assistants and other subordinate officers and employees under the supervision of such officer. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
    Year. The term "year," unqualified, means a calendar year. 
(Code 1957, §§ 1-2, 18-1; Code 1982, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 1.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several subsections and sections and the headings of chapters, articles and divisions of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the subsection, section, chapter, article or division, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles or substantive portions of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the catchlines or other headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1957, § 1-3; Code 1982, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. If a violation of this Code is also a violation of state law, the violation shall be punished in the same manner and within the same limits as are prescribed for such violation of state law. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1982, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Confinement for failure to pay fine, F.S. § 56.011; fines, forfeitures and costs generally, F.S. § 34.191; time allowed to pay fine before being worked, § 34.161. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Monticello, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event that a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Monticello, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1957, § 1-6; Code 1982, § 1-5) 
Charter reference- Approval of ordinances, § 11. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - History notes, editor's notes and state law references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the editor's notes and state law reference notes throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall not be considered as part of the text of the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1957, § 1-4; Code 1982, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 1-5; Code 1982, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1982, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing positions, classifications and salaries or otherwise affecting city officers or employees; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the city to any person, or any modification thereof; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any annual appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or fees, consistent with this Code; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any administrative ordinances not inconsistent therewith; 
(11)  Any provision of the Charter or any special act made an ordinance by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act; 
(12)  Any ordinance amending an act of the state legislature; 
(13)  Any ordinance adopting a comprehensive plan; 
(14)  Any ordinance rezoning a parcel of land; 
(15)  Any ordinance passed after June 7, 2005; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1982, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-12. - Assessment of court costs for criminal justice education. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed by the city, in compliance with F.S. § 938.15, an additional $2.00 as court costs, for criminal justice education, against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted for violation of a city ordinance, where said offense occurred within the city. In addition, $2.00 shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such penal statutes or ordinances. However, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute or county ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the city and earmarked for criminal justice education for members of the police department. The use and expenditure of such funds shall be in accordance with state statutes. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1985, § 1; Code 1982, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-13. - Enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(a)  Code enforcement officers designated. The following employees/agents of the city are hereby designated as code enforcement officers: 
(1)  City superintendent. 
(2)  Animal control officers. 
(3)  Planning assistants/code enforcement. 
(b)  Qualifications of code enforcement officers. The training and qualifications of the code enforcement officers shall be determined by the city. 
(c)  Issuance of citations authorized. Code enforcement officers are authorized to issue citations to individuals when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the individual has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted ordinance of the city, which is subject to enforcement under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Notice to correct violation. Prior to issuing a citation, the code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the individual that the individual has committed a violation of a duly enacted ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be 30 calendar days. If, upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer finds that the individual has not corrected the violation within the 30-calendar-day time period, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. 
(e)  Immediate issuance of citation. A code enforcement officer may immediately issue a citation without providing a reasonable time period for correction, if a repeat violation is found, or if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(f)  Form and contents of citation. The citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in the form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance; 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued; 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause; 
(5)  The number or section of the Code or ordinance violated; 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer; 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation; 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation; 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation; and 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(g)  Filing of copies of citation. After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
(h)  Maximum civil penalty. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a violation of a city ordinance subject to enforcement under the provisions of this section shall constitute a civil infraction with a maximum civil penalty of $500.00. 
(i)  Penalty for first offense and repeat violation. If an individual has been issued a citation pursuant to the provisions of this section and does not contest the citation, the civil penalty for the first offense shall be $100.00. If the individual has been issued a citation for a repeat violation and chooses not to contest the citation, the civil penalty shall be $250.00. 
(j)  Payment of penalty. An individual who is issued a citation shall have seven calendar days within which to pay the applicable civil penalty for an uncontested citation, or to contest the citation in the county court. The civil penalties for the violation of municipal ordinances subject to the provisions of this section may be paid in cash or by money order, made payable to the city, and shall be paid at the office of the city clerk at the city hall. 
(k)  Right to contest citation. If the individual who has been issued the citation wishes to contest the citation, he/she must do so within seven calendar days following the date the citation was issued. 
(l)  Failure to pay penalty or contest citation. If the individual to whom a citation was issued fails to pay the civil penalty within seven calendar days of the date the citation was issued, and fails to contest the citation within the same seven-calendar-day time period, the individual shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to contest the citation, and judgment may be entered against him/her for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty of $500.00. 
(m)  Procedure for contesting citation. If an individual wishes to contest a citation, he/she must do so within seven calendar days by notice in a form to be prescribed by the city and available from the office of the city clerk. The original and one copy of the notice, together with a copy of the citation which he/she is contesting, must be deposited with the county court, and an additional copy delivered either before or immediately thereafter to the office of the city clerk. 
(n)  Refusal to accept citation. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in the second degree as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(o)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to enforcement of the provisions of chapter 6, chapter 18, chapter 54, article IV of chapter 66, and chapter 74. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement of building codes adopted pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city or the county. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 8-1-2000) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Corporate powers, § 6; city officers, § 7 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Supervision of city officers by mayor; mayor's access to books and records. 
    The mayor shall have general supervision over all city officers and may examine into the condition of the offices, the books and records and papers thereof and therein, and the manner of conducting official business. He/she shall report to the council all violations or neglect of duty on the part of any official that may come to his/her knowledge. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), § 10) 
Sec. 2-2. - Council committees. 
    The council shall by ordinance or resolution determine the number of standing committees, and the number of members of which each of said committees shall consist, and shall designate the character and duties of each. The mayor shall appoint said committees annually as soon after organization as practicable. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), § 21) 
Sec. 2-3. - Use of local government infrastructure surtax funds. 
    In accordance with state law, the city may, through its elected officials, use local government infrastructure surtax funds for any public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 95-03, § 1, 4-4-1995) 
Secs. 2-4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Clerk-treasurer, § 23; chief of police, § 25. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-31-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.61 et seq. 

Sec. 2-51. - Pension plan established. 
    By this division, the city hereby exercises the rights provided under the Florida Statutes for establishment of retirement benefits for its employees. 
(Code 1957, § 15-18; Code 1982, § 18-16) 
Sec. 2-52. - Fire and police pensions. 
    The pension plan adopted in this division shall not include personnel of the fire and police departments, who are covered by other provisions. Said fire and police pensions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15-19; Code 1982, § 18-17) 
Sec. 2-53. - Eligibility; city contributions. 
(a)  The city pension plan shall be a defined contribution plan and shall be established to provide the following: 
(1)  All regular full time employees (other than police officers and firefighters) who have completed one year of service as a full time employee are eligible to participate in the plan. 
(2)  The city will contribute an amount equal to ten percent of the employee's annual compensation for each eligible employee. 
(3)  Employees will be fully vested in the plan after six years of eligible service. 
(4)  Provisions relating to the vesting schedule, normal retirement age, and other terms of the plan are outlined in the agreement which is attached as exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized to execute, on behalf of the city, the agreement attached as exhibit A, and all other documents necessary to implement the defined contribution plan. 
(Code 1957, § 15-19; Code 1982, § 18-18; Ord. No. 98-06, 7-7-1998) 
State Law reference- Limitation of benefits, F.S. § 112.65. 
Sec. 2-54. - Additional benefits for police officers. 
(a)  Monthly retirement income. The amount of monthly retirement income payable to a police officer who retires on or after his/her normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of his/her years of credited service multiplied by 23/4 percent of his/her average final compensation. 
(b)  Member contribution. The members of the retirement plan shall increase their employee contributions from five percent to seven percent to fund the increased retirement benefit, until such time that it is actuarially determined that their contributions may be reduced to the original five-percent contribution rate and still maintain the increased retirement benefit. 
(c)  Application. All other provisions of F.S. ch. 185 shall be fully applicable, except for the provisions of this section, to the city's municipal police officers' retirement trust fund. The increased pension benefits in the same percentage of increase as provided for by this section shall apply to all police officers now eligible for retirement benefits, but not now retired, and all future retirees under the provisions of the city's municipal police officers' retirement trust fund, F.S. ch. 185. 
(d)  Pretax contribution. Effective on the first date when administratively feasible subsequent to May 4, 2004, the contributions made by each member of the police officers' retirement plan to the city's municipal police officers' retirement trust fund shall be designated as employer contributions, pursuant to the provisions of section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 414. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the retirement plan, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(Code 1982, § 18-19; Ord. No. 88-02, §§ 1-3, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-55. - Additional benefits for firefighters. 
(a)  Monthly retirement income. 
(1)  The minimum benefit provisions set forth in F.S. ch. 175, except as otherwise provided for in this section, are hereby adopted as the benefit provisions of the firefighters' retirement trust fund. 
(2)  For purposes of determining all benefits for members covered under the fund monthly benefits attributable to each year of creditable service shall be the greater of: (i) 2.75 percent of average final compensation, or (ii) $25.00, effective May 2, 2017. This benefit will be payable to all current retirees beginning May 2, 2017. 
(b)  Member contribution. The members of the retirement plan shall increase their employee contributions from five percent to seven percent to fund the increased retirement benefit, until such time that it is actuarially determined that their contributions may be reduced to the original five-percent contribution rate and still maintain the increased retirement benefit. 
(c)  Application. All other provisions of F.S. ch. 175 shall be fully applicable, except for the provisions of this section, to the city's municipal firefighters' pension trust fund. The increased pension benefits in the same percentage of increase as provided for by this section shall apply to all firefighters now eligible for retirement benefits, but not now retired, and all future retirees under the provisions of the city's municipal firefighters' pension trust fund, F.S. ch. 175. 
(d)  [Additional provisions.] In addition to the provisions of F.S. § 175.091, the following provisions are applicable regarding the contributions: 
(1)  State contribution. All future receipts of the chapter 175 money will be used by the city to offset its contributions to the pension plan. 
(2)  Unused accumulated 175 reserve; effective for the contribution for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2016. The unused accumulated reserve of $26,121.00 will be used to increase the multiplier from $21.00 to $25.00 per year of service. 
(e)  Defined contribution component. Pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 175.351(6), a defined contribution plan component is established in addition to the defined benefit component of this local law plan. This defined contribution component is not currently funded. If the plan is funded, the board of trustees has the authority to adopt rules regarding the operation of the defined contribution component of the local law plan. 
(Code 1982, § 18-20; Ord. No. 88-03, §§ 1-3, 4-5-1988; Ord. No. 2000-03, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1-3, 5-2-2017) 
Secs. 2-56-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL SECURITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650. 

Sec. 2-81. - Benefits extended. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of April 1, 1956, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, nor excepted in this division, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors' insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto and by F.S. ch. 650, and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment, as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof, except service in the legislative class of elective positions. 
(Code 1957, § 15-1; Code 1982, § 18-31) 
Sec. 2-82. - Mayor directed to execute agreements. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the division of retirement of the state department of administration as state agency for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivors' insurance to the employees and officials of this city as provided in sections 2-81 and 2-88, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and proper, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after April 1, 1956. 
(Code 1957, § 15-3; Code 1982, § 18-32) 
State Law reference- Submission of plans by political subdivisions, F.S. § 650.05(1). 
Sec. 2-83. - Adoption of act. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto appertaining of title II of the Social Security Act, as amended, for and on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement. 
(Code 1957, § 15-7; Code 1982, § 18-33) 
Sec. 2-84. - Custody of funds; duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk is hereby designated as the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the city clerk is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15-8) 
Sec. 2-85. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1957, § 15-6; Code 1982, § 18-35) 
State Law reference- Reports by political subdivisions, F.S. § 650.05(1)(e); rules and regulations made by state agency, § 650.07. 
Sec. 2-86. - Appropriations from general fund. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund, such amounts at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1957, § 15-5; Code 1982, § 18-36) 
State Law reference- Contributions by political subdivisions, F.S. § 650.05(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-87. - Authority to withhold wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-81 are hereby authorized to be made and shall be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1957, § 15-4; Code 1982, § 18-37) 
State Law reference- Contributions by employees, F.S. § 650.05(3)(b). 
Sec. 2-88. - Employees covered by existing retirement system. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to include in any agreement entered into under section 2-82 any service, position, employee or official now covered by or eligible to be covered by an existing retirement system. 
(Code 1957, § 15-2; Code 1982, § 18-38) 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sign ordinances, F.S. §§ 166.0425, 479.155; removal of outdoor advertising, F.S. § 479.15; fraudulent practices, F.S. ch. 817. 

Sec. 6-1. - Placing banners or signs across streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any banner or canvas sign across any public street, park or other way of the city without first having obtained permission from the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-8; Code 1982, § 3-3) 
Sec. 6-2. - Posting bills or other advertising matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or other advertising matter upon any permanent or temporary structure or building, pole or tree located in any street, park or other public way or place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-7; Code 1982, § 3-6) 
State Law reference- Advertisement fastened to tree on right-of-way of road, F.S. § 479.11. 
Sec. 6-3. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by any person thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be solicited or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(b)  No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this section, the aforesaid person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1982, §§ 3-7, 3-8) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the definitions set out in F.S. § 561.01. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1; Code 1982, § 4-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Duty of arresting officer to preserve evidence. 
    Upon the arrest of any person charged with the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the arresting officer to take into his/her custody all alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages whether spirituous, vinous or malt, which may be found in the possession, custody and control of the person arrested, and to safely keep and preserve the same and have it forthcoming at any trial of such person for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 3-15; Code 1982, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-3. - Proof and testimony in prosecutions. 
(a)  In any prosecution under the provisions of this chapter it shall not be necessary for the city or any officer, in pleading or by evidence, to negate the existence in point of fact of any of the exceptions contained in this chapter, but the existence of any such exceptions in point of fact shall be defensive matter in any such prosecution. 
(b)  In any prosecution under the provisions of this chapter it shall not be necessary for the city or any officer to allege or prove the particular name, kind, character or contents of any alcoholic or other intoxicating liquors or beverages, whether spirituous, vinous or malt, or other liquors or liquids, but it shall be sufficient to allege generally and to prove that the same are alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages, or other liquors or liquids, within the prohibitions of this chapter. 
(c)  In all prosecutions for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, proof that the liquor in question was and is known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, gin or brandy or other similar name or names shall be prima facie evidence that said liquor is intoxicating and contains more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. Any person who, by past experience in the handling or use of intoxicating liquors, or who by taste, smell or the drinking of any such liquors has knowledge as to the intoxicating nature thereof, may in any prosecution for violation of the provisions of this chapter testify as to his/her opinion as to whether such beverage or liquor is or is not intoxicating, and a conviction based upon such testimony shall be valid. 
(Code 1957, § 3-14; Code 1982, §§ 4-9-4-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 562.47(2). 
Sec. 10-4. - Sale near church or school. 
    No beer, wine or other intoxicating beverages shall be sold within 300 feet of an established church or school, which distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of said place of business to the main entrance of the church and, in the case of schools, to the nearest point of the school grounds in use as part of the facilities. As used herein, the term "school" shall mean and refer to a nursery school or children's day care facility, or a public or private elementary, middle or high school. 
(Code 1957, § 3-7; Code 1982, § 4-12; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 10-7-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate the location of alcoholic beverage businesses, F.S. § 562.45. 
Sec. 10-5. - Hours and days of sale. 
    No alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served or consumed in any premises holding a license under the State Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Tuesday through Saturday, and from 12:00 a.m. on Sunday until 7:00 a.m. on Monday, except as provided herein. Alcoholic beverages in sealed containers may be sold in licensed premises, only for consumption off the premises where sold, on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 10:00 p.m. 
    Additionally, businesses holding a public food service license, a hotel license, or a bed and breakfast license issued by the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation that also have a license issued by the Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco to sell or serve alcoholic beverages on the same premises, may sell and serve alcoholic beverages on those premises between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays, provided that such entities derive at least 51 percent of their gross revenue from activities other than alcohol sales. Entities that are recognized as 501(c)(3) organizations by the Internal Revenue Service, and that also have a license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages, may sell and serve alcoholic beverages in conjunction with an artistic, educational, cultural, promotional, civic or charitable event occurring on the premises between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays, provided that such entities derive at least 51 percent of their gross revenue from activities other than alcohol sales. 
(Code 1957, § 3-8; Code 1982, §§ 4-14-4-16; Ord. of 5-6-1980; Ord. No. 87-02, 4-7-1987; Ord. No. 88-04, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 8-6-2013; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate hours of business, F.S. § 582.45. 
Sec. 10-6. - Open containers within 500 feet of licensed establishments. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for anyone to consume or possess open containers of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors off of the premises of an establishment dealing in intoxicating beverages and within 500 feet of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages, except within closed buildings or on premises occupied solely by residential structures. The distance set forth herein shall be measured from the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along public thoroughfares from the principal entrance of the establishment dealing in intoxicating beverages to the location of the violation of this section. 
(b)  Posting of signs. Each establishment dealing in intoxicating beverages shall at all times, when such establishment is open to the public or is dispensing or selling intoxicating beverages or alcoholic liquors, have located in the interior as well as the exterior portions of the building licensed for sale of such beverages, at a location at which it can be readily seen and read by customers of the establishment, a sign prominently displayed of a size at least one foot by two feet containing the following information: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME OR POSSESS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN AN OPEN CONTAINER WITHIN 500 FEET OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND OFF OF THESE LICENSED PREMISES-ORDINANCE NO. 86-11 
(c)  Location and form of signs; violations. The chief of police shall prescribe by rule the location for the signs and the size of the lettering, following as his/her guidelines the criteria set forth above. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any establishment dealing in intoxicating beverages to fail to comply with this section or for any person to sell, dispense or serve alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in any establishment which is not in compliance with this section. The requirements of this section shall then apply to all establishments dealing in intoxicating beverages whether or not then licensed or licensed in the future. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to establishments holding a public food service license and a license issued by the Florida Division of Alcohol Beverages and Tobacco, which also possess valid temporary use permits issued by the City of Monticello for the use of city sidewalks in the downtown B-l business zoning district for restaurant tables and seating outside such establishments. Beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages may be consumed at such sidewalk cafes provided that the purchasers are seated at tables, and the alcoholic beverages are served at a time when food service is available at the sidewalk café. 
(Code 1982, § 4-19; Ord. No. 86-11, § 1, 8-5-1986; 2018-06, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD PARLORS 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Obstruction. Any frosting or paint upon any window not situated in any building used under the provisions of this article, or that may hereafter be constructed in any such building, or any swinging doors (excepting doors used for the purpose of closing and fastening such place of business) or any partition or wall which may be constructed in any such building which shall have the effect of obstructing or obscuring a public view of the tables or of any part of the premises where billiards or pool is played, or where liquors, wines or beers are sold or dispensed, from any of the streets or alleys from which entrance to such building may be had, shall be deemed and held an obstruction within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 3-13; Code 1982, § 20-1) 
Sec. 14-32. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person or the agent or employee of such person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4 of this Code, and in addition thereto the city license for conducting a place regulated herein shall forthwith and immediately stand revoked, cancelled and annulled. 
(Code 1957, § 13-27; Code 1982, § 20-2) 
Sec. 14-33. - Obstructing view of interior. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or tenant of any building situated within the corporate limits of the city and used by such owner, occupant or tenant as a place for playing billiards or pool, or as a place for the sale of spirituous liquors, wines or beers, to erect or maintain screens, frosted glass windows or other obstructions in or about such places of business, or suffer any such screens, frosted glass windows or other obstructions already erected to remain, which prohibit a public view of the interior of such place being had from any of the streets or alleys of the city from which entrance to such building may be had. 
(Code 1957, § 3-12; Code 1982, § 20-3) 
Sec. 14-34. - Business hours. 
    No poolroom or billiard parlor shall be open for the public and no game shall be allowed therein on Sunday or between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Patrons must cease playing at 10:00 p.m. and must be off the premises by 10:30 p.m. 
(Code 1957, § 13-23; Code 1982, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-35. - Gambling. 
    Any person who is the owner of or who is in charge of and conducting any poolroom or billiard parlor or other place where pool tables and billiard tables and equipment incidental thereto are kept and maintained for the use of the public and shall allow any gambling, betting or wagering to be carried on or conducted in and about the place shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor, as defined in F.S. § 775.01 et seq. 
(Code 1957, § 13-24; Code 1982, § 20-6) 
State Law reference- Holder of license to operate pool or billiard table permitting gambling, F.S. § 849.07. 
Sec. 14-36. - Permitting minors to participate in games or to loiter about premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or carrying on either himself/ herself or in connection with another or for another any poolroom or billiard parlor with the general public to allow a minor to engage in any game therein or to loiter in such place. 
(Code 1957, § 13-26; Code 1982, § 20-7) 
State Law reference- Proprietor of poolroom permitting minors to gamble, F.S. § 849.04. 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animal industry, F.S. ch. 585; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828; livestock, F.S. ch. 534; livestock at large, F.S. ch. 588. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Killing, wounding or molesting wild birds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to kill or wound, or attempt to kill, capture or molest, within the city limits, any mockingbird, redbird, thrush, woodpecker, dove or other wild bird. 
(Code 1957, § 4-6; Code 1982, § 5-3) 
Sec. 18-2. - Permit for keeping livestock. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, house, stall, stable, domicile or otherwise maintain upon his/her premises, or the premises occupied by him/her, within the corporate limits of the city, any live horse, mule, donkey, jackass, burro, pony, cow, hog, sheep or goat, except upon an unrevoked written permit so to do from the city clerk, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Issuance. The permit as required in this section shall be issued by the city clerk without charge upon proper application and upon the written agreement of the person receiving the permit to obey the rules and regulations of the council covering the privilege for which the permit is issued, which permit shall be subject to the approval of the council. The rules and regulations shall be written upon the permit, shall be construed to be a part thereof and shall be subscribed to and signed by the person making application therefor. 
(c)  Revocation. The permit as required in this section shall be revocable by the council for due cause, or upon the failure of the person receiving the permit to comply with any of the rules and regulations applicable thereto, and when so revoked the permit shall be null and void. After any permit has been revoked, the council may refuse to approve any subsequent permit to the same person until the applicant therefor fully complies with all the rules and regulations. The violation of any ordinance of the city governing the keeping of livestock shall also be considered cause for revocation by the council of any permit issued hereunder. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4-7-4-9; Code 1982, §§ 5-4-5-6) 
Sec. 18-3. - Nuisance animals. 
(a)  Generally. Any animal which habitually barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise, which is at large, which chases or runs after persons or vehicles, which destroys or damages any property of another person, which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring resident and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of his/her property, or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance shall be deemed to be committing an act in violation of this chapter. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any animal which is deemed in violation of this section shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor. 
(b)  Complaints. Upon receipt of an "affidavit of complaint" signed by two or more residents of the city, each complainant residing in separate dwellings in the vicinity in which a violation of subsection (a) of this section occurred, made under oath before an individual authorized by law to take acknowledgments and setting forth the nature of and the date of the act, the owner of the animal, the address of the owner and a description of the animal doing such act, the impounding officer shall investigate the complaint to determine whether the act complained of violates this section. In the event that the act complained of constitutes a violation of this section, the impounding officer shall enforce this section pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. The methods of enforcing this section shall be to: 
(1)  Issue a notice of violation to the owner of such animal; such notice of violation shall state the date and time of the issuance of the notice, the name and address of the person in violation, the date of the offense, the offense committed, a description of the animal involved and a demand that the offense be abated within 72 hours after the issuance of the notice. If the person shall fail to abate the offense, the impounding officer shall cause a warrant to be issued against the person in violation of this section. 
(2)  Impound such animal. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4-15-4-17; Code 1982, §§ 5-7-5-9) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisance by injunction, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06; public nuisances generally, F.S. ch. 823; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386. 
Sec. 18-4. - Livestock or dangerous animals running at large; impoundment generally. 
(a)  Running at large prohibited; impoundment authorized. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal of the equine species, or any fowl, cow, calf, bull, boar, goat or dangerous or vicious animal of any species, to run in or on any of the public thoroughfares, squares or unenclosed lands, or other public lots of the city; and it shall be the duty of the police, on information or view, to cause the same to be impounded; nor shall such animal be restored to the owner until such owner shall pay as provided in this section for each and every such animal the cost of impounding, provided that before impounding any mischievous animal, whose owner may be known to the police, the police shall notify such owner to keep such animal confined, and if thereafter such animal is found upon the thoroughfares, squares, unenclosed land or lots aforesaid at large, the same shall be impounded without notice, as provided above. 
(b)  Duties of chief of police. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to impound all animals or fowl running at large in violation of this section which may be conveniently impounded, and to hold the same until all fees and charges as are herein provided for impounding and keeping such animals are paid. 
(c)  Fee. The chief of police shall be entitled to charge in each case an impounding fee of $50.00 for each goat, swine, cow, horse, mule or other livestock and $20.00 per day for each animal for keeping and impounding such animal or animals. 
(d)  Notice of sale of impounded livestock. 
(1)  Upon the impounding of any livestock by the chief of police, the chief shall forthwith serve written notice upon the owner, advising such owner of the location or place where the livestock is being held and impounded, of the amount due by reason of such impounding, and that unless such livestock be redeemed within three days from date thereof that the same shall be offered for sale. 
(2)  In the event the owner of such livestock is unknown or cannot be found, service upon the owner shall be obtained by once publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, or if there be no such newspaper then by posting of the notice at the city hall door and at two other conspicuous places within the city. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
To Whom It May Concern: 
You are hereby notified that the following described livestock (giving full and accurate description of same, including marks and brands) is now impounded at (giving location where livestock is impounded) and the amount due by reason of such impounding is ____________ dollars. The above described livestock will, unless redeemed within three days from date hereof, be offered for sale at public auction to the highest and best bidder for cash. 
_____
(Date) _____
(Chief of Police)  
(3)  Unless the impounded livestock is redeemed within three days from the date of notice, the chief of police shall forthwith give notice of sale thereof which shall be held not less than five days nor more than ten days (excluding Sundays and holidays) from the first publication of the notice of sale. Said notice of sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by posting a copy of such notice at the city hall door, or if there be no such newspaper then by posting such copy at the city hall door and at two other conspicuous places in the city. Such notice of sale shall be in substantially the following form: 
(Name of owner, if known, otherwise "To Whom It May Concern") you are hereby notified that I will offer for sale and sell at public sale to the highest and best bidder for cash the following described livestock (giving full and accurate description of each head of livestock) at ____________ o'clock,   ; m. (the hour of sale to be between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time) on the ____________ day of ____________ at the following place ____________ (which place shall be where the livestock is impounded or at the place provided by the city council for the taking up and keeping of such livestock) to satisfy a claim in the sum of ____________ for fees, expenses for feeding and care and costs thereof. 
_____
(Date) _____
(Chief of Police)  
(e)  Interference with impoundment. No person shall break open or assist in the breaking open of any of the fences, gates, fastenings or enclosures of impounding vehicles and no unauthorized person shall remove or let loose any animal from the shelter or impounding vehicles or attempt to do so or in any manner interfere with such animal, or with the safe keeping thereof, until after such animal is released in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4-2-4-5, 4-19; Code 1982, §§ 5-21-5-25) 
State Law reference- Livestock at large, F.S. § 588.12 et seq.; authority to impound livestock running at large or strays, F.S. § 588.16; notice of impoundment, F.S. § 588.17; fees for impoundment of livestock, F.S. § 588.18; interference with impoundment, F.S. § 588.24. 
Sec. 18-5. - Rabies vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets. 
(a)  Vaccination required. No person shall own or harbor any dog, cat, or ferret over four months of age within the city unless such dog, cat or ferret is vaccinated. The provisions of this section do not apply to animals owned by a licensed research facility or held in a veterinary medical facility or government operated or licensed animal shelter. 
(b)  Method of vaccination. All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. 
(c)  Certificate of vaccination. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form which must contain the following information: 
(1)  The license number of the administering veterinarian. 
(2)  The name, address, and phone number of the veterinarian and owner. 
(3)  The date of vaccination. 
(4)  The expiration date of the vaccination. 
(5)  The species, age, sex, color, breed, weight, and name of the animal vaccinated. 
(6)  The rabies vaccine manufacturer. 
(7)  The vaccine lot number and expiration date. 
(8)  The type and brand of vaccine used. 
(9)  The route of administration of the vaccine. 
(10)  The signature or signature stamp of the licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1982, § 5-42(a)-(c); Ord. of 1-7-1986, § 2) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets, F.S. § 828.30. 
Secs. 18-6-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-31. - Animal control board. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby created the Monticello Animal Control Board. 
(b)  Composition. The board shall be comprised of three members, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Jefferson County Humane Society and one of whom shall be a certified law enforcement officer with K-9 experience. 
(c)  Appointment and term of members. The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve for an initial period of three years, subject to reappointment for additional terms of three years at the discretion of the city council. 
(d)  Duties; compensation of members. The board shall be responsible for conducting hearings under the provisions of section 18-68, and such other duties as may be assigned to it by the city council. Members shall not receive a salary. 
(e)  Adoption of rules of procedure. The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, including conducting hearings, to the extent such rules are not inconsistent with the provisions of section 18-68. Such rules may be adopted by the board without amendment of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 5-10, 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 18-32. - Right of entry. 
    For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter, including investigation of possible violations and for enforcing its provisions, the impounding officer or the county health officer is empowered to enter without authority of any court of competent jurisdiction upon any private property, not including any dwelling house or structure or fenced enclosure, and, but not by way of limitation, to demand that any animal or, if applicable, the license tag of such animal be exhibited to said officer, provided the impounding officer or the county health officer shall be empowered to enter into any such fenced enclosure to impound any animal known or suspected of biting or scratching any person or any animal infected with or showing suspicious symptoms of rabies. 
(Code 1957, § 4-18; Code 1982, § 5-1) 
State Law reference- Owner's liability when dog bites any person, F.S. § 767.04. 
Sec. 18-33. - Interference with authorized personnel. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any police officer, health officer or impounding officer in the performance of any duty required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 4-19; Code 1982, § 5-2) 
Secs. 18-34-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, adopted May 6, 2014, amended Art. III in it's entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 18-61-18-94, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1982, §§ 5-41-5-49, 5-61-5-63; an ordinance adopted Jan. 7, 1986, §§ 1-9, 14-16; Ord. No. 98-07, § 5-26, adopted July 7, 1998. 
State Law reference- Damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means a dog or cat. 
    Animal control authority. The city manager is authorized, empowered and directed to appoint and employ a person or persons of and for the city, as enforcement officers for this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals. 
    At large. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be at large when off the property of the owner and not under restraint. 
    Direct control shall be defined as immediate and continuous physical control of a dog or cat at all times such as by means of a fence, leash, cord or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the same; or in the case of specially trained or hunting animals which immediately respond to such commands, direct control shall also include aural or oral control, if the controlling person is at all times clearly and fully within the unobstructed sight and hearing of the animal. 
    Humane manner means care of an animal, to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
    Neutered means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
    Nuisance dog or cat. A dog or cat shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; 
(2)  Causes insanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; or 
(4)  Chases vehicles, or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property or private property. 
    Owner/custodian means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, trust, estate, business, or other legal entity, having the right of property or custody of a dog or cat or who keeps or harbors a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person. In the case the owner is under eighteen (18) years of age, that person's parent or legal guardian will be responsible. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit. 
    Restraint. A dog or cat shall be considered under restraint if it is within the real property limits of its owner or secured by a leash or lead or under the control of a responsible person. 
    Vicious animal means a dog or cat that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 18-62. - Registration required for dogs and cats which have not been identified with a radio frequency identification (RFID) chip. 
(a)  No person shall own or harbor any dog or cat over four months of age within the city unless such dog or cat has received a rabies vaccination in accordance with state law and has been implanted with a RFID chip or otherwise identified with a city-issued registration tag to be worn on a collar at all times. The provisions of this section do not apply to animals owned by a licensed research facility or held in a veterinary medical facility or government operated or licensed animal shelter. 
(b)  A city-issued registration tag shall be issued upon payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  City-issued registration tags must be attached to the collar of the dog or cat. Tags must be worn at all times and are not transferable. The city shall maintain a record of all registration tags issued. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 18-63. - Restraint required; confinement and restraint of dangerous animals; nuisance animals. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be kept under direct control of the owner/custodian. 
(b)  The confinement and restraint of dangerous or aggressive animals within the city is governed by the provisions of chapter 8, article II, dangerous animals and rabies control, of the Jefferson County, Florida, Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  No dog or cat shall be allowed to cause a nuisance. The owner of every dog or cat shall be held responsible for every behavior of such dog or cat under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor of the second degree and punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 18-64. - Interference with enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the city in the performance of any duty as herein provided. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties as set forth in F.S. § 775.15. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 18-65. - Dangerous dogs. 
    The classification and control of dangerous and aggressive animals is governed by the provisions of chapter 8, article II, dangerous animals and rabies control, of the Jefferson County, Florida, Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3, 12-1-2015) 
Secs. 18-66-18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 18-91. - Generally. 
(a)  Any dog or cat found running at large shall be impounded by the city animal control authority in an animal shelter and confined in a humane manner. Immediately upon impounding a dog or cat, the city animal control authority shall make every reasonable effort to identify the animal's owner by microchip or by the city-issued registration tag and inform such owner of the conditions whereby custody of the animal may be regained after payment of impoundment fees and any applicable boarding, transport or treatment or vaccination fees. 
(b)  No animal impounded by the city shall be released until proof of rabies vaccination is provided and verified by city personnel. 
(c)  Dogs and cats not claimed by their owners within a period of five business days shall become the property of the city, and may be adopted, fostered, transferred or euthanized, except animals that are unweaned, impounded as part of a litter, or are feral are not required to be held unless they are wearing identification, are microchipped, or otherwise marked in a manner that suggests they may be owned. 
(d)  No at large unaltered dog or cat impounded more than twice in an eighteen-month period may be redeemed by any person until the animal is spayed or neutered. The sterilization shall be accomplished by transporting the animal, by animal control personnel, to any duly-licensed veterinarian in Jefferson County. In all cases, the animal's owner shall not hold liable the City of Monticello or the city council members, individually or in their official capacity, and all members of the animal control authority, individually and in their official capacity, and all of the city's employees, appointees, contractors, subcontractors, and agents from any and all liability, for any and all claims, causes of action, demands or damages, and costs (to include reasonable attorney fees) present, past and future, contingent or otherwise, arising from the spay or neuter of such dog or cat. The owner is responsible to pay the veterinarian fees prior to redemption. 
(e)  In the event that the animal control officer finds dogs or cats to be neglected, suffering, or maintained without access to shelter for protection against inclement weather, he/she shall have the right forthwith to remove or cause to be removed any such animals to a safe place for care at the owner's expense or to euthanize them when necessary to prevent further suffering. Return of the animal to the owner may be withheld until the owner shall have made full payment for all impoundment and treatment expenses so incurred and provided proof of a safe premises for housing of the animal. Disposal of an animal by any method specified herein does not relieve the owner of liability for violations and any accrued charges. 
(f)  The charges or fees for impounding, keeping, or treating of any animal in city custody shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 18-92. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
    At the discretion of the animal control authority, unclaimed impounded dogs and cats may be released for adoption as a pet to members of the public. No dog or cat shall be released for adoption as a pet without being neutered, microchipped, and vaccinated against rabies. Rabies vaccination fees, neutering fees, microchip implant fees and veterinary costs may be assessed, as well as an adoption fee, to be determined by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to adopt building, plumbing, electrical, gas, etc., codes, F.S. § 163.295; adoption of building code required, F.S. § 553.73; enforcement of building code required, F.S. § 553.80; contracting, F.S. ch. 489. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-17) 
Sec. 22-2. - Permit fee; restriction on issuance of permits. 
    Any permit required by the building code is to be issued without charge, upon application therefor, provided that the city clerk is not authorized to issue a permit to any contractor who does not have a proper license from the city. 
(Code 1957, § 6-7; Code 1982, § 6-18) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license construction contractors, F.S. § 489.131. 
Sec. 22-3. - Permit for electrical work. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any alteration in the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, or to wire any building for electric lights, motors or heating devices, within the limits of the city, without a written permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3; Code 1982, § 6-1) 
Sec. 22-4. - Placement, set-up and occupancy of preowned mobile homes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    New mobile or modular homes, which shall be exempt from this section, means any mobile or modular home where the certificate of title indicates that the current owner is the original titleholder, exclusive of the manufacturer or licensed dealer; and where the certificate of title indicates the unit was purchased within five years of the date of inspection. However, new mobile or modular homes shall not be exempt from skirting requirements as hereinafter described. 
    Preowned mobile or modular home means any mobile or modular home where the certificate of title issued by Florida or other state of origin indicates that the current owner is not the original owner, exclusive of the manufacturer or licensed dealer. 
(b)  Standards. Effective immediately, the following rules and regulations shall apply to the set-up and occupancy of all preowned mobile or modular homes. Prior to introduction of city utilities to any preowned mobile or modular home lawfully permitted in the city, the building inspector shall inspect and certify such home and deliver to the occupant or owner a certificate of compliance with this section. Such certificate shall be issued after inspection of the following specific areas: 
(1)  The home must be free of holes, cracks or openings which would admit rain; 
(2)  Insulation systems must be in place beneath the floor, properly secured and free from apparent leaks and damage; 
(3)  The frame must be free of any indications of water damage, rot or obvious structural insufficiency; 
(4)  Ceilings must be watertight and without evidence of water damage or rot; 
(5)  Electrical systems must be safe and free of exposed wiring, unsafe outlets or fuse storage boxes. If electrical wiring is aluminum, the owner or occupant must obtain and furnish the inspection official with a certificate from a licensed electrician attesting to the safe condition of said wiring; 
(6)  Exterior steps must be in place at all entrances at least as wide as the door, with a hand rail if more than two steps. Three steps are required if the door threshold is in excess of 20 inches from the ground or concrete pad; 
(7)  Skirting must be placed between the ground or concrete pad and the exterior flooring of the mobile or modular home, and must be of sufficient strength to prevent access by animals or children, but shall allow adequate ventilation to pass beneath the home. Skirting may be constructed of wood, masonry, vinyl, lattice work or such other material as is sufficient to comply with this provision; 
(8)  Air conditioning and heating duct systems must be elevated from the ground and be free of "kinks" or bends which would obstruct air flow. Heating systems must be properly vented and in satisfactory working order; 
(9)  Window and door hardware must be operable and windows must be screened; and 
(10)  All mobile or modular homes must be located within the appropriate setbacks as mandated by the land development regulations (chapter 54). 
(c)  Inspection; certificate of compliance. 
(1)  Each preowned mobile or modular home introduced into the city must be inspected and the owner or occupant must obtain a certificate or sticker from the building inspector, or his/her designated official, certifying that such home meets all requirements of this section. Such sticker shall be valid for two years from the date of inspection and shall entitle the owner or occupant to immediate hook up to city utilities. 
(2)  If the preowned mobile or modular home fails to satisfactorily pass inspection or contains any deficiency identified herein, the building inspector shall notify the owner or occupant in writing of the specific deficiency and shall withhold issuance of a certificate pending compliance. 
(3)  There shall be a fee of $15.00 for inspection, which fee shall be payable in advance and deposited into the regular accounts of the city. Any preowned mobile or modular home which fails such inspection shall be noted by the building inspector by name, brand and serial number, which information shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall maintain a record of inspections and certificates issued. 
(4)  The building inspector may, from time to time, reinspect a home for which a certificate has previously been issued, upon reliable information that such home no longer meets the requirements of this section, and may, as necessary, recertify such home pursuant to the procedures herein set forth. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses. Existing preowned mobile or modular homes which are currently used and occupied within the city and which fail to qualify within the requirements of this section are declared to be nonconforming uses. The city council hereby declares a six-month moratorium for compliance purposes so that all existing preowned mobile or modular homes may be brought into full compliance with this section. After January 1, 1994, each mobile or modular home within the city, excluding newly purchased homes, shall bear a current and valid certificate and/or sticker certifying compliance. 
(e)  Penalty; additional remedies. 
(1)  Any firm, corporation, individual or other legal entity occupying, leasing or renting for human occupancy any mobile or modular home, in violation of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and shall, upon affidavit of the building inspector, be charged with this offense and, if proven, be punished in accordance with section 1-4 of this Code. 
(2)  In addition to the criminal penalties provided, the city shall have the right to seek a declaration from the circuit court that any nonconforming use, whether by owner or occupant, is a continuing violation of this section, is a sanitary nuisance, and is subject to appropriate sanctions, including injunctive relief, permanent condemnation, damages and reasonable court costs and attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 93-04, § 6-61, 5-4-1993) 
Sec. 22-5. - Floodplain management regulations-Part 1. 
    Section 104.10.1 Florida Building Code, Building - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall coordinate with the Floodplain Administrator to review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117. 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
117 VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 3, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-6. - Floodplain management regulations-Part 2. 
    Section 1612.4.1, Florida Building Code, Building - Elevation requirements. The minimum elevation requirements shall be as specified in ASCE 24 or the base flood elevation plus 2 feet (610 mm), whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 3, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-7. - Floodplain management regulations-Part 3. 
    Section R322.2.1, Florida Building Code, Residential - Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 2 feet or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 2 feet 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 2 feet, or at least 4 feet 2 feet (610 mm) if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 2 feet or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 3, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 22-8-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Human excreta means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings. 
    Sanitary water closet means any flush toilet which is properly connected with the city sewer or a septic tank of approved design. 
    Septic tank means an underground cavity with watertight walls and floor into which flows the effluvia of sanitary water closets and from which the effluvia does not come to the surface of the ground but is absorbed by an arrangement of drain tile directly into the soil. 
(Code 1957, § 11-17(1)-(4); Code 1982, § 6-31) 
State Law reference- State public health rules, F.S. § 381.031. 
Sec. 22-32. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any plumbing of any character, make any change to or extension of or disconnect plumbing, or change the location of any fixture (except repairs of leaks, the opening up of stoppages and replacing of broken fixtures) within the limits of the city, without a written permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 6-4; Code 1982, § 6-32) 
State Law reference- Cities to provide for construction of plumbing, F.S. § 469.05. 
Sec. 22-33. - Disposal of human excreta. 
(a)  Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate shall be required to have a sanitary method of disposing of human excreta, namely, either a sanitary water closet that is connected with the city sewer or an approved type of septic tank. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of human excreta within the corporate limits of the city except in a sanitary water closet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or leasing any premises in the city to permit the disposal of any human excreta on any property leased or rented by any such person or the agent of any such person, except in a sanitary water closet. 
(d)  The cost of installing a sanitary water closet for the disposal of human excreta shall be borne by the owner of the property upon which the sanitary water closet is to be located. 
(Code 1957, §§ 11-18-11-21; Code 1982, §§ 6-33-6-36) 
Sec. 22-34. - Septic tanks. 
    No septic tanks other than those approved by the state department of health and rehabilitative services shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city, nor shall such septic tanks be constructed without permits secured from the city clerk and an inspection made before the tank and the drain field are covered. 
(Code 1957, § 11-22; Code 1982, § 6-37) 
Secs. 22-35-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDLORD AND TENANT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Landlord and tenant, F.S. ch. 83. 

Sec. 22-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building, housing and health codes means any law, ordinance or governmental regulation concerning health, safety, sanitation or fitness for habitation, or the construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any dwelling unit. 
    Landlord means the owner or lessor of a dwelling unit. 
    Premises means a dwelling unit and the structure of which it is a part and a mobile home lot and the appurtenant facilities and grounds, areas, facilities and property held out for the use of tenants generally. 
    Rental agreement means any written agreement, or oral agreement if for less duration than one year, providing for use and occupancy of premises. 
    Tenant means any person entitled to occupy a dwelling unit under a rental agreement. 
(Code 1982, § 11-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 83.43. 
Sec. 22-62. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to require minimum compliance by landlords of the standards mentioned herein which the city council has enacted and declared to be essential to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens occupying housing units as tenants or renters. 
(Code 1982, § 11-17; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
Sec. 22-63. - Violations generally. 
(a)  Violations of this article as verified by the appropriate state agency shall render the landlord subject to arrest and prosecution. 
(b)  Furthermore, the premises wherein continued violations are found to exist shall subject the property to an order of closing by the city council until such time as full compliance is had. 
(Code 1982, § 11-18; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Remedies generally under Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, F.S. § 83.54 et seq.; injunctions, F.S. ch. 60. 
Sec. 22-64. - Injunctive relief. 
    The city may enforce this article by injunctive relief from the circuit court of the county. In that event, the city shall, upon successful prosecution, be entitled to costs and attorney's fees assessed against the violator. 
(Code 1982, § 11-19; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Remedies generally under Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, F.S. § 83.54 et seq.; injunctions, F.S. ch. 60. 
Sec. 22-65. - Maintenance responsibilities of landlord. 
(a)  The landlord at all times during the tenancy shall: 
(1)  Comply with the requirements of applicable building, housing and health codes; or 
(2)  Where there are no applicable building, housing or health codes, maintain foundations and all other structural components in good repair and capable of resisting normal forces and loads and the plumbing in reasonable working condition. However, the landlord shall not be required to maintain a mobile home or other structure owned by the tenant. 
(b)  The landlord's obligations under this section may be altered or modified in writing with respect to a single-family home or duplex. 
(Code 1982, § 11-20; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 83.51. 
Sec. 22-66. - Additional requirements for multifamily units. 
(a)  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, in addition to the requirements of section 22-65, the landlord of a dwelling unit other than a single-family home or duplex shall, at all times during the tenancy, make reasonable provisions for: 
(1)  The extermination of rats, mice, roaches, ants, wood-destroying organisms, and bedbugs. When vacation of the premises is required for such extermination, the landlord shall not be liable for damages but shall abate the rent. The tenant shall be required to temporarily vacate the premises for a period of time not to exceed four days, on seven days' written notice, if necessary, for extermination pursuant to this subsection. 
(2)  Locks and keys. 
(3)  The clean and safe condition of common areas. 
(4)  Garbage removal and outside receptacles therefor. 
(5)  Functioning facilities for heat during winter, running water and hot water. 
(b)  Nothing in this article authorizes the tenant to raise a noncompliance by the landlord with this section as a defense to an action for possession. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a mobile home owned by a tenant. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section prohibits the landlord from providing in the rental agreement that the tenant is obligated to pay costs or charges for garbage removal, water, fuel or utilities. 
(Code 1982, § 11-21; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 83.51. 
Sec. 22-67. - Conflicting provisions. 
    If the duty imposed by section 22-65 is the same as or greater than any duty imposed by section 22-66, the landlord's duty is determined by section 22-65. 
(Code 1982, § 11-22; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 83.51. 
Sec. 22-68. - Conditions created or caused by tenant. 
    The landlord is not responsible to the tenant under this article for conditions created or caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of the tenant, a member of his/her family or other person on the premises with his/her consent. 
(Code 1982, § 11-23; Ord. of 2-7-1978) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 83.51. 
Secs. 22-69-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DILAPIDATED DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 22-101. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Monticello Condemnation of Dilapidated Dwellings and Structures Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-102. - Authority. 
    The City of Monticello, by virtue of its charter and by virtue of the general laws of Florida, declares there is an immediate need to remove unsafe and unsightly dwelling units and structures within the city and to provide a method for demolition, if necessary, this article is enacted for these and other pertinent purposes. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-103. - Designation of unfit dwelling units and structures. 
(a)  Grounds. Any dwelling or dwelling unit or commercial structure having the following defects, may be designated by the building inspector and city superintendent jointly as unfit for human habitation or commercial use and they may so placard it on two prominent locations by posting thereon a cardboard notice containing the words "Condemned by the City of Monticello. No Trespassing." 
(1)  The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat, inadequate or unsafe wiring or other facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or the public. 
(2)  The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested in such manner as to create a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the public and/or has become a location of repeated criminal activity. 
(3)  The structure, because of the location, general condition, state of the premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public. 
(4)  The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant to comply with such prior notices or orders issued pursuant to this article, is unfit for human habitation. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the building inspector and city superintendent, or their duly designated representatives, determine that a dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation, as provided in subsection (a) above, they shall include such findings within the notice of violation provided in subsection (a) above relating to notices and orders and they shall also include a statement of their intent to vacate and placard the dwelling unit or structure if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not been secured. 
(c)  Order to vacate. Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in subsection (b) above, has not been complied with or a hearing on the violation has not been invoked as provided for in section 27-7 hereof, the building inspector and city superintendent may order the dwelling or dwelling unit or structure to be vacated. A copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner or occupant as provided for in section 27-7 hereof. 
(d)  Vacated dwelling made secure. The owner, agent or operator of any dwelling or commercial structure which has been designated as unfit for human habitation or commercial use and ordered vacated, shall make such dwelling safe and secure in whatever manner the building inspector and city superintendent shall deem necessary in order to meet the standards set forth herein. Any vacated building open at the doors and windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of this provision. 
(e)  Notice of intent to demolish. Whenever the building inspector and city superintendent designate a building unfit for human habitation, as provided in this article, and determine that the cost necessary to correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value of the building, they shall include within the notice of violation a statement of their intent to order the demolition of the building. A copy of such notice shall be served on the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee. The owner may demolish the building or correct the violation regardless of cost, provided the requirements of the building code are satisfied. Demolition by the owner shall constitute compliance. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-104. - Responsibility of occupant. 
    The responsibilities of the occupant are as follows: 
(1)  To keep dwelling or structure and premises he controls and occupies in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  To dispose of rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner as prescribed by city ordinances or regulations. 
(3)  To hang and remove screens provided by the owner except where owner has agreed to supply such services. 
(4)  To keep plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and to exercise reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(5)  To exterminate in the following cases: 
a.  Occupant of a single dwelling is responsible for extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on premises. 
b.  Occupant of a dwelling unit in a multiple unit structure is responsible for extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests, if his unit is the only unit infested. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by the failure of owner to maintain the dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insect proof condition, the occupant is not resonsible for extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-105. - Responsibilities of owner. 
    The responsibilities of the owner are as follows: 
(1)  To let no dwelling to any one for an occupancy unless it meets minimum standards set forth herein. 
(2)  To have dwelling in clean, sanitary, habitable condition, to free from infestation before renting, to paint walls and ceilings and to clean, repair and exterminate if needed to meet aforesaid requirements before offering for rent. 
(3)  To provide screens to be hung. 
(4)  To exterminate in the following cases: 
a.  When infestation exists in two or more units or multiple unit structures. 
b.  When infestation exists in shared or public areas of multiple unit structure. 
c.  When infestation exists in single unit of multiple unit structure or in single unit structure when infestation is due to failure of the owner to maintain the dwelling in a ratproof and reasonably insect proof condition. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-106. - Minimum standards-General condition of structures. 
(a)  All dwelling structures shall be watertight, weatherproof, rodent and insect proof and in good repair. 
(b)  Every foundation, exterior wall and roof shall be reasonably watertight, weathertight and rodent proof, shall adequately support the building at all times and shall be in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair. 
(c)  Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall be reasonably tight, capable of affording privacy and maintained in a workmanlike state of repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-107. - Hearings and appeals-City council authority. 
(a)  Should the owner of a dwelling unit or structure, or occupant thereof, disagree with the findings of the building inspector and city superintendent that a dwelling unit or commercial structure is subject to condemnation and demolition, or is unfit for human habitation, any such person may, within 15 days of receipt of said notice, request in writing a hearing on the sufficiency of the evidence relied upon by said building inspector and city superintendent. The city council shall promptly schedule a hearing on the issues in dispute and shall hear evidence regarding the existence of or extent of those conditions which give rise to the decision of said officials. Once the request is received by the city clerk, said clerk shall notify all interested persons and no demolition or order to vacate shall be initiated or continued until the city council resolves the issues in dispute. 
(b)  The city council shall allow at least 15 days prior to scheduling a hearing but the hearing shall, in no event, be scheduled for more than 45 following the request for hearing. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, by written order, uphold the decision to condemn and demolish or, in the absence of sufficient evidence to support the condemnation and demolition, vacate and overrule any prior notices or orders for demolition. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-108. - Lien for costs of demolition. 
    Upon completion of demolition of any dwelling unit or structure, the city clerk shall notify the owner at his last known address of the completion of demolition and shall enclose a statement for costs for such demolition, payable in 30 days. Should such billing remain unpaid for 60 days after notice, the city may file a claim of lien as provided by law and enforce payment accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-109. - Method of demolition; public uses of refuse; right to promote fire fighter training by controlled burning. 
    Whenever a dwelling unit or structure has been duly condemned and notice of intent to demolish has been served and the owner has failed to comply with the required notices regarding correction and repair, the city shall proceed to demolish said premises in a method deemed appropriate by the city superintendent and/or building inspector. The city council hereby declares the use of fire fighters or trainees in a controlled burn of said property shall be an acceptable method of demolition. Prior or subsequent to such demolition by burning or any other acceptable means, the city shall retain the right of salvage for any property usable by the city in any of its departments for public use. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-110. - Subsequent building permits. 
    No owner or partial owner or legal successor to owner or part owner whose property has been demolished, shall be entitled to a building permit in any location within the city limits until such time as the costs and lien for previous demolition is fully paid and discharged and release of lien filed with the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 6-5-1990) 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2009, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to occupational license tax and derived from §§ 12-1, 12-3-12-10, 12-19-12-21, 12-23, 12-33, and 12-34 of the Code of 1957, Ord. of 8-21-1979, §§ 12-1-12-16, 12-31 and 12-32 of the Code of 1982, Ord. No. 98-05, adopted July 7, 1998, Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1(12-4), adopted Sept. 7, 2004, and Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1(12-17), adopted Sept. 7, 2004. 

Sec. 26-31. - Payment of a business tax is required to engage in business, profession or occupation; issuance. 
    No person shall engage in or manage any business, profession or occupation mentioned in this chapter within the city until after a business tax receipt has been procured from the city, which business tax receipt shall be issued to each person on payment of the amount hereinafter provided, paid to the city clerk, who shall issue all business tax receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-32. - Due date; proration. 
(a)  All business tax receipts issued under this chapter shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year, and no business tax receipt shall be issued for a fractional portion of a year; except that a business tax receipt may be issued after April 1 upon payment of one-half the amount fixed as the price of such tax for one year. 
(b)  The city shall not contract for goods or services, nor expend any funds with any individual, firm or other entity which is delinquent in payment of its business tax for the current year or any past years, according to the books and records in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Further, should any payments be due to any business for past services rendered or goods provided to the city, no payment, fee, or commission shall be issued until all past due business taxes, together with any penalties, have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. §§ 205.043, 205.053. 
Sec. 26-33. - Delinquent payments. 
    Those business taxes under this article which are not paid by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 26-34. - Penalty for doing business without license. 
    Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a business tax receipt, if required under this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 26-35. - Payment of penalty prerequisite to issuance of business tax receipt. 
    It shall be the duty of all delinquent taxpayers as set forth in this article to pay the increased business tax to the city clerk, and the payment of such amount to him/her shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the business tax receipt provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-36. - Wholesalers. 
(a)  All business tax receipts issued by the city for engaging in or managing any wholesale business shall entitle the receipt holder to sell only to retail merchants possessing current business tax receipts, unless otherwise provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer doing business within the limits of the city to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise to any person except a retail merchant possessing a current business tax receipt. 
(c)  All wholesale dealers doing business within the limits of the city who shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise to any person within the city other than a retail merchant possessing a current business tax receipt shall be required to obtain an appropriate business tax receipt for retail trade, as provided by this article. 
(d)  Nothing contained in subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall prohibit the selling by licensed wholesale dealers in gasoline and kerosene to individuals of gasoline in lots of 50 gallons or more and of kerosene in lots of 20 gallons or more, without a business tax receipt, provided such amounts shall be delivered in one delivery, and that at no time delivery is made into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle; and provided further that at least one filling station, possessing a current business tax receipt, and doing business in the city, shall be furnished with a written notice of such transaction at the time of delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-37. - Posting. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons carrying on any business, profession or occupation mentioned in this article to keep their business tax receipt conspicuously posted in their place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-38. - Transfer. 
(a)  Transfer upon sale of business. All business tax receipts may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of $3.00 and presentation of the original business tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  Transfer upon change of location. Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any business tax receipt issued under this article may be transferred from one location to another location in the city upon payment of a transfer fee of $3.00. 
(c)  Effect of transfer; surrender of original license. A business tax receipt transferred under this article shall not be good for any longer time nor in any other place than that for which it was originally or subsequently issued. The original business tax receipt must be surrendered to and filed with the city clerk at the time of the application for the transfer, and such transfer, after being approved, shall be of the same force and effect as the original business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043. 
Sec. 26-39. - Expiration date. 
    All business tax receipts issued under this chapter shall expire and be null and void on September 30, as of midnight, of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043. 
Sec. 26-40. - Failure to pay business tax. 
    Any person failing or refusing to pay a business tax according to the tax schedule then and there in effect shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Further, the conviction of a violation shall not relieve the person from his/her obligation to pay the tax and penalties thereon as established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Amount of penalties and fines specified, F.S. § 775.082 et seq. 
Sec. 26-41. - Sales on courthouse circle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any items, including merchandise and agricultural produce, locally grown or otherwise, on sidewalks, parking spaces or other property abutting the courthouse circle in the city. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be given a written warning and notice to cease and desist. Any violation after such written warning and notice to cease and desist shall, pursuant to F.S. § 162.22, be punishable as provided in section 1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-42. - Tax schedule. 
    The following enumerated individual business taxes shall be paid to the city yearly, unless otherwise specified, by the persons engaging in or managing or transacting the several occupations or professions named: 
ABSTRACT COMPANIES, agents, firms or persons engaged in the business of making abstracts of title from public records: $25.00 
ADDING MACHINES, business machines and other office equipment, dealers in or agents for: $10.00 
ADVERTISING (See also BILLPOSTERS): 
(1)  Each person advertising on streets with banners, floats, cartoons, exhibitions, megaphones or other means when no vehicle is used: $25.00 
(2)  Same as above when vehicle is used: $50.00 
(3)  Card directory: $10.00 
(4)  Advertising schemes and devices not otherwise provided for, each device: $25.00 
(5)  Any person engaged in the business of outdoor advertising, such as painted walls, bulletins, spectacular electric displays, etc.: $100.00 
Provided, however, that this license tax is not intended to include signs advertising any business when painted by a licensed sign painter.) 
(6)  Agents, firms, associations or corporations distributing circulars, pamphlets or other advertising matter, except those paying a city license tax, advertising their own goods and merchandise not including billposting: $25.00 
(7)  Agents, firms or associations or other persons engaged in the business of billposting: $25.00 
(8)  Persons acting as advertising agents or writing advertisements for profit: $10.00 
AERIAL DEVICES. Constructing or advertising aerial devices, kites, balloons or other similar exhibitions for which a charge is made, each exhibit: $10.00 
AGENCIES. Agency or any other business not specifically mentioned except such licenses as may hereafter be authorized by the city: $15.00 
ALTERATIONS: $15.00 
AMUSEMENTS, not otherwise covered by ordinance, which shall include indoor baseball and any other lawful indoor sport: $10.00 
ANTIQUES AND COLLECTIBLES: $25.00 
APPLIANCE, RADIO, AND TV REPAIR: $25.00 
ARCHITECTS, each: $10.00 
ARTIFICIAL STONE MANUFACTURERS and dealers in tiling, terra cotta, marble, granite, etc., or agent for: $15.00 
ARTISTS OR PHOTOGRAPHERS: $5.00 
ASTROLOGERS: $300.00 
AUCTIONEERS: 
(1)  Resident, each: $25.00 
(2)  Transient, each, per day: $50.00 
(3)  Transient, selling real estate only, per day: $25.00 
(4)  Livestock, per year: $25.00 
AUCTION HOUSE: $50.00 
AUDITING COMPANY: $25.00 
AUDITORS OR ACCOUNTANTS, each: $10.00 
AUTO DETAILING: $25.00 
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE: $25.00 
AUTOMOBILES: 
(1)  Automobile storage garage: $10.00 
(2)  Automobile accessories (same as MERCHANT). 
(3)  Automobile repair shop: $10.00 
(4)  Automobile and/or truck dealers; provided that payment of the business tax shall be received for the operation or establishment of one automobile and/or truck display lot, and provided further that any such lots in excess of one shall be required to pay an additional business tax pursuant to this subsection: $15.00 
BAKERY, wholesale or retail: $15.00 
BANK OR BANKER: $25.00 
BARBERSHOPS: 
(1)  One chair: $5.00 
(2)  Each additional chair: $2.00 
BEAUTY PARLOR: $10.00 
BED AND BREAKFAST: $25.00 
BICYCLES. Dealers in bicycles and supplies, including repair shop: $5.00 
BILLPOSTERS, agents, firms or persons engaged in the business of billposting other than by painting signs. (See also ADVERTISING.): $25.00 
BOATS. Keeping for hire or operating for profit, launches or other boats whether propelled by steam, electricity or other power as follows: 
(1)  For each launch or boat not being a rowboat having a passenger capacity not exceeding ten persons: $5.00 
(2)  For each launch having passenger capacity in excess of ten passengers: $10.00 
BONDS OR INVESTMENTS (see also BROKERS). Agents for selling or offering for sale stock or bonds which are to mature by the payment of installments or otherwise: $10.00 
BOOT BLACK, each chair or stand: $1.00 
BOTTLING WORKS, bottling soda, mineral or spring water, or other soft drinks: $25.00 
BOWLING ALLEY: 
(1)  First two alleys: $15.00 
(2)  Each additional alley: $7.50 
BOXING CONTESTS. (See EXHIBITIONS.) 
BROKERS (see also BONDS OR INVESTMENTS): 
(1)  Merchandise: $25.00 
(2)  Stocks and bonds: $25.00 
(3)  Brokers, dealers in grain, cotton or stock on margin: $25.00 
(4)  Real estate (see article VI of this chapter). 
(5)  Lumber: $25.00 
BUILDERS AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES. (See CONTRACTORS.) 
BUILDERS' SUPPLIES. Dealers in, including doors, sash and blinds, oils, mantels, lime, cement, etc. (but this shall not include factories manufacturing sash, doors, blinds or novelty works): $20.00 
BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATION OR LOAN COMPANY: $10.00 
BUS LINE OFFICE: $25.00 
BUSINESS MACHINES. (See OFFICE EQUIPMENT.) 
CABINET MAKER OR CARPENTER SHOP: $25.00 
CABLE TELEVISION: $50.00 
CANNING FACTORY: $10.00 
CAR WASH (VENDING): $25.00 
CARPET AND RUG CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: $10.00 
CARTS, push, for fruit, etc. (See FRUIT STANDS.) 
CATERING SERVICE: $25.00 
CELLULAR, PAGER, AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY: $25.00 
CHIROPODIST: $10.00 
CIRCUS. (See SHOWS.) 
CIVIL ENGINEER. (See ENGINEER, CIVIL.) 
CLAIRVOYANT: $500.00 
CLOTHIER, transient agent for nonresident tailor: $10.00 
COFFEE SERVICE: $25.00 
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES. (See article IV of this chapter.) 
COLD STORAGE, other than ice factory: $25.00 
COLLECTION AGENCY for the collection of rents or accounts other than real estate agency paying no other business tax to the city: $10.00 
COMMISSION MERCHANT or factor: $25.00 
COMPUTER SERVICE: $25.00 
CONTRACTORS. Persons holding themselves out as regular contractors as a business shall pay a business tax as follows: 
(1)  Paper hanging, house and sign painting, including inside painting: $10.00 
(2)  Paving and sidewalk: $10.00 
(3)  Plumbing: $10.00 
(4)  Electrical: $10.00 
(5)  House-moving: $10.00 
(6)  General contractors: $25.00 
Contractors or builders erecting or constructing on percentage basis shall pay the same business tax as provided for all contractors. 
All others not otherwise specified in this subsection shall pay a business tax of $25.00. 
CONVALESCENT FACILITY: 
(1)  Up to five units: $25.00 
(2)  Over five units: Additional $3.00 per unit 
CRATE MILL or container manufacturer: $25.00 
CREDIT UNIONS: $25.00 
DANCEHALLS, each: $10.00 
DAY CARE CENTERS: $25.00 
DENTISTS, each: $25.00 
DIRECTORIES, city, county or state; each person making or offering for sale: $10.00 
DIVINE HEALERS: $500.00 
DOORS, SASH, BLINDS, ETC., manufacturer: $25.00 
DRY CLEANERS and dyers: $10.00 
ELECTRICITY: $50.00 
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: $10.00 
ENGINEER, CIVIL: $10.00 
EXHIBITIONS, freak or other curiosity for profit: 
(1)  Per day: $5.00 
(2)  Per week: $20.00 
(3)  Wrestling or boxing and other similar exhibitions or matches, for each exhibition or match not having a regular business tax receipt under AMUSEMENTS: $10.00 
EXPRESS COMPANIES, doing business in the city, not to include business done by the companies between the city and other points outside of the state, having place of business within corporate limits: $37.00 
FEED, SEED, HAY AND GRAIN, retail or wholesale: $15.00 
FERRIS WHEEL and other such amusement devices, per week: $25.00 
FERTILIZER: 
(1)  Dealer in: $10.00 
(2)  Manufacturer of: $25.00 
FILM OR PHOTO DEVELOPING: $25.00 
FINANCE COMPANY: $25.00 
FISH OR MEAT MARKET: $15.00 
FITNESS CENTER: $25.00 
FLEA MARKET: $25.00 
FLORIST: $5.00 
FLYING JENNY, per week: $25.00 
FORTUNETELLER OR PALMIST: $500.00 
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE STAND: $10.00 
When operated by pushcart or portable or movable stand: $15.00 
FRUIT DEALER, WHOLESALE, including packing houses: $15.00 
FUNERAL DIRECTOR, EMBALMER OR UNDERTAKER: $25.00 
FURNITURE DEALERS. (Same as MERCHANTS.) 
FURNITURE MOVING: $25.00 
GAME ROOM/AMUSEMENT CENTER: $15.00 
GARAGES, STORAGE, each location: $10.00 
GAS FITTER, when operated as independent contractor: $10.00 
GAS, LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM or other gases used for fuel, dealers in and/or installers of fittings and appliances for the use of: $15.00 
No business tax receipts shall be issued to an applicant to engage in the businesses set out above in this item until such applicant shall have provided the city clerk with satisfactory evidence that the applicant has complied with the laws of the state with reference to the bond or public liability requirements for persons licensed by the state to carry on the businesses of selling liquefied petroleum gas or making installations for the use of same. For the purpose of this item the definition of liquefied petroleum gas is the same as the definition set out in the statutes of the state. 
GASOLINE FILLING STATION, each pump: $5.00 
Gasoline filling stations that pay for three pumps or $15.00 shall be permitted to sell and keep a merchandise stock up to $1,000.00 without a merchant's business tax receipt. 
GROCERY. (Same as MERCHANT.) 
GUARANTY OR SURETY COMPANY and agent therefor: $5.00 
GUNSMITHS, including sporting goods: $25.00 
Repair shop: $5.00 
HARDWARE. (Same as MERCHANT.) 
HOTELS, TAVERNS OR BOARDINGHOUSES: 
(1)  3 to 5 rooms: $3.00 
(2)  6 to 10 rooms: $5.00 
(3)  11 to 15 rooms: $7.50 
(4)  16 to 30 rooms: $12.50 
(5)  31 to 50 rooms: $20.00 
(6)  Over 50 rooms: $25.00 
ICE, selling or delivering, per vehicle: $25.00 
ICE CREAM: 
(1)  Manufacturing for sale for consumption on other than premises: $10.00 
(2)  Peddler, each person or vehicle: $10.00 
ICE CREAM AND/OR SODA FOUNTAIN, when not connected with other business: $10.00 
INSURANCE: 
(1)  Each insurance company writing life, fire, accident, health, public liability, indemnity, motor vehicle, industrial or other type or form of insurance within the corporate limits of the city, and either represented by local, traveling or itinerant agent or representative, per year: $25.00 
(2)  Insurance agents or firms doing an insurance business as agent or representative of insurance companies for each place of business, per year: $10.00 
(3)  Each traveling or itinerant insurance agent soliciting business within the corporate limits of the city, per year: $10.00 
(4)  Insurance solicitors employed by insurance agents who have paid an annual business tax as provided by this section, per year: $5.00 
INVESTIGATORS, PRIVATE, each: $10.00 
INVESTMENT AGENTS. (See BONDS OR INVESTMENTS.) 
ITINERANTS. (See also PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS): 
(1)  Any person whomsoever operating, in the city, telescopes or other devices for the purpose of gazing at the stars or other heavenly bodies, who shall make a charge, for each instrument, per month: $10.00 
(2)  Merchants and vendors, any person, either principal or agent, temporarily engaged in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and occupying any building or structure for the same, per month: $75.00 
JANITORIAL SERVICE: $25.00 
JEWELRY REPAIR SHOPS AND WATCHMAKERS: $5.00 
JUNK DEALER, including dealers in scrap or old iron, brass, copper or any other metal, waste cotton, or any articles of any kind unless for their original purpose: $25.00 
KNIFE AND SCISSORS SHARPENER: $5.00 
LAND AND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY: $25.00 
LAUNDRY: 
(1)  Located outside the city and doing business in the city: $100.00 
(2)  Located and doing business in the city: $15.00 
(3)  Hand laundry in the city: $10.00 
LAWN MAINTENANCE/LANDSCAPING: $25.00 
LAWYERS, each: $10.00 
LINEN SERVICE: $25.00 
LIVESTOCK DEALERS: $25.00 
LOCKSMITHS, each: $5.00 
LUMBER: 
(1)  Broker. (See BROKERS.) 
(2)  Dealers who buy and sell lumber, dealers in sawed lumber and dealers in staves, shingles, etc., for each place. (See BUILDING MATERIAL.) 
(3)  Sawmill yard, or novelty works. (See SAWMILLS.) 
LUNCHSTANDS, portable or moveable: $35.00 
MACHINE SHOP: $10.00 
MACHINERY, dealer in, or agent for: $15.00 
MANICURIST: $10.00 
MANUFACTURERS not otherwise provided for: $25.00 
MARRIAGE/FAMILY THERAPIST, PHYSICAL THERAPIST: $25.00 
MASSEURS: $10.00 
MATTRESS FACTORY: $10.00 
MEAT MARKET: $15.00 
MEDICINES, proprietary or medical ointment, manufacturer of, other than drugstores: $15.00 
MERCHANDISE MACHINES, coin-operated. (See Article IV of this chapter.) 
MERCHANT TAILOR: $10.00 
MERCHANTS, storekeepers or druggists, wholesale or retail, having permanent place of business: $25.00 
MESSENGER SERVICE: $25.00 
MIDWIVES: $5.00 
MILK: 
(1)  Retail, each vehicle: $10.00 
(2)  Depot, milk alone: $10.00 
MILLINERY, not in connection with other business: $10.00 
MONEY LENDERS. Other than banks or loan companies: $25.00 
MONUMENTS, DEALER: $15.00 
MOSS FACTORY: $25.00 
MOTORBOATS. (See BOATS.) 
MOTORCYCLES, dealer in or agent for: $5.00 
MOTOR VEHICLES. (See AUTOMOBILES.) 
MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE: 
(1)  Passenger vehicles for hire, each vehicle: $10.00 
(2)  Trucks or vehicles other than passenger vehicles for hire: 
a.  Resident: $10.00 
b.  Nonresident: $25.00 
MUSIC MACHINES, coin-operated. (See Article IV of this chapter.) 
NAIL SALON: $10.00 
NEWS DEPOT, meaning dealer in current periodicals, newspapers, etc.: $5.00 
NEWSPAPER PUBLISHER: $20.00 
NOTARY PUBLIC, taking other than acknowledgements: $10.00 
NOVELTY WORKS, SAWMILLS, etc.: $25.00 
NURSERY STOCK, agent for or dealer in: $5.00 
NURSING HOME FACILITY: 
(1)  Up to five units: $25.00 
(2)  Over five units: Additional $3.00 per unit 
OFFICE EQUIPMENT, dealers in: $10.00 
OILS, FUEL, illuminating or lubricating gasoline, wholesale dealer in, or agent for: $50.00 
OILS, PEDDLERS. (See PEDDLERS.) 
OPTICIAN OR OCULIST, not including regular physicians and surgeons: $10.00 
OSTEOPATHS: $5.00 
PACKING HOUSE, for fruits and vegetables: $15.00 
PAINTER, SIGN: $10.00 
PAINTERS AND DECORATORS: $10.00 
PALMIST: $500.00 
PAPERHANGERS. (See CONTRACTORS.) 
PARCEL DELIVERY SERVICE: $25.00 
PAWNBROKERS: $25.00 
PEDDLERS, including transient merchants (see also ITINERANTS): 
(1)  Fruits and vegetables, etc.: $100.00 
(2)  Lunches, sandwiches, peanuts, etc., having no vehicle: $10.00 
(3)  Same as above from pushcart: $35.00 
(4)  Ice cream. (See ICE CREAM.) 
(5)  Wares, merchandise, goods, etc., house to house: $100.00 
(6)  Oils, fuels, etc., each vehicle: $10.00 
PEST EXTERMINATORS: $25.00 
PHOTOGRAPHERS: $5.00 
PHRENOLOGISTS: $500.00 
PHYSICIANS: $25.00 
PIANO TUNER: 
(1)  Resident: $5.00 
(2)  Itinerant, or one who, either in person or through others, solicits work from house to house: $25.00 
PLASTERERS. (See CONTRACTORS.) 
POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS AND TABLES: 
(1)  For each place of business where pool, billiards or bagatelle tables are kept for use by the public for a consideration, per year: $15.00 
(2)  In addition the fee prescribed in subsection (1) above, for each table maintained in excess of these: $15.00 
The number of tables shall be based on the combination of the varying types of tables and not on each type separately. 
POOL INSTALLATION: $25.00 
PRINTER, when not operating newspaper office: $15.00 
RADIO STATION: $50.00 
RAILROAD COMPANIES. (Same as EXPRESS COMPANIES.) 
REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND SALESMEN. (See article VI of this chapter.) 
RENTAL OR LEASED UNITS (dwellings/mobile home lots): 
(1)  Up to five units: $25.00 
(2)  Over five units: Additional $3.00 per unit 
REPAIR SHOPS, not enumerated herein: $5.00 
RESTAURANTS: 
(1)  Seating not more than 10 persons: $5.00 
(2)  Seating from 11 to 20 persons: $7.50 
(3)  Seating from 21 to 30 persons: $10.00 
(4)  Seating from 31 to 40 persons: $15.00 
(5)  Seating more than 40 persons: $25.00 
Restaurants seating more than 40 persons and paying a business tax receipt as required by subsection (5) above shall be permitted to sell and keep a merchandise stock up to $1,000.00 without a merchant's business tax as required under classification MERCHANTS of this section. 
ROOMINGHOUSE, LODGINGHOUSE OR BOARDINGHOUSE. (See HOTELS.) 
SALESMAN, real estate. (See article VI of this chapter.) 
SAND AND SHELL, dealer in: $25.00 
SAVINGS AND LOANS: $25.00 
SAWMILLS: $25.00 
SEED STORE. (See FEED, SEED, HAY AND GRAIN.) 
SEWING MACHINE: 
(1)  Dealer in: $10.00 
(2)  Repairer, itinerant: $25.00 
SHEET METAL SHOP: $10.00 
SHOEMAKERS OR MENDERS, with or without machinery: $5.00 
SHOOTING GALLERY: $25.00 
SHOWS: 
(1)  Shows of all kinds except circuses giving performances or exhibitions under tents or other temporary structures or within temporary enclosures shall pay a business tax for each day as follows and except as otherwise provided: 
a.  When the charge for admission including the charge for reserved seats shall be less than $0.50 for each person: $50.00 
b.  When the charge for admission, including reserved seats shall be more than $0.50 for each person each day: $100.00 
(2)  Dog and pony or other animal show: 
a.  Per day: $25.00 
b.  Per week: $100.00 
(3)  Circuses, per day: $100.00 
(4)  Circus parade through the streets when the performance is outside the city: $250.00 
(5)  Circus parade through the streets when the performance is in the city: $20.00 
(6)  Traveling moving picture shows showing in buildings or tents where admission is charged, per day: $15.00 
SHUFFLEBOARDS and all devices such as throwing at wooden figures or other objects with rings, or any other device of a like nature, or striking an object to test the lungs, etc., where charge is made to participate, per year: $50.00 
SKATING RINKS: 
(1)  Operating in a permanent structure, per year: $10.00 
(2)  Operating in a temporary structure, such as under a tent, or an open rink, or any structure deemed by the tax collector to be of a temporary nature, per year: $25.00 
SLOT MACHINES. (See Article IV of this chapter.) 
SODA FOUNTAIN. (See ICE CREAM AND/OR SODA FOUNTAIN.) 
STENOGRAPHERS, PUBLIC: $5.00 
STORAGE HOUSES. (See WAREHOUSES.) 
STREET VENDORS, of confetti, balls, balloons or other specialties, per day: $10.00 
SURGEONS: $10.00 
SURVEYORS: $10.00 
TAILOR, MERCHANT (See MERCHANT, TAILOR.) 
TANNING FACILITY: $10.00 
TATTOOING OR BODY PIERCING: $25.00 
TAX PREPARATION SERVICE: $10.00 
TAXICABS. (See MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE.) 
TAXIDERMIST: $25.00 
TELEGRAPH COMPANY doing business within the state, exclusive of business to and from points outside of the state, and exclusive of business done for the United States government, having a place of business within the city: $25.00 
TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE: $25.00 
TELEPHONE COMPANIES: $50.00 
THRIFT SHOP: $25.00 
TIMBER BROKER: $25.00 
TIN SHOPS: $10.00 
(See also SHEET METAL SHOP.) 
TIRE RETREADING AND VULCANIZING SHOP: $5.00 
THEATERS, MOVING PICTURES, where admission is charged: 
(1)  500 seats or less: $25.00 
(2)  More than 500 seats: $50.00 
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS (See PEDDLERS.) 
TRAVEL AGENCY: $25.00 
TREE TRIMMING: $25.00 
TYPEWRITERS or dealer in. (See OFFICE EQUIPMENT.) 
UMBRELLA MENDERS: $5.00 
UNCLASSIFIED. All persons doing business in the city or having agents or representatives established here and not specifically enumerated in this list: $20.00 
UNDERTAKER. (See FUNERAL DIRECTOR.) 
UPHOLSTERERS OR FURNITURE MENDERS having an established place of business: $5.00 
VENDING MACHINES. (See article IV of this chapter.) 
VETERINARY: $5.00 
VIDEO RENTAL: $25.00 
WAREHOUSE AND STORAGE ROOMS for hire: $15.00 
WATCHMAKERS. (See JEWELRY REPAIR.) 
WATER, dealer in mineral or spring water: $25.00 
WELDER: $25.00 
WINDOW CLEANER: $25.00 
WOOD DEALER, or other material, delivery within the city limits: $5.00 
WRECKER/TOWING SERVICE: $25.00 
WRESTLING MATCHES. (See EXHIBITIONS.) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 26-43-25-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONEERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses by auctioneers, F.S. § 468.381 et seq. 

Sec. 26-71. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, an auctioneer is defined to be any person who shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise, livestock, or vehicles of any description or any personal property of whatever nature or any real estate or interest therein, at any store, stand or any place within the city by public outcry for gain or profit, or who shall advertise or hold himself/herself out as an auctioneer for public patronage, or shall receive fees or commission for his/her services. 
(Code 1957, § 14-12; Code 1982, § 12-86) 
Sec. 26-72. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to any common carrier or public warehouseman selling unclaimed or undelivered freight or goods where the same is held for freight or storage charges, nor to any sale made under the laws of the United States, the state, or the city requiring any property to be sold at public auction. 
(Code 1957, § 14-14; Code 1982, § 12-87) 
State Law reference- Auction sale to enforce statutory lien, F.S. § 85.031; liens for recovering, towing or storing vehicles, F.S. § 713.78; auction sale for partition of property, F.S. § 64.071; tax sale of personal property, F.S. § 197.106. 
Sec. 26-73. - Bond. 
    Before the issuance of any business tax receipt to a person engaging in the business of auctioneering, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the city a bond of a surety company authorized to do business in the state in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned on the faithful observance of the provisions of this article by the applicant and approved by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 14-13; Code 1982, § 12-88; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 2, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-74. - Manner of conducting sale; refusal of bids. 
    Each article offered for sale at auction shall be sold as offered, if a bid is made by more than one bona fide bidder, before any other article is offered for sale, and without a reasonable delay. No by-bidding by the owner or any person acting for or representing the owner shall be permitted, nor shall any bid be accepted that is not a bona fide bid, and such person shall not be permitted to bid at any such auction, and there shall be no reserve price on any such article provided, however, that the seller may be a reserve price placed on any article if such fact is made known to the bidder when such article is offered for sale at auction; provided, further, that any resident of the city or establishment in possession of a current city business tax receipt may reject any and all bids. 
(Code 1957, § 14-15; Code 1982, § 12-89; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 468.388(7), (8). 
Sec. 26-75. - Sales in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or other person to offer for sale, or sell at public auction or by public outcry, any goods, wares or merchandise or any livestock, or any other personal property, or any real estate or interest therein, upon any street or public place in the city, unless written permission has been obtained from the city so to do. 
(Code 1957, § 14-16; Code 1982, § 12-90) 
Secs. 26-76-26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COIN-OPERATED DEVICES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fraudulent operation of coin-operated devices, F.S. § 817.32; coin-operated gambling devices, F.S. §§ 849.15, 849.235; damaging vending machines, parking meters, F.S. § 877.08; slugs, F.S. § 817.33. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automatic vending machine means any machine dispensing any articles of value, uniform as to quantity and quality, upon the insertion of a coin into the machine. This definition shall not include coin-operated telephones and United States stamp vending machines. 
    Coin-operated amusement devices other than skill machines means machines which produce or reproduce music, or return entertainment or amusement for a consideration. This definition is supplemental to the definition of coin-operated skill devices as provided in this section. 
    Coin-operated skill devices (commonly called pinball, marble machines and the like) means any machines which are played strictly for amusement purposes only as games of skill, for a consideration, and which, when played or operated, do not vend, deliver or grant any merchandise, prize or award of whatsoever nature or kind. 
(Code 1957, §§ 8-1-8-3; Code 1982, § 12-101) 
State Law reference- "Coin-operated vending machine" defined, F.S. § 877.08. 
Sec. 26-102. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to authorize the licensing of slot machines or other gambling machines or devices of whatever nature, nor shall the provisions of this article be applicable to stamp machines or to coin-operated telephones or to coin-operated parcel-checking locks and toilet locks or to any coin-operated machine which vends only unadulterated Florida-produced citrus juices. 
(Code 1957, § 8-12; Code 1982, § 12-102) 
State Law reference- Coin-operated gambling devices, F.S. §§ 849.15, 849.235. 
Sec. 26-103. - Inspections. 
    All machines placed in the city under this article shall be at all times subject to such inspection as may be directed by the chief of police or the mayor. 
(Code 1957, § 8-10; Code 1982, § 12-103; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 26-104-26-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SKILL DEVICES 

Sec. 26-131. - Generally. 
    Any and all coin-operated skill devices, as defined in this article, shall be subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 8-11; Code 1982, § 12-111) 
Sec. 26-132. - Location near schools or churches. 
    No coin-operated skill device shall be maintained or operated within 300 feet of any public or parochial school or church. This shall not apply to any machines operated or maintained in any hotel. 
(Code 1957, § 8-11; Code 1982, § 12-112) 
Sec. 26-133. - Secretive location. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in direct charge or supervision of coin-operated skill devices to place or maintain such machines behind any blind or screen or in any hidden or secretive location, except when such machines are not open to play. 
(Code 1957, § 8-11; Code 1982, § 12-113) 
Sec. 26-134. - Orderly operation. 
    All coin-operated skill devices must be operated and maintained at all times in an orderly manner, and the operation thereof shall be conducted with the same dignity as any other well-regulated business. 
(Code 1957, § 8-11; Code 1982, § 12-114) 
Secs. 26-135-26-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT FOR COIN-OPERATED DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, adopted Dec. 1, 2009, enacted provisions which changed the name of the tax issued by local government from an "occupational license tax" to a "business tax," and amended art. IV, div. 3 in its entirety to read as set forth herein. Formerly, art. IV, div. 3, §§ 26-161-26-167, pertained to license, and derived from §§ 8-4, 8-5, 8-6, 8-9, 12-11, and 12-12 of the Code of 1957, and §§ 12-126-12-130 and 12-132 of the Code of 1982. 

Sec. 26-161. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, lease or distribute any coin-operated machines defined in this article without obtaining a business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-162. - Confiscation of unlicensed machines. 
    The chief of police is authorized to confiscate all machines upon which the city business tax has not been paid. Whenever confiscated, such machines shall be disposed of by the police department, and the operator thereof shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Disposal of the machines shall be by sale at publicly advertised auction within a period not longer than 30 days after such confiscation, and if not disposed of at such sale within the period herein provided, then such machines shall be destroyed by breaking, burning or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-163. - Business tax for vending machines. 
    Every person who operates or controls an automatic vending machine that vends merchandise with prices ranging from $0.01 to $0.15 per item vended, except a postage stamp vending machine, shall pay a business tax for each machine of $2.50. Each fee vending machine that vends merchandise with prices ranging from $0.16 or more per item vended shall require the payment of a business tax of $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-164. - Business tax for coin-operated amusement devices. 
    Every person who operates for profit any machine, contrivance or device, including music boxes, jukeboxes and other mechanisms used for the production and reproduction of music, which is set in motion or made to or permitted to function by the insertion of a coin or slug, shall pay a business tax of $25.00 for each such machine, contrivance or device. This section shall apply to all coin-operated machines, contrivances or devices operated for amusement and which do not dispense any form of prize or reward but shall not be construed to authorize the use of any machine, contrivance or device for gambling or as a game of chance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-165. - Application. 
    Before any person will be entitled to obtain a business tax under the provisions of this article, such person must comply with the following requirements: Submit an application to be obtained from the city clerk for consideration by the city council. Such application shall contain therein the name, age, place of residence and brief background history of the applicant and his/her associates, together with the name or proposed name of the business, the business address or proposed business address of the applicant and the number of machines and devices he/she intends to operate. The applicant shall submit with the application the names and places of residence of five persons, residents of the city, as references. In addition it shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any such business tax receipt to be on file with the police department a set of fingerprints of the applicant, which shall be impressed by the police department. If, after due consideration by the city council, it is determined that applicant is not of a good moral character, pursuant to section 26-166, a business tax receipt will be refused. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-166. - Good moral character. 
(a)  For purposes of determining the issuance of the business tax receipt required by this article, the phrase "good moral character" shall be construed to mean the propensity of the person to serve the public in the city in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(b)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
(1)  At the current time he/she has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
(2)  He/she is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he/she seeks a business tax receipt. 
(c)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined, or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business tax receipt: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner. 
(4)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-167. - Serial number; display; transfer. 
    All business tax receipts issued by the city under this article shall contain thereon the serial number of the machine. Tax receipts must at all times be firmly attached to the machine or device and prominently displayed. No business tax receipt shall be transferable from one machine or device to another. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 4, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 26-168-26-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 26-191. - Record of transactions required. 
    Any person who sells property to a pawnbroker or pledges the property as security for a loan shall present either a driver's license or other comparable identification to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall record the date of the transaction, the type of identification, the name and address as it appears on the item of identification and the identifying number appearing thereon and have the record signed by the person from whom he/she receives the property. This record shall be made available to any law enforcement agency or officer upon request. 
(Code 1957, § 13-21; Code 1982, § 12-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 715.041. 
Sec. 26-192. - Inspection of record of transactions. 
    The record required in section 26-191 shall at all business hours be open to inspection by the police officers of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-21; Code 1982, § 12-72) 
Sec. 26-193. - Buying or receiving from minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any secondhand jewelry store, or for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer, to buy, take or receive by any way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise or article of personal property of any kind from any minors. 
(Code 1957, § 13-22; Code 1982, § 12-73) 
Secs. 26-194-26-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND SALESMEN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, adopted Dec. 1, 2009, enacted provisions which changed the name of the tax issued by local government from an "occupational license tax" to a "business tax," and amended art. VI in its entirety to read as set forth herein. Formerly, art. VI, §§ 26-221-26-229, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 12-24-12-33 of the Code of 1957, and §§ 12-46-12-55 of the Code of 1982. 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 475.01. 

Sec. 26-221. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to every person engaged in the business or vocation of real estate broker or salesman, as defined by F.S. § 475.01, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12-24; Code 1982, § 12-46; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-222. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person required by this article to obtain a business tax receipt, who shall fail or refuse to do so, or who shall perform any act requiring a license without having the required license then and there in force and effect, shall be deemed guilty of an offense; provided, however, that the payment of the penalty provided for in this Code shall not relieve the offender from the payment of any tax due the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-223. - Rules of evidence. 
    In all proceedings under this article, where the payment, receipt or expectation of a commission, compensation or valuable consideration is a necessary element of the offense, proof of the performance of the act, service or condition for which such commission, compensation or valuable consideration is required to be shown shall be prima facie evidence that such act, service or condition was performed or existed for or in expectation of the payment or receipt of a commission, compensation or valuable consideration. A certificate signed by the taxing authority that the records do not show that the defendant has been issued a business tax receipt shall be prima facie evidence that no business tax receipt was purchased. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-224. - State license required. 
    Before any business tax receipt shall be issued under this article to an applicant by the taxing authority, such applicant shall exhibit to the taxing authority a current license duly issued to him/her under the provisions of the laws of the state, together with such proof as the licensing authority may require touching the identity of the applicant. The fact that the state license was so exhibited shall be noted on the business tax receipt application, and on the record thereof, together with the serial number of the state license. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-225. - Each member of firm to obtain a business tax receipt in addition to firm business tax receipt. 
    Every member or officer of a partnership or corporation who shall be actively engaged in its brokerage business shall be required to pay the business tax and receive a business tax receipt as a real estate broker, in addition to the business tax held by such partnership or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-226. - Business tax; issuance of business tax receipt. 
    Every person engaged in the business or vocation of real estate broker shall pay to the city clerk, referred to in this article as the taxing authority representative, the sum of $10.00, and every person engaged in the business or vocation of real estate salesman shall pay to the taxing authority representative the sum of $10.00, as a tax for the privilege of engaging in such business or vocation, respectively, and shall thereupon be issued the proper business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-227. - Designation of employer; change of employment. 
    Every person who shall apply for a business tax receipt as a real estate salesman under this article shall designate the person by whom he/she is employed, and such business tax receipt shall not entitle him/her to perform any of the acts or services set forth in this article for any other person. The name of such employer shall be noted on the business tax receipt and records; provided, however, if such salesman shall desire to change employers, he/she shall notify the taxing authority in writing of the name and address of the new employer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-228. - Revocation or annulment of state license. 
(a)  Effect. A revocation or annulment of the state license of a broker or salesman shall operate to annul automatically the business tax receipt issued under this article, and to withdraw the privilege of acting thereunder. 
(b)  Action by city. When, by the terms of this article, a business tax receipt shall be automatically annulled, no action by any officer of the city shall be required as evidence of such annulment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 26-229. - Expiration of business tax receipts; half-year tax schedules. 
    All business tax receipts shall bear the date of issuance, and shall expire on September 30 next thereafter, unless sooner annulled by operation of the provisions of this chapter. If more than six months of the tax year shall have expired before the business tax shall be applied for, or before any act shall be performed requiring a business tax receipt, the tax required to be paid shall be one-half of that prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 26-230-26-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TOBACCO PRODUCT PLACEMENT 

Sec. 26-251. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tobacco Product Placement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 26-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company or other business formed for profit making or nonprofit purpose in the incorporated areas of the city, including all retail establishments where goods and services are sold. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or other legal entity. 
    Self service merchandising means the open display of tobacco products to which the public has access without the intervention of the vendors, storeowners, or other store employees. 
    Specialty tobacco store means an establishment primarily in the business of selling cigars, pipe tobacco and other tobacco products in which 50 percent or more of any one or more of the following is devoted or attributable to the sale of pipe tobacco or cigars: 
(1)  Wall space or any other display areas such as tables, racks or display structures; or 
(2)  Gross revenues. 
    Tobacco product promotion means any advertisement, the display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic or designs that are trademarks of a particular brand of tobacco product. Tobacco product promotion does not include any public service message sponsored by a federal, state or local government entity, or by a nonprofit entity, designed to communicate the hazards of tobacco use or to encourage minors to refrain from using or buying tobacco products. 
    Tobacco products include loose tobacco leaves and products made from loose tobacco leaves, in whole or in part, which can be used for smoking, inhaling, chewing or ingesting in any manner, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, bidis or beedies, clove and other herbal cigarettes, pipe tobacco, snuff or smokeless tobacco and chewing tobacco. Tobacco products also include cigarette wrappers, pipes, cigarette and cigar holders, snuff flower, plug and twist tobacco, and any other tobacco-related products or accessories, including but not limited to cigarettes and cigars. This definition does not include any nicotine-containing product that is used for the purpose of helping a person stop smoking such as nicotine gum or nicotine patches. 
    Tobacco retailer means any person or business that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
    Vendor assisted means the customer has no access to tobacco products without the assistance of the vendor, storeowner, or other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 2, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 26-253. - Penalties; reporting of violations to state. 
(a)  Any person or business that violates this article shall upon conviction be guilty of a second-degree misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. 
(b)  The penalty for a second conviction of this article shall be at least double the penalty for the first conviction, except that any penalty shall not exceed the maximum penalty set by law for a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(c)  All convictions for violation of this article shall be reported to the state division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 7, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 26-254. - Territorial applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable and enforceable throughout the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 5, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 26-255. - Merchandising restricted. 
    No person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment subject to this article shall sell, permit to be sold, or display for sale any tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising or any other means other than vendor assisted sales, unless the tobacco products are located inside a tobacco specialty store, or access to the premises by persons under the age of 18 is prohibited by law. All tobacco products must be kept behind the sales counter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 3, 10-1-2002) 
Sec. 26-256. - Placement of advertising. 
    All businesses, persons, tobacco retailers and specialty tobacco stores shall place any and all tobacco advertising, including but not limited to stickers, posters, and signs, at least four feet above the floor. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 4, 10-1-2002) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Disposition of property or the income thereof made in perpetuity for cemetery maintenance, F.S. § 689.13; authority of city to maintain an abandoned cemetery at expense of owner, F.S. § 497.345(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Location of burials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to inter the body of any dead person anywhere within the corporate limits of the city except within such place as is known and designated by the city council as a "burying ground" or "cemetery." 
(Code 1957, § 7-1; Code 1982, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Requirement for burial permit, F.S. § 382.007. 
Sec. 30-2. - Mahan Park designated as private cemetery. 
    "Mahan Park," situated on West U.S. Highway No. 90 in the city, is hereby designated as a "private burial ground "or "cemetery" wherein such deceased persons as are designated by Fred A. Mahan or his wife, Rose K. Mahan, may be interred. 
(Code 1957, § 7-13; Code 1982, § 7-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Authority of lot owners and city employees. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the owners of cemetery lots from handling or treating in any legal way, not detrimental to the rest of the cemetery, any article or object which is their property and is present on any cemetery lot of their ownership, and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the regular appointed maintenance force entrusted with the maintenance of the cemeteries from doing any act regularly associated with or a part of their duty nor shall anything contained herein be construed to prohibit the employees of the city from carrying out each and every order of the city council and/or the committee of streets and cemeteries of the council. 
(Code 1957, § 7-12; Code 1982, § 7-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Control of city-owned cemeteries. 
    The operation, control and supervision of all city-owned cemeteries within and without the corporate limits of the city is hereby placed under the jurisdiction of the council. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2; Code 1982, § 7-5) 
Charter reference- Extraterritorial powers of city, §§ 6, 19. 
Sec. 30-5. - Records of interments. 
    A complete record of all interments in the cemeteries shall be kept by the city clerk on blanks and forms furnished for that purpose in the office of the clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 7-10; Code 1982, § 7-6) 
State Law reference- Record of burial in cemetery of cemetery company, F.S. § 497.309. 
Secs. 30-6-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY AUTHORITY 

Sec. 30-31. - Established; membership. 
(a)  The Monticello Cemetery Authority is hereby created. It shall consist of seven members serving on a voluntary basis and it shall convene at times as may be fixed in the future by the city council or by said authority. 
(b)  The seven initial members thereof shall be appointed by each of the elected city council members and shall serve terms of two years or until such member is removed, resigns or dies. Thereafter, he/she shall be replaced by a nominee chosen by the city council member who first selected such member. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 2, 7-6-1993) 
Sec. 30-32. - Officers; powers and duties; adoption of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The cemetery authority shall elect a chairperson, secretary and vice-chairperson to conduct its meetings in public from time to time. The authority shall have exclusive jurisdiction to enact rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of all city cemeteries; to set prices on the sale of plots; to recommend landscaping and design functions; to recommend architects and surveyors; and to approve forms, maps and surveys as may be submitted by the interested public. 
(b)  The authority shall have the responsibility for naming any newly acquired cemetery subject to the approval of the city council. The authority shall adopt rules and regulations concerning the operational hours, the security of the cemeteries and the method in which funerals may be conducted and the times permitted for such. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 3, 7-6-1993) 
Sec. 30-33. - Reports and recommendations; expenses. 
    The chairperson of the cemetery authority, with the concurrence of the majority of said authority, shall submit reports and regulations to the city council and, after notice, the city council shall consider and act upon such recommendations and shall thereupon adopt rules and regulations which shall be binding upon the public at large pertaining to all cemeteries owned by the city. Any costs reasonably incurred by the authority shall be considered an obligation of the city, except that such authority shall not incur costs exceeding $50.00 without the express approval of the city council or, in an emergency, the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 4, 7-6-1993) 
Secs. 30-34-30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BURIAL LOTS IN MUNICIPALLY OWNED CEMETERIES 

Sec. 30-51. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
    All proceeds of the sale of lots in the municipally owned cemeteries shall be kept by the city treasurer in a separate fund and shall be expended as directed by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4; Code 1982, § 7-28) 
Sec. 30-52. - Pauper lots. 
    The lots in the municipally owned cemeteries allotted to the interment of paupers and other persons in similar conditions shall be used at the pleasure of the city as expressed by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 7-5.1; Code 1982, § 7-31) 
Sec. 30-53. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The location of graves in pauper lots and the plotting and location of lots and passageways in the cemeteries together with all matters of engineering having to do with the cemeteries is hereby made the duty of the city clerk, under the direction of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 7-6; Code 1982, § 7-32) 
Chapter 34 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Vacancy in office of mayor or member of council, § 16; election dates, § 35. 

Sec. 34-1. - State election laws. 
    The general laws of the state relating to elections shall be strictly observed in all general and special elections so far as they are applicable, and the council shall from time to time cause instructions to be prepared based upon such laws and this chapter, for the use of inspectors and other officers in conducting and managing elections, and shall prescribe suitable forms of oaths to be administered to voters when challenged or in other cases, and also forms for returns and other purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 9-10; Code 1982, § 8-1) 
State Law reference- Electors and elections, F.S. ch. 97 et seq.; voting illegally, F.S. § 104.15. 
Sec. 34-2. - Special election; revising registration list. 
    Whenever a special election shall be held under this chapter, a meeting of the council shall be held within five days of the election for the purpose of revising the registration list. Public notice of such meeting shall be given and all persons not on the annual registration list, claiming a right to vote at such special election, shall appear at such meeting and apply for registration. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4; Code 1982, § 8-3) 
Sec. 34-3. - Officers to be elected. 
    The officers to be chosen at a city election shall be those designated in the Charter, Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921). 
(Code 1957, § 9-2; Code 1982, § 8-6) 
Sec. 34-4. - Qualifying period; special elections; referendums and Charter amendments. 
(a)  For any elective city office there shall be a five-day qualifying period, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. The first day of the five-day period shall be not earlier than the 50th day preceding the date established by the Charter for the primary election, and not later than the 46th day preceding said primary. Candidates may qualify at any time after 12:00 noon on the first day of the qualifying period, and before 12:00 noon on the last day of the qualifying period. 
(b)  Any special election as provided for by the Charter shall be scheduled by the city council not less than 60 days prior to such election. 
(c)  Any referendum or Charter amendment shall be considered by the electorate at the general election as established by the Charter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-7; Ord. No. 90-06, 4-3-1990; Ord. No. 94-03, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 99-02, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 34-5. - Appointment of canvassing board. 
    The votes shall be canvassed under the supervision of a three-member board, which shall consist of the county supervisor of elections, the mayor and the city clerk/treasurer. In the event that the mayor and/or clerk/treasurer is a candidate, the mayor shall appoint a member of the city council to serve in his/her place. Should the county supervisor of elections decline to serve, the mayor shall appoint a replacement, who need not be a member of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-8; Ord. No. 99-02, § 8-8, 7-6-1999) 
State Law reference- Change of date of municipal election; F.S. § 101.75; opening and closing of polls, F.S. § 100.011; inspectors and clerks to conduct elections, F.S. § 102.012. 
Sec. 34-6. - Canvassing of returns. 
    The canvassing board shall, as soon as the polls are closed, proceed to canvass the votes. The board shall prepare duplicate returns thereof and deliver one of the same to the mayor and the other to the clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1957, § 9-8; Code 1982, § 8-10; Ord. No. 99-02, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 34-7. - Newly elected officers. 
    The newly elected officers shall be entitled to enter upon the offices at the regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in January following the election. 
(Code 1957, § 9-9; Code 1982, § 8-11; Ord. No. 99-02, 7-6-1999) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 35. 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2009, enacted provisions amending ch. 38, art. I and div. 1 of art. II in their entirety, and specifically set out provisions intended for use as arts. I and II, §§ 38-1-38-17. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. II, div. 1, §§ 38-31-38-38, and div. 2, §§ 38-51-38-59. Formerly, art. II, div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 11-5-11-15 of the Code of 1957, §§ 15-1-15-13 of the Code of 1982, and Ord. No. 93-09, adopted Dec. 7, 1993. Ord. No. 2009-06, § 2, renumbered former art. II, div. 3 as a new art. III, §§ 38-71-38-77; the text of former div. 3 remains unchanged. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Authority. 
    The city, acting through the city council and/or its designee(s), shall have authority pursuant to home rule and police powers under Article VIII, section 2, of the Florida Constitution to determine and declare the existence of a public nuisance and shall have the authority to provide for the abatement of same. Abatement of such nuisances constitutes a municipal service, which specifically benefits the property upon which the nuisance is abated and all costs incurred by the city in abating such nuisances shall be levied as a special assessment pursuant to F.S. § 170.201 and/or all other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-32. - City council findings. 
    The city council finds that conditions exist within the city which violate public rights, subvert public order, decency, or morals, or cause inconvenience or damage to the public generally. Specifically, the accumulation of underbrush, weeds, rubbish, trash, and grass on improved property; the existence of unsafe dwellings and other structures on improved property; and the creation of pools, ponds, other bodies of water, or conditions which endanger the public health, welfare, property value, or safety of the community, has become an ever increasing menace in the city and constitutes a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to create a nuisance, or suffer or permit a nuisance to exist, upon property, which is under his, her, or its care, custody or control. 
    The city, acting at the direction of the city council, shall have the authority to and shall take steps to ensure the abatement of public nuisances in the most aggressive manner provided by the Monticello Code or state law. The abatement of such nuisances protects the public health, safety and welfare, enhances the value of the property, involves the furnishing of vital municipal services, and specifically benefits the property on which the nuisance is abated. The cost of any abatement, including administrative fees and costs, shall constitute a special assessment upon the benefited property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-33. - Public nuisance abatement program established. 
    There is hereby established a City of Monticello Nuisance Abatement Program for the purpose of abating the public nuisances defined in section 38-35 in this chapter. The owner of any property located within the city who creates, suffers, or permits a nuisance to exist upon his or her property, shall be responsible for abating the nuisance and, if the owner fails to abate the nuisance in accordance with the notice given pursuant to this chapter, the city may abate the nuisance and the city shall be reimbursed for the costs associated with the abatement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the recovery of those costs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-34. - Public nuisance abatement program trust fund established. 
    There is hereby established an interest-bearing public nuisance abatement program trust fund for the deposit, maintenance, and distribution of any assessment funds collected or expended as a result of the public nuisance abatement program. The assessment imposed on a benefited property and collected by the city shall include the actual cost of abating the nuisance, the cost of serving notice, the cost of obtaining title information, the cost of lien recordation, the cost of inspections, and all other specifically related costs. Any funds in the trust fund may be used to abate public nuisances on property to which title is not clear, abate nuisances on government property, which may not be assessed, or for other purposes directly related to the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-35. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Board shall mean the nuisance abatement board. 
    Nuisance shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the state and ordinances of the city, including this chapter. 
(2)  Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber, or other things, which based upon the facts and circumstances of the accumulation has become a public nuisance in fact. 
(3)  The existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, grass, undergrowth, brush, or other dead or living plant life upon an improved lot, tract or parcel of land, within 100 feet of any improved property within the city to the extent and in the manner that such improved lot, tract or parcel of land is or may reasonably become infested or inhabited with rodents, vermin, wild animals, or snakes; or may become a breeding place for mosquitoes; may pose a fire hazard; threaten or endanger the public health and welfare; pose an attractive nuisance for children; may reasonably cause disease; or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of any adjacent property. 
(4)  Any "attractive nuisance" or condition which may prove detrimental to the health and safety of children, whether on an improved or unimproved lot, tract or parcel of land including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, excavations, abandoned appliances, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles, and any structurally unsound fences or structure, lumber, trash, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak, or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(5)  Any unfit, unsanitary, abandoned, or unsafe dwelling, structure, or improvement upon real property. 
(6)  Any underbrush, weeds, or untended grass which exceeds two feet in height located on improved property. 
(7)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(8)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial wastes, or other substances. 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity in violation of local, state, or federal law is conducted, performed, or maintained, and which under the facts and circumstances surrounding the activity constitutes a public nuisance in fact. 
(10)  Any accumulation of stagnant water or sewage permitted or maintained on any improved lot, premises, or piece of ground. This provision does not apply to natural wetlands or permitted retention/detention ponds. 
(11)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(12)  Unsheltered storage for a period of 30 days or more within the corporate limits of this city (except in licensed junkyards) of old and unused stripped junk and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition; and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, or equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(13)  For the purpose of this article, the term "nuisance" shall also include any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located. 
(14)  Such other acts or conditions which are determined and declared by other ordinances or by resolution of city council to be or constitute public nuisances. 
    Nuisance inspector shall mean the city manager or the designee thereof. 
    Refuse shall mean leavings, dregs, rubbish, trash or waste material. 
    Underbrush shall mean any undergrowth or brush conducive to the collection of insects and rodents, which may be or become a fire hazard, or may negatively impact adjoining property. 
    Unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure shall mean any dwellings or structure or portions thereof and accessory buildings which are structurally unsafe, unstable, or unsanitary; inadequately provided with exit facilities; constitute a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; constitute a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; dangerous to life or property of the occupant thereof or of the surrounding areas; unfit for human habitation if so intended or used; or otherwise in violation of the housing, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, sanitation and fire codes of the city, county and/or state, as applicable. 
    Weeds shall mean any plants that are useless, invasive, or injurious to crops, grasses, landscaping scrubs, trees, or flowers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-36. - Nuisance abatement program: supplemental means of enforcement. 
(1)  Pursuant to F.S. §§ 162.13 and 166.0415(7), the nuisance abatement program is a supplemental means of enforcing city codes and ordinances. A public nuisance also constitutes a code violation and the city is not limited to a choice of remedy to ensure compliance with its codes. Code enforcement proceedings are punitive and involve fines levied against the subject property, which may be collected pursuant to F.S. § 162.09. In contrast, nuisance abatement pursuant to this chapter is remedial in nature and specifically designed to immediately, or as soon as practicable, bring the property into compliance, thereby protecting the public welfare and directly improving and benefiting the property upon which the nuisance is abated. 
(2)  In addition to nuisance abatement proceedings, the city may institute code enforcement proceedings against a property for an occurrence of a violation. However, once the subject violation/nuisance is abated, that occurrence of the code violation has ceased and no further code enforcement penalties may accrue for that specific occurrence. 
(3)  Repeat nuisance violations. Following the first notice under this chapter to abate a nuisance as described herein, any subsequent violation of the same nuisance classification(s) on the same property within a 12-month period may be abated by the city without further notice so long as the initial notice and order of abatement specifically provides for such subsequent abatement therein. All costs of abating the repeat nuisance, including administrative fees and costs, shall constitute a special assessment against said property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-37. - Powers and duties of the nuisance inspector. 
(a)  The nuisance inspector and/or his/her designees shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable standards and reporting non-compliance therewith and in furtherance of this responsibility, the nuisance inspector and/or designees shall make such inspections, compile such facts and evidence, and prepare such reports as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this chapter. The nuisance inspector's findings, evidence and reports shall be promptly forwarded to the city attorney's office for review. 
(b)  The nuisance inspector and his or her designees are hereby authorized to enter upon private property in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall be immune from all civil and criminal liability while under the discharge of duties imposed herein. When necessary to obtain such entry, the nuisance inspector may institute appropriate proceedings to obtain a warrant. 
(c)  In the case of an obvious unfit and unsafe dwelling, structure, or other condition which after inspection is determined to be uninhabited, the nuisance inspector shall cause to be posted a "No Trespassing" sign in an attempt to warn third parties who might be exposed to the risk of danger created by the unsafe condition. However, the city does not assume any liability for harm to third parties caused by the unfit and unsafe dwelling, structure, or condition under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-38. - Nuisance abatement board. 
    The city, acting at the direction of the city council, specifically reserves the right to create a nuisance abatement board, which shall be authorized to hear and review nuisance cases, determine the existence of a nuisance pursuant to the Monticello Code, and provide notice and order abatement of same. The membership and qualifications of such board shall be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 38-39-38-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 38-51. - Publication of annual notice. 
    The city council shall cause to be published in a newspaper regularly published and in general circulation within the city once a week for two consecutive weeks during the month of April of each year hereafter a notice reading substantially as follows: 
"ATTENTION OWNERS, AGENTS, CUSTODIANS, LESSEES AND OCCUPANTS OF REAL PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF MONTICELLO: 
You are hereby notified that you are required by law to cut and prevent the excessive accumulation of weeds, underbrush, grass or other dead and living plant life upon your improved property; to remove any trash, debris, refuse, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or appliances, or other nocuous matter located on any property owned, controlled or occupied by you in the City of Monticello; and also to repair, restore or demolish any unfit or unsafe structure located upon such property; and that upon your failure to do so, the City of Monticello will institute nuisance abatement proceedings against your property and cause such nuisance to be abated. The cost of such abatement will constitute a special assessment lien against the property on which the nuisance is located. Such special assessment lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state, county, district, and municipal taxes and superior in dignity to mortgages and all other liens, irrespective of the date of the recording of the municipal lien or the date of the recording of any mortgage or any other lien on real property. A failure to pay said lien, even such lien upon homestead property, may result in a loss of title to your property." 
A failure to publish this notice as provided for herein shall not invalidate any nuisance abatement proceedings brought pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-52. - Resolution declaring property a threat and order to show cause. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the nuisance inspector's findings, evidence, and reports supporting the existence of a nuisance as defined herein, the city attorney, or his or her designee, shall review and determine the sufficiency therewith. If the facts and circumstances support a finding of a public nuisance, the city attorney or his or her designee, shall prepare a resolution for the city council declaring the property a threat to the public, health, safety and welfare with order to show cause. 
(b)  Such resolution or order to show cause shall: 
(1)  Identify the property at issue; 
(2)  Identify the owner or owners of the property as ascertained by a reasonable search of the property appraiser's records or search of the public records; 
(3)  Describe the condition or activity which may constitute a public nuisance; 
(4)  Set the date, time, and place for the show cause hearing at which the owner(s) shall have the opportunity to present such evidence and or argument as to why said building, structure or condition should not be by the city council or board condemned as a nuisance and its abatement, removal, or destruction required; 
(5)  Include a statement providing that a failure to respond or appear at the hearing shall be deemed an admission of the existence of a public nuisance on the property at issue which may result in abatement of the nuisance by the city and levy of an assessment against the property pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Notice of such hearing shall be made by serving a certified copy of said resolution and/or order to show cause upon the owner if able to be located within the city by the chief of police of the city, his designee, or process server in the manner as near as practicable to the manner in which a summons is served as provided by the laws of the State of Florida. In the event that it is determined that the owner is not available for service within the city, service shall be perfected by at least one of the following: 
(1)  Mailing, via registered or certified mail, a certified copy of the resolution and/or order to show cause at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the owner(s) and mortgagee(s) of record; or 
(2)  Publication of the resolution and/or order to show cause. Such notice shall be published once for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in Jefferson County. The last date of publication shall be at least one day prior to the hearing. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under Chapter 50 of the Florida Statutes for legal and official advertisements; or 
(3)  If the property is in foreclosure proceedings and has been abandoned by the owner(s) as evidenced by the property being vacant and the owner has not provided a forwarding address nor is participating in the foreclosure proceedings by filing an answer or has otherwise been unable to be served; service by certified mail to the owner(s) last address of record and service upon the bank or mortgage company of record in the foreclosure proceedings by certified mail shall be deemed sufficient notice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-53. - Resolution declaring a public nuisance or order of abatement. 
(a)  The show cause hearing shall be a public hearing. At or after such hearing, if no good and sufficient cause be shown to the contrary, the city council shall pass a resolution declaring a public nuisance or the nuisance abatement board shall issue an order of abatement affirming the existence or the nuisance and requiring the owner of the property to abate the nuisance condition(s) within a reasonable time to be determined by the city council or board in the resolution or order and provide for abatement of the nuisance by city forces if such conditions are not corrected as of the time determined by the city council or nuisance abatement board. 
(b)  The city council or board may require any or all measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance. These measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the cutting of vegetation, removal of debris or abandoned materials, repair or maintenance of structures, and/or the demolition of unfit or unsafe structures. 
(c)  At minimum, the resolution or order of abatement shall: 
(1)  Identify the property; 
(2)  Identify the owner or owners of the property and any interested parties upon whom noticed was served; 
(3)  Set forth the conditions supporting the finding of a public nuisance and/or specify the sections of this chapter upon which the finding of a public nuisance was based; 
(4)  Require the abatement of the nuisance within such time as the city council determines to be reasonable considering the nature of the nuisance, the danger to the public, and the amount of work involved to abate the nuisance. 
(5)  Include a statement advising that upon the owner's failure to comply with the resolution or order of abatement by removing the nuisance, the city may vacate, demolish, or remove, or otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance with the resolution or order of abatement and the expense of such performance by the city or its independent contractor shall be charged against the real property as a special assessment and such special assessment lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state, county, district, and municipal taxes and superior in dignity to mortgages and all other liens, irrespective of the date of the recording of the municipal lien or the date of the recording of any mortgage or any other lien or real property. A failure to pay said lien, even such lien upon homestead property, may be collected pursuant to any manner specified by law and may result in a loss of title to the property. 
(6)  The order may include notice that any reoccurrence of the nuisance within a 12-month period may be abated by the city without the need for further proceedings and the cost to abate the repeat nuisance shall constitute a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-54. - Extension of time to comply. 
    In the event of extenuating circumstances such that the property owner(s) is/are unable to complete abatement within the time provided within the resolution or order, the owner(s) may file a written request for an extension of time to comply stating the reasons they have been unable to complete compliance. If reasonable grounds are shown, the city council or board is authorized to extend the time in which to complete compliance with the original order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-55. - City action on failure to comply. 
(a)  If the owner or other parties in interest fail to comply with an order made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within the time therein fixed, the city is authorized to vacate, demolish, remove, or otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance with such order, either with city forces or by an independent contractor and neither shall be held liable for trespass, conversion, or other damages while abating the nuisance in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-56. - Emergency order. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, any nuisance in violation of this chapter is an immediate threat to life, limb, health, welfare, or property, the city council may issue an emergency order and immediately terminate or abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-57. - Appeals. 
    Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by a final resolution or order of the city council or nuisance abatement board pursuant to this chapter shall file an appeal to the Circuit Court of Jefferson County. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before city council or the nuisance abatement board. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the resolution or order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-58. - Attorneys' fees. 
    The prevailing party in any legal action, appeal, or proceeding instituted to contest any city council or nuisance abatement board order or action pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs notwithstanding, in the event the city prevails, that the attorney handling the matter may be an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 38-59. - Assessment of cost. 
(a)  The city council shall assess the entire cost of city abatement action upon the affected property as a special assessment, which assessment, when made, shall constitute a lien upon such property by the city. The lien of the city shall encompass, in addition to the abatement cost for the vacation or removal of the facility, all administrative, legal, postal and publication expenses, as well as all other direct or indirect costs associated therewith. The lien upon the property shall be superior to all others except taxes as previously set forth herein. 
(b)  The city shall file such lien in the Official Records of Jefferson County showing the nature of such lien, the amount thereof, an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address, which lien shall date from the date of the filing and recite the owners of the property. Such municipal lien shall bear interest from such date at the rate of eight percent per annum. However, the assessment may be paid without interest at any time within 30 days after the improvement is completed. The city may enforce the lien upon the real property of the owner, as provided for in F.S. ch. 173 as amended from time to time. 
(c)  In the alternative, the city may collect all such liens assessed pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632 as authorized pursuant to § 197.3632(9). 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 38-60-38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED AND NONOPERATING VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 38-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned or junked or nonoperating motor vehicle shall mean any "vehicle," if any of the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  It does not have a license tag for the current year. 
(2)  Any part, equipment or piece thereof necessary for its operation is and remains removed therefrom for a period of at least three days. 
(3)  It is on property of another without written permission of the owner of such property or premises. 
(4)  It is on property contrary to or in violation of any zoning law, regulation or ordinance. 
(5)  It is found at any location in the city and the owner or any person having custody or possession thereof cannot, after reasonable search and inquiry, be found or located. 
(6)  It is located in close proximity to a parcel or tract of land with other junked or abandoned vehicles, and is not under the control or supervision of some person whose whereabouts can be ascertained upon reasonable search and inquiry. 
(7)  For any other reason the vehicle appears, after reasonable inquiry and investigation, to be junked or abandoned. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power, other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer or tractor. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15-14, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-72. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15-15, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-73. - Leaving on street, highway or other public property. 
    No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street, highway or other public property within the city. Any vehicle which is found on public property in violation of this division shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 705.103. If it should be determined by a law enforcement officer that the location of a vehicle in violation of this division on a public street or highway of the city constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public, such vehicle may be, under such circumstances, immediately impounded to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this community. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, §15-16, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-74. - Time limit for leaving on private property; exceptions. 
    No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 72 hours; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than 72 hours. This division shall not apply with regard to the following: a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when the vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15-17, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-75. - Impoundment authorized. 
    The city shall remove or have removed any vehicle left on private property within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this division, or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15-18, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-76. - Notice prerequisite to impoundment; exception. 
    Where a vehicle on private property is in violation of this division, prior to impoundment the city shall first cause to be placed either on such vehicle, or on the property where the vehicle is located, a notice stating that such vehicle is in violation of this division. Ten days shall be allowed from the posting of such notice for the owner of the vehicle or premises to cause the same to be removed, which time shall be stated in the notice. Where there is a license tag or other information reasonably available which may assist in identifying the owner or the lienholder, if any, the city shall also contact the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles in order to determine the name and address of the owner and any person who has filed a lien on the vehicle. Upon receipt of this information, the city shall mail a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to the lienholder, if any. If at the end of ten days after posting such notice (provided that at least five days have elapsed since the mailing of any notice hereunder) the vehicle has not been removed from the property, it may be impounded, and thereafter disposed of pursuant to the provisions of section 38-77. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, §15-19, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 38-77. - Disposition of impounded vehicles. 
    If any vehicle is not removed from private property and caused to be in compliance with the terms of this division within the time allowed and such vehicle is impounded, the vehicle may be disposed of by sale. From the funds received from any such sale, there shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to assist in defraying expenses of the enforcement of this division all necessary expenses incurred in connection with the impounding and sale of such vehicle, and the balance thereof may be claimed by the rightful owner within 30 days from the date of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15-20, 12-7-1999) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire and emergency drills in schools, F.S. § 231.09; obedience to fire department officials at scene of fire, F.S. § 316.072; Florida Emergency Telephone Act, F.S. § 365.171; arson and criminal mischief, F.S. ch. 806. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Riding on fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a member of the fire department, to ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the city when the same is being used in going to or coming from a fire. 
(Code 1957, § 6-18; Code 1982, § 9-1) 
Secs. 42-2-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-31-42-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 42-51. - Fire marshal. 
(a)  The fire chief of the fire department shall designate a fire official of the city fire department as fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall be appointed on the basis of examination or other method for determining his/her qualifications. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall be the administrator of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9-41-9-43; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 3) 
Sec. 42-52. - Technical inspectors. 
    The fire chief of the city fire department may designate such number of technical inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the city council. Such technical inspectors shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(Code 1982, § 9-44; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 3) 
Sec. 42-53. - General duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage and use of explosives and flammables; 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose; 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires; 
(7)  The maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
(b)  They shall have other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter, and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. 
(Code 1982, § 9-45; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 4) 
Sec. 42-54. - Recommendation of fire safety ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire chief or the fire marshal of the city fire department to investigate and to recommend to the city such additional ordinances, or amendments to existing ordinances, as he/she may deem necessary or desirable for safeguarding life and property against fire. 
(Code 1982, § 9-46; Ord. of 11-4-1980, §§ 5, 13) 
Sec. 42-55. - Preparation of instructions and forms. 
    The fire chief of the city fire department shall prepare instructions for the fire marshal and his/her assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-47; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 6) 
Sec. 42-56. - Reports of fires. 
    Every fire shall be reported in writing to the bureau of fire prevention within one day after the occurrence of the same by the fire department officer in whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the fire marshal of the city fire department, and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof and the insurance upon such property and such other information as may be required, including the injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Code 1982, § 9-48; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 7) 
Sec. 42-57. - Investigation of fires. 
    The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. The fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(Code 1982, § 9-49; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 7) 
Sec. 42-58. - Annual report. 
    The fire marshal shall make an annual report of the activities of the bureau of fire prevention and shall transmit this report to the chief executive officer of the city through the fire chief of the city fire department. The report shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code with such statistics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. 
(Code 1982, § 9-50; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 12) 
Secs. 42-59-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 

Sec. 42-81. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Monticello Fire Prevention Code." 
(Code 1982, § 9-16; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 42-82. - Violations generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this article, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by the action of the fire chief in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such an act is that of the owner, or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, the occupant or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
(Code 1982, § 9-17; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 42-83. - Applicability of state fire prevention code. 
    The provisions of the state fire prevention code shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Code 1982, § 9-18; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 14) 
Sec. 42-84. - Violations of state fire prevention code. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the state fire prevention code referred to in F.S. § 633.025(1) ; or shall fail to comply therewith; or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications or plans submitted or approved thereunder; or shall operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit or approval issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-4. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1982, § 9-23; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 16) 
Sec. 42-85. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be established from time to time by the city council for permits, certificates, approvals and other functions performed under the state fire prevention code and shall be payable to the city. Such fees shall accompany each application for such permit, approval, certificate or other fee-related code provision. 
(Code 1982, § 9-25; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 20) 
Sec. 42-86. - Interpretation. 
    This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety and welfare, and all the provisions of the state fire prevention code shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 9-29; Ord. of 11-4-1980, § 15) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Foods generally, F.S. ch. 500. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-31-46-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEAT INSPECTION AND MARKING 

Sec. 46-51. - Inspection required. 
    All meat or meat products manufactured or processed, either in whole or in part from the meat of any animal, and which are possessed, displayed or offered for sale as human food by any person within the corporate limits of the city, shall, before being so possessed, displayed or offered for sale, be inspected by duly constituted agents of the United States of America or of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 11-4.1; Code 1982, § 10-3) 
State Law reference- Bureau of meat inspection, F.S. § 570.36. 
Sec. 46-52. - Marking required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, sell or expose for sale or to have in his/her possession with intent to sell for use as human food within the limits of the city the meat or food products manufactured in whole or in part from the meat of any animal unless such meat or products bear the official impress tag or mark of either the United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry, or of the bureau of meat inspection of the state showing the inspection and approval by either of those departments of such meat or product for human food. 
(Code 1957, § 11-4.1; Code 1982, § 10-4) 
Sec. 46-53. - Destruction of meat for noncompliance. 
    All meat and meat products or products in which material of animal origin is an integral part, and intended for use as human food, and offered for sale in the city, which do not conform to the terms and provisions of sections 46-51 and 46-52, if sold or offered for sale in the city, shall be seized and destroyed by the properly constituted authorities of the city; provided that the foregoing provisions shall be in addition to and cumulative of the penalty prescribed in section 1-4 for violations of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 11-4.2; Code 1982, § 10-5) 
Chapter 50 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 50-31. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health, and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth, handicap, or national origin, or familial status, and, to that end, to eliminate discrimination in housing. 
(Code 1982, § 11-31; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 1; Ord. of 12-18-1985, § 2; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 50-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Council means the city council of the City of Monticello. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 50-34, 50-35 or 50-36. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Familial status is established when an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years is domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual; or 
(2)  A designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Handicap means: 
(1)  A person has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, or he/she has a record of having, or is regarded as having, such physical or mental impairment; or 
(2)  A person has a developmental disability as defined in F.S. § 393.063. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1982, § 11-32; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 2) 
Sec. 50-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in sections 50-34 and 50-35 shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his/her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented (a) without the use of any manner of sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and (b) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 50-34(3); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his/her residence. 
(3)  Nothing in this article requires any person renting or selling a dwelling constructed for first occupancy before March 13, 1991, to modify, alter, or adjust the dwelling in order to provide physical accessibility except as otherwise required by law. 
(4)  a.  Any provision of this article regarding familial status does not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
b.  As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
1.  Provided under any state or federal program that the commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
2.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
3.  Intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older that meets the following requirements: 
i.  At least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. 
ii.  The housing facility or community publishes and adheres to policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent required under this subsection. If the housing facility or community meets the requirements of subsections i. and iii. of this subsection and the recorded governing documents provide for an adult, senior, or retirement housing facility or community and the governing documents lack an amendatory procedure, prohibit amendments, or restrict amendments until a specified future date, then that housing facility or community shall be deemed housing for older persons intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older. If those documents further provide a prohibition against residents 16 years of age or younger, that provision shall be construed, for purposes of the Fair Housing Act, to only apply to residents 18 years of age or younger, in order to conform with federal law requirements. Governing documents which can be amended at a future date must be amended and properly recorded within one year after that date to reflect the requirements for consideration as housing for older persons, if that housing facility or community intends to continue as housing for older persons. 
iii.  The housing facility or community complies with rules made by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to 24 CFR 100 for verification of occupancy, which rules provide for verification by reliable surveys and affidavits and include examples of the types of policies and procedures relevant to a determination of compliance with the requirements of this subsection b. Such surveys and affidavits are admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings for the purposes of such verification. 
c.  Housing shall not fail to be considered housing for older persons if: 
1.  A person who resides in such housing on or after October 1, 1989, does not meet the age requirements of this subsection, provided that any new occupant meets such age requirements; or 
2.  One or more units are unoccupied, provided that any unoccupied units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of this subsection. 
d.  A person shall not be personally liable for monetary damages for a violation of this subsection if such person reasonably relied in good faith on the application of the exemption under this subsection relating to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection d., a person may show good faith reliance on the application of the exemption only by showing that: 
1.  The person has no actual knowledge that the facility or the community is ineligible, or will become ineligible, for such exemption; and 
2.  The facility or community has stated formally, in writing, that the facility or community complies with the requirements for such exemption. 
(5)  Nothing in this article: 
a.  Prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or religion. 
b.  Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
c.  Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
d.  Prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined under F.S. ch. 893. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his/her personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, or familial status. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Code 1982, § 11-33; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 3; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 50-34. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
    As made applicable by section 50-33 and except as exempted by sections 50-33(a) and 50-36, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status. 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitations, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status. 
(6)  The protections afforded under this article against discrimination on the basis of familial status apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(7)  It is unlawful to discriminate in the sale or rental of, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(8)  It is unlawful to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(9)  For purposes of subsections (7) and (8) of this section, discrimination includes: 
a.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; or 
b.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(Code 1982, § 11-34; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 4; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 50-35. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him/her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 50-33. 
(Code 1982, § 11-35; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 5; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 50-36. - Discrimination in provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him/her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status. 
(Code 1982, § 11-36; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 6; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 50-37. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be with the council. 
(b)  The council may delegate its functions, duties and powers to an appointed board, including functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. 
(c)  The council or its appointed board shall: 
(1)  Implement the provisions of this article and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and all ordinances, codes, rules and regulations pertaining to housing discrimination. 
(2)  Receive, initiate, and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of this article, and take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent, and/or initiate prosecution of any such violations. 
(3)  Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal housing opportunity. 
(4)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing discrimination. 
(5)  Enter into written working agreements, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article, with federal, state and county agencies involved in reducing housing discrimination. 
(6)  Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued by the chairperson of the council or its appointed board. 
(7)  Take other informational, educational or persuasive actions to implement the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 11-37; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 7) 
Sec. 50-38. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article must file a written complaint with the council or its appointed board within 45 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurs. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the council or its appointed board shall serve upon the individual charged with a violation (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), the complaint and a written resume setting forth the rights of the parties including, but not limited to, the right of the respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by council or its appointed board. 
(c)  The council or its appointed board shall immediately investigate the complaint. Within 60 days from the date of the receipt of the complaint, the council or its appointed board shall establish written report with findings of fact. 
(d)  Copies of the council's or its appointed board's report shall be sent to the complainant and the respondent. Either may, within ten days after such services, request a hearing before the council. 
(e)  When the complaint or the respondent request a hearing by the council or its appointed board, or when the council or its appointed board itself determines that a hearing is desirable, the council or its appointed board shall call and conduct such hearing in accordance with section 50-39. 
(f)  The council or its appointed board shall carry into execution the actions specified in its report, or if a hearing is held, shall carry into execution the actions determined upon by the council or its appointed board in the hearing. 
(g)  The council or its appointed board in its review or its hearing may determine: 
(1)  That the complaint lacks ground upon which to base action for violation of this article; 
(2)  That the complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties; or 
(3)  That the case warrants filing charges against the offending party in the appropriate court. In some cases both conciliation and adjudicative orders, or both adjudicative orders and initiation of court action, may be indicated. 
(h)  If council or its appointed board issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, conciliate, prevent or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this article, and the respondent refuses or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the council or its appointed board shall forthwith request that the state attorney file a complaint in the appropriate court. The city council or its appointed board shall at all times provide the complainant with full and timely information as to all the alternatives available to him/her under local, state, and federal law, including assistance to initiate judicial action if desired, under the circumstances. 
(i)  The provisions of Rule 1.090, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, shall govern the computation of any period of time prescribed by this article. 
(j)  All papers or pleadings required by this article to be served may be served by certified mail or in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1.080(b), Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1982, § 11-38; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 8) 
Sec. 50-39. - Hearings. 
(a)  When a hearing is required before the council or its appointed board, as specified in section 50-38(e), the council or its appointed board shall schedule the hearing and serve upon all interested parties a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held promptly, but not less than 15 days after service of such notice and of the council's or its appointed board's written report (section 50-38(d)). 
(b)  The parties, or their authorized counsel, may file such statements with the council or its appointed board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. The parties may appear before the council or its appointed board in person or by duly constituted representative and may have the assistance of attorneys. The parties may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross-examine witnesses shall be preserved. All testimony shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The council or its appointed board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity but due process shall be observed. The council or its appointed board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which records shall be public and open to inspection by any person, and upon request by any principal party to the proceedings the council or its appointed board shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at cost. The constitutional rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself/herself shall be scrupulously observed. 
(c)  The council or its appointed board shall make a finding of fact, and a determination of action to be taken (section 50-38(g)). 
(d)  The council or its appointed board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to the complaint at issue. 
(e)  Upon written application to the council or its appointed board, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the council, or to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the council or its appointed board itself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his/her request. 
(f)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the council or its appointed board shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the state courts of Florida. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him/her, unless he/she is indigent in which case the council shall bear the cost of said fees. 
(g)  Within ten days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the council or its appointed board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The council or its appointed board shall grant the petition if it finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h)  In case of refusal to obey a subpoena, the council or its appointed board or the person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Code 1982, § 11-39; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 9) 
Sec. 50-40. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he/she might otherwise be entitled, or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 11-40; Ord. of 1-2-1985, § 10) 
Chapter 54 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Monticello Land Development Regulations Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 01.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(01.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-2. - Findings. 
(a)  F.S. ch. 163 empowers the city to enact a land development regulations ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement and amendment. 
(b)  The city council deems it necessary for the purpose of protecting, promoting and improving the health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city to enact such an ordinance. 
(c)  The city council, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 163, has designated a local planning agency for the city. 
(d)  The local planning agency has recommended and the city council has adopted a comprehensive plan. 
(e)  The city council has given reasonable consideration to the most appropriate use of land throughout the city in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(f)  The city council has given due public notice of hearings relating to land development regulations, and has held such public hearings. 
(g)  It is the desire of the city to revise and consolidate the existing land development regulation ordinances. 
(h)  All requirements of F.S. ch. 163 with regard to the preparation of the land development regulations and subsequent action of the city council have been met. 
(i)  The provisions of this chapter are hereby enacted and do hereby become the land development regulations ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 01.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(01.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish comprehensive controls for the development of land in the city based on the comprehensive plan, as defined, and designed to preserve the unique character of the city and enacted in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  The objectives of this chapter are to provide for efficiency and economy in the process of development, for the appropriate and best use of land, for preservation, protection, development and conservation of the natural resources of land, water, and air, for convenience of traffic and circulation of people and goods, for the use and occupancy of buildings, for healthful and convenient distribution of population, for adequate public facilities and utilities, for promotion of the civic amenities of beauty and visual interest, and for development in accord with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 01.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(01.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, the following rules of interpretation shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, association, organization, trust, company, or individual. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is permissive. 
(7)  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to included the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to discontinue a use for more than 180 consecutive days. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or a structure subordinate to the principal use or building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided that any such structure is built with or after the construction of the principal building. 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment means any establishment devoted primarily to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on and/or off the premises. 
    Alley means a right-of-way providing a secondary means of access and service to abutting property. 
    Alteration means any change, rearrangement, enlargement, extension, or reduction of any structure or part thereof, or relocation on the same site. 
    Animal hospital means any building or portion thereof designed or used for the veterinary care, surgical procedures, or treatment of animals, but not boarding of well animals. 
    Architect means a person licensed by the state to practice architecture. 
    Automobile repair garage means any building, structure, or land used primarily for automobile repair work, such as motor overhaul, body or fender repair, or spray painting. An automobile repair garage may also offer for sale at retail automobile fuels, oils, or accessories. 
    Automobile service facility means any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of automotive fuels. 
    Awning means an accessory structure, either temporary or permanent, which is supported by an open framework and is covered by cloth or metal material. 
    Bar. See Alcoholic beverage establishment . 
    Bed and breakfast home (host home) means a private residence or other structure on a homeowner's property (such as a guesthouse or cabin) that is used to accommodate paying guests overnight in which breakfast (either continental or full) is provided. 
    Boarding house (rooming house) means a building other than a hotel or motel where lodging with or without meals for three or more persons not of the immediate family is provided for compensation. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average finished grade of all exterior corners to the highest point of the building, not including those structures specifically permitted to extend beyond the height of the building. On any site where construction is required to adhere to the base flood elevation, as established for the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, the building height is the vertical distance from the first living level or the tidal floodplain, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the building not including those structures specifically permitted to extend beyond the height of the building. 
    Building setback means the required minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear, or side lines of the lot and the front, rear, or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property lines so grouped shall be used in determining building setback when the interior common lot line is straddled by the principal structure. 
    Building site means that part of a parcel of land designed to be occupied by the principal building and such accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it. 
    Cafeteria. See Restaurant . 
    Center line of street. That line surveyed and monumented by the governing body shall be the center line of the street, or if such a center line has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of such street. 
    Certified survey means a survey, sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit containing a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which is certified and signed by the registered surveyor under whose supervision said survey was prepared. 
    Child care center means any establishment which provides care for more than five children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care wherever operated and whether or not operated for profit. The term "child care center" shall include day nurseries, day care services, and day care agencies, but not foster homes. 
    City means the City of Monticello located within Jefferson County, Florida. 
    Clinic, medical, means a facility which does not provide for overnight accommodations and in which professional services concerning personal health of humans are administered by medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any other such profession which may lawfully be practiced in the state. 
    Clinic, veterinary, means a facility which provides for outpatient care of animals wholly within a soundproof, air-conditioned structure, and wherein there are no overnight boarding accommodations for animals. 
    Club, private, means a building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    Common lot line means a line dividing one lot or parcel from another. 
    Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan, as defined by F.S. ch. 163, as adopted by the city, and which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, public utilities, land use, or other similar information. 
    Condominium means a form of ownership as defined by Florida Statutes. 
    County means Jefferson County, Florida. 
    Coverage. See Lot coverage . 
    Day nursery. See Child care center . 
    Density means the number of residential dwelling units permitted on a particular lot when the applicable zoning district minimum lot size for a one dwelling unit is multiplied by the aggregate acreage of said lot. Density is always expressed in terms of dwelling units per acre (d.u./ac.). 
    Development administrator means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Development rights means the number of residential dwellings units or the amount of commercial and/or industrial square footage which may be constructed on a particular parcel or lot as specified in the zoning district regulations. 
    District means any certain described area to which these regulations apply and within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    Dwelling unit (d.u.) means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family (apartment and condominium), means a building designed for and/or containing three or more dwelling units. The term includes adult congregate living facilities. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for and/or containing only one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed for and/or containing two dwelling units. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of his or her land to another party for a specific purpose, and also includes any strip of land created by a subdivider for public or private utilities, drainage, sanitation, or other specified uses having limitations, the title to which shall remain in the name of the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the servitude. 
    Engineer means a person professionally licensed by the state to practice engineering. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities, city, county, or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead electrical, gas, potable water, sanitary sewer and communications transmission, distribution, or collection systems including related wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, and utility substation facilities necessary for the furnishing of adequate services for the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
    Excavation means removal of 100 cubic yards or more of earth material for a purpose other than that incidental to and on the site of authorized construction. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling, not more than three of whom are unrelated to each other by birth, adoption, or marriage. "Family" includes a community residential home, as defined in F.S. § 419.001(1)(a), with no more than six residents, and a family day care home, as defined in F.S. § 402.302(7). 
    Fence (garden wall) means any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or other materials which is erected for the purpose of privacy, protection, or ornamentation. 
    Frontage means the boundary line of a lot bordering on a public right-of-way. 
    Garage, private parking, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, public parking, means a building or structure designed or used for the storage of vehicles. 
    Garage, repair, means a building or establishment wherein the major repair of vehicles and vehicle-related accessories is conducted. The sale of fuels and motor oils and the rental of trailers may be permitted. 
    Governing body means the city council of the City of Monticello as legally constituted. 
    Grade (finish) means the finished elevation of a site after all fill, land balancing, or site preparations have been completed. 
    Home occupation means the occupation of an individual and/or members of his or her immediate family conducted entirely in their dwelling when such dwelling is the principal use of the property and all the conditions of this chapter for home occupations can be affirmatively evidenced and complied with. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or buildings under common ownership, interest, and single management, as licensed by the state, containing individual guest rooms for which daily or weekly lodging is provided for the more or less transient residence of individuals or families. 
    Hotel or motel efficiency means a unit within a hotel or motel, as defined herein, with individual sleeping and cooking facilities. 
    Hotel or motel unit means a unit within a hotel or motel, as defined herein, with individual sleeping facilities. 
    Junk means inoperative, dilapidated, abandoned, or wrecked materials, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, tractors, wagons, boats, and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap materials, scrap building material, scrap contractors' equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery and the like. 
    Junkyard means a place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition, used or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
    Kennel means an establishment where domestic animals are bred, boarded, or sold. 
    Landfill (earth, soil, and hard materials) means addition of 100 yards or more of earth, topsoil, sand, gravel, rock, concrete products, or bricks to any lot or parcel other than that incidental to and on the site of authorized construction. 
    Landscape architect means a person licensed by the state to practice landscape architecture. 
    Landscape area or green space means an area or areas, including beautification strips, consisting of materials such as, but not limited to, hedges, trees, planted ground cover, sodded and grassed areas, or planted floral installations, all of which must be composed of natural plantings only, as distinguished from artificially manufactured plant reproductions. 
    Loading space (berth) means a space which provides for the loading or unloading of service vehicles and has a minimum size of 12 feet in width, 30 feet in length, and 14 feet in height. 
    Lot includes tract or parcel and means the least fractional part of subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries, and an assigned number, letter, or other name through which it may be identified, and having frontage upon a public or private right-of-way or easement for ingress and egress purposes. (See Parcel .) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 177.031(16). 
    Lot area means the horizontal plane area within the lot lines expressed in this chapter in square feet or acres exclusive of public or private dedications. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or at a street corner having an interior angle not greater than 135 degrees. All boundaries abutting streets shall be considered front yards; all other boundaries shall be considered side yards. 
    Lot coverage means the area of the lot expressed as a percentage of the total lot area covered by the ground floor of all principal and accessory uses and structures, including all areas covered by the roof of such uses and structures measured along the exterior faces of the walls or along the foundation wall line or between the exterior faces of supporting columns or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings or as a combination of the foregoing whichever produces the greatest total ground coverage for such uses and structures. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite mean rear line of the lot. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on one street only. 
    Lot line means the line bounding a lot, as herein defined, and as established by ownership, except that where a lot line lies within a private street or waterway, the edge of the private street right-of-way or waterway shall be considered to be the lot line for the purposes of calculating density, lot, yard, and bulk requirements. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, or a parcel recorded by metes and bounds at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Lot, through (double frontage), means an interior lot which has street frontages at opposite boundaries of the lot, excluding alleys. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the front building setback line of the lot as determined by the prescribed front yard requirements of the zoning district. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home park means a tract of land prepared and approved according to this chapter to accommodate ten or more mobile homes. 
    Mobile home site means a space or plot of ground within a mobile home park or subdivision designated for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a platted residential subdivision in which the dwelling units consist of mobile homes and accessory residential structures. 
    Motel. See Hotel or motel . 
    Nonconforming lot means a single lot, tract, or parcel of land shown on either a recorded or unrecorded map, plat, drawing, or survey under the ownership of a single person, or combination of persons acting as a unit, where such map, plat, drawing or survey was in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such lot failing to meet the requirements for area, width, and/or depth for any permitted use within the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure or use means a structure or land use legally existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendment thereto, which does not conform to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursery school or kindergarten means any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of nonresident children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system, whether or not for compensation, as licensed by the state. 
    Nursing home or convalescent home means a home for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured as licensed by the state. 
    Office means a building, room, or space where clerical or administrative activities are performed or wherein specialized services, such as those of a doctor, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, chiropractor, osteopath, insurance agent, or real estate broker, are provided. 
    Official zoning map means the official zoning map of the city, which depicts the zoning district classifications of this chapter. Said map is herewith adopted by reference and shall not be changed except by order of the governing body as provided for herein. 
    Open space (permeable) means any portion of a lot or parcel not required, designated, or encumbered by either principal or accessory uses, buildings and structures, and other site uses, such as traffic circulation or parking. Such open area may be landscaped or retained in the natural state; however, no improvements or alterations will be permitted which would hinder the area's natural percolation of rainwater or storm water runoff. 
    Parcel means a tract of land which may be described by metes and bounds or plat. (See Lot .) 
    Parking lot means an open area used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles, whether or not a fee is charged. 
    Parking space means an area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle and permitting the necessary ingress and egress of a motor vehicle. 
    Permitted use means the specific purpose or purposes for which land or building are maintained in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this chapter. 
    Plat means any plan, map, sketch, chart or other graphic representation of the subdivision of land. 
    Plat of record means a plat which conforms to all the requirements of the applicable laws of the state and this chapter and which has been filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court for the county. 
    Premises means any lot and/or all buildings and structures thereon. 
    Principal use or structure means a use or a structure in which is conducted the predominant or primary function or activity of the lot upon which it is located. 
    Property line. See Lot line . 
    Property owners' association means a nonprofit organization recognized as such under the laws of the state and operated under recorded land agreements through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision, be it a lot, home, property, or any other interest, is automatically subject to a charge for a prorated share of expenses, either direct or indirect, for maintaining common properties within the subdivision, such as roads, parks, recreational area, common areas, or other similar properties. Within the text of this chapter, a property owners' association is considered a single entity for property ownership. 
    Public notice means the legal advertisement given of an action or proposed action of a governing body as set forth in this chapter or applicable statutes of the state. 
    Recreation vehicle. The following types of vehicles are deemed recreation vehicles: 
(1)  Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and towed; designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses; permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer on the trailer; and, when factory equipped for the road, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 32 feet. 
(2)  Motor home: A self-powered vehicle designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses. 
(3)  Pickup coach: A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses. 
(4)  Camping trailer: A collapsible temporary dwelling structure covered with a water repellent fabric, mounted on wheels, and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation uses. 
(5)  Auto camper: A lightweight, collapsible unit that fits on top of an automobile, and into the truck with the cover removed, and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation uses. 
(6)  All terrain vehicles: Dune buggies, swamp buggies, and the like shall be considered recreation vehicles for the purposes of this chapter whether or not licensed as such by the state. 
    Rest home. See Nursing home . 
    Restaurant means an establishment where food is ordered from a menu, prepared, and served for pay, for consumption on the premises in a completely enclosed room, under the roof of the main structure or in an interior or exterior court, including a cafeteria but not a drive-in restaurant. 
    Restaurant, drive-in, means any food or beverage dispensing operation at retail to the general public where said public is served while remaining in automobiles or other motor vehicles, For purposes of this definition, fast food chains or operations shall be considered as drive-in restaurants. 
    Right-of-way means land dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, drainage facility, access for ingress and egress, or other purpose by the public, certain designated individuals, or governing bodies. 
    Service station. See Automobile service facility . 
    Setback means the distance between the lot line and the building line. 
    Shopping center means five or more commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as an integral unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in its location, size, and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
    Shrub means a low growing perennial, woody, evergreen plant with persistent stems. 
    Special exception (conditional use) means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, and relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or prosperity, and is permissible. Such uses may be in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this chapter. 
    State means the State of Florida and all its duly appointed agencies. 
    Store, convenience, means a small retail establishment which sells a general line of goods and products intended for the convenience of surrounding residents and whose gross floor area does not exceed 3,000 square feet. 
    Store, personal service, means an establishment which provides personal services directly to the consumer, such as barber shops, beauty shops, and dry cleaners, but which does not have as its primary function the sale of retail goods. 
    Store, retail, means an establishment which sells goods or products directly to the public for compensation whose gross floor area is 3,001 square feet or greater. 
    Street includes any access way such as a street, road, lane, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, parkway, viaduct, circle, court, terrace, place, or cul-de-sac, and also includes all of the land lying between the right-of-way lines as delineated on a plat showing such streets, whether improved or unimproved, but shall not include those access ways such as easements and rights-of-way intended solely for limited utility purposes, such as for electric power lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, drainage and sanitary sewers, and easements of ingress and egress. 
    Structural alteration means any change, except the repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or the rearrangement of interior partitions and/or space affecting more than 20 percent of the total floor area of the building. 
    Structure means anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, docks, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks, and advertising signs. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into three or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land; and includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and resubdivisions; and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided, and also includes a subdivision of any parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of any transfer of ownership, right to possession or building development; also, the establishment of a street and the replatting of existing plats. 
    Surveyor means a person licensed by the state to practice land surveying. 
    Townhouse means a building or structure designed for and/or containing one dwelling unit and or intended for occupancy by not more than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings or structures by not more than two party walls extending from the foundation to the roof and providing two direct means of access from the outside. For the purpose of this chapter, a townhouse may include a building or structure in fee simple, condominium, cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof. 
    Trailer, house. See Mobile home . 
    Trailer, travel. See Recreation vehicle . 
    Use, accessory. See Accessory use . 
    Use, principal. See Principal use . 
    Variance means a relaxation granted by the city council as provided for herein of the area or dimensional requirements or other provision of this chapter, but not including use regulations, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vehicle means a conveyance for persons or materials as may be licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 2.01, 3.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.01, 03.08), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-5. - Conflicting regulations. 
    In case of conflict between this chapter, or any part thereof, and any other existing or future ordinance or code, the most restrictive in each case shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(15.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-6. - Severability. 
    If any part of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, it is the council's intent that the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed and held to be valid as if the invalid part had not been adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(15.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-7. - Approval of development generally. 
    No development may be approved unless it is found that the development is in conformance with the comprehensive plan of the city and that the provision of certain public facilities will be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impacts of the development on those facilities. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-8. - Determination of consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    If a development proposal is found to meet all the requirements of this chapter, it shall be presumed to be in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan in all respects except for compliance with the concurrency requirement. Any aggrieved or adversely affected party may, however, question the consistency of a development proposal with the city's comprehensive plan. If a question of consistency is raised, the development administrator or any of the appointed boards, or the city council, depending on which is responsible for approving the development, shall make a determination of consistency or inconsistency and support that determination with written findings. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 2.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-9. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Continuation of use. 
(1)  A use, building or structure, lawfully in existence at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of such ordinance, or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  A use, building or structure is, for the purposes of this chapter, a nonconforming use if the use, building or any physical characteristics of said use or building are not in full compliance with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
(b)  Regulation of nonconforming uses and structures. No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, except when changed to a conforming use or when required to do so by law and as follows: 
(1)  Restoration. Any nonconforming structure which has less than 50 percent of its previous existing floor area made unsafe or unusable may be restored or reconstructed for its intended use, provided that the floor area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the floor area which existed prior to such damage. All repairs shall be completed within one year after damages occur or such use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use. 
(2)  Repairs. Normal maintenance repair and incidental alteration of a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, provided it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use. A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livability; provided, however, that no structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units. 
(3)  Site alterations. Site alterations, including but not limited to off-street parking rearrangement or enlargement of nonbuilding recreational facilities of a nonconforming use, are permitted, provided that: 
a.  The use is nonconforming because one or more physical characteristics, not including use, of the development are nonconforming. 
b.  The proposed alterations do not increase the degree of nonconformity. 
(c)  Termination of nonconforming uses and structures. 
(1)  Abandonment. A nonconforming use not used for a period of six months, or the change of use to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of time, shall be considered an abandonment thereof, and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived. 
(2)  Partial destruction. When 50 percent or more of the existing floor area of a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or other casualty or act of God and as a result becomes unsafe or unusable, the use of such structure as a nonconforming use shall thereafter be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.04), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-10-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - Administrative official designated. 
    The city council hereby designates the development administrator, as defined, as the administrative official charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing this chapter. As provided for, this responsibility may be delegated to other staff personnel of the city; however, final responsibility and authority shall remain with the development administrator. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-32. - Powers and duties of development administrator. 
(a)  The development administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter. The development administrator is authorized to act through aides and assistants. In the performance of his or her duties, the development administrator may request the assistance of any officer or agency of the city. 
(b)  The development administrator shall investigate promptly complaints of violations, reporting findings and actions to complainants, and shall use best endeavors to prevent violations or to detect and secure the correction of violations. The development administrator shall order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes, and discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or shall take any other lawful action authorized by this chapter necessary to insure compliance with or to prevent violations of this chapter. 
(c)  It is the intent of this chapter that questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the development administrator. 
(d)  The development administrator shall maintain written records of all official actions with relation to land development regulation administration, and of all complaints and actions taken with regard thereto, and of all violations discovered by whatever means, with remedial action taken and disposition of all cases, and the same shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-33. - Enforcement procedures; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement generally. The purpose of this section is to develop rules and procedures to enforce this chapter. The development administrator and code enforcement board, pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, shall enforce this chapter according to the procedures set forth below. 
(b)  Interlocal enforcement agreement. The city shall enter into an interlocal agreement with the county to administer and enforce the planning and zoning sections of this chapter and applicable state building codes. This shall include all building permits, development orders and inspections. 
(c)  Initiation of enforcement procedures. When the development department has reason to believe that the provisions of this chapter or any previous order of the code enforcement board or administrative official is being violated, it shall initiate enforcement proceedings via the code enforcement officer. No member of the code enforcement board may initiate enforcement proceedings. 
(d)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(e)  Enforcement process. 
(1)  A notice of violation shall be served upon the owner, agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant to terminate and abate the violation in 30 days of the date such notice is received by certified mail, hand delivery, or advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. Such notice of violation shall include a sufficient description by address and/or legal description to identify the property upon which the violation exists; a description of the violation to be terminated and abated; and a statement that if the described violation is not terminated and abated within 30 days after notice as herein provided, the code enforcement board may order the code enforcement officer to cause the violation to be terminated and abated, and to impose a lien upon the property for the actual cost of such termination and abatement. 
(2)  If such violation has not been terminated and abated within the 30-day period a second notice shall be sent to the offender indicating that a code enforcement hearing has been scheduled. Such second notice of violation shall further state the date, time and place in which the violation will be scheduled for hearing before the code enforcement board. 
(3)  If a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the code enforcement officer shall immediately take the case before the code enforcement board, even if the violator has not been notified. 
(f)  Enforcement hearings. All hearings before the code enforcement board pertaining to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. The code enforcement board may issue whatever orders are necessary to bring the violation into compliance, including an order which directs the code inspector to cause the violation to be terminated and abated, and which further orders that a lien be placed on the property in an amount equal to the actual cost of terminating and abating the violation. No order of the code enforcement board shall cause a violation to be terminated and abated before the time has run out for appealing such order. 
(1)  After a case is set for hearing, the code enforcement board may issue subpoenas as requested by the development department and the alleged violator. Subpoenas may be served by the county sheriff. The city shall pay all costs of issuing and serving up to and including four subpoenas requested by any party. Should a party request more than four subpoenas, that party shall pay all costs incurred in issuing and serving those in excess of four. 
(2)  Hearings before the code enforcement board shall be conducted as follows: 
a.  The administrator shall read the statement of violations and request for hearing. 
b.  The alleged violator shall be asked if he or she wishes to contest the charges. 
c.  The city shall present its case and alleged violator shall present his or her case. The city's case shall be presented by an attorney representing the city or by a member of the administrative staff of the city or a city code enforcement officer. The alleged violator's case may be presented by an attorney, or other representative chosen by the alleged violator. 
d.  Both parties may call witnesses and all witnesses shall be sworn. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. 
e.  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed. 
f.  Both parties may cross examine witnesses and present rebuttal evidence. 
g.  The board and its attorney may call or question any witness. 
h.  After all evidence has been submitted, the chair shall close presentation of evidence. 
i.  The board shall immediately deliberate and make a decision in open session. If a decision cannot be reached in the initial meeting, the board shall adjourn and reconsider the matter as soon as possible at a time and date certain. 
j.  A decision of the board must be approved by a majority of the members of the board present, except that at least three members of the board must vote in order for the action to be official. The decision shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall state the affirmative relief granted by the board. 
k.  The decision shall be announced as an oral order of the board and shall be reduced to writing within ten days and mailed to the parties. 
l.  The board may, at any hearing, order the reappearance of a party at a future hearing. 
(3)  The code enforcement board, upon finding a violation, shall issue an order to comply, setting a date certain for compliance, and a fine to be levied if the deadline for compliance is not met. The fine shall not exceed $250.00 for each day the violation continues past the specified compliance date. For repeat violations, the fine shall not exceed $500.00 per day. 
(4)  After an order has been issued by the code enforcement board and a date for compliance has been set, the code enforcement officer or other designated city official shall make a reinspection to determine compliance or noncompliance with the order. 
(5)  The inspector shall file an affidavit of compliance or noncompliance with the administrator of the code enforcement board, and a copy shall be sent to the violator by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(6)  If the development administrator files an affidavit of compliance, the administrator of the code enforcement board shall close the file and so report to the board. 
(7)  If the development administrator files an affidavit of noncompliance with the code enforcement board, the board may order the violator to pay the fine as specified in the board's order. 
(8)  A copy of the order imposing the fine shall be mailed to the violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally served upon the violator. 
(9)  If a fine remains unpaid for a period of 14 days, a certified copy of the order imposing the fine shall be recorded in the official records of the county, which shall thereafter constitute a lien against the land on which the violations exist, or if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator, and may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the county sheriff, including levy against personal property. If the fine remains unpaid for a period of one year following the date the lien was filed, the board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. 
(10)  In addition to the penalties prescribed above, the code enforcement board shall: 
a.  Direct the development administrator not to issue any subsequent development orders for the development until the violation has been corrected. 
b.  Inform the violator that no further work under an existing approval may proceed until the violation has been corrected. 
(g)  Lien. 
(1)  If the code enforcement board orders that a violation of this chapter be terminated and that a lien be placed on the property for the actual cost thereof, the development administrator shall, within 15 days from the date any such work is completed, cause to be prepared a claim of lien describing the real property upon which a lien is claimed, the date of completion of the work, the actual cost of terminating and abating the violation and have attached as an exhibit to the claim of lien a certified copy of the code enforcement board order imposing the lien. The claim of lien shall be filed in the official record books of the public records of the county. The development administrator shall further cause to be published one time, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, a notice setting forth the lien held by the county against each piece of real property by lot and block number or other proper description. 
(2)  Any person owning or having interest, legal or equitable, in the real property shall have the right, within 30 days after the publication of the notice of lien, to present to the code enforcement board a sworn petition stating his or her interest in the property and alleging that, in the opinion of the petitioner, the cost of such work as shown in the claim of lien filed in the official records book of the public records of the county exceeds the actual cost thereof or is otherwise erroneously entered, and shall be heard upon such petition. The petition may be accompanied by the documentary evidence showing that the cost of the work as shown in the claim of the lien exceeds the actual cost or is erroneously entered. If it shall appear to the satisfaction of the code enforcement board that the cost is erroneously stated, then the code enforcement board shall so declare, and shall correct the amount to be charged against such real property as is correct, and the development administrator shall have the corrected claim of lien for such amount filed in the official record books of the public records of the county. 
(3)  Where no sworn petition is filed pursuant to subsection (2), the cost of such work as shown in the recorded claim of lien shall become a fixed lien on the real property upon which the work has been done. 
(h)  Other penalties and remedies. 
(1)  Generally. If the code enforcement board determines that the code enforcement process delineated above would be an inadequate response to a given violation, it may pursue the following penalties and remedies, as provided by law. 
(2)  Lot sales limited to approved subdivision. It shall be unlawful for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land to transfer, sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat or subdivision of such land without having submitted a plan and plat of such subdivision for approval as required by this chapter and recorded the approved subdivision plat as required. 
(3)  False representation as to maintenance responsibility. Any owner or agent of the owner who falsely represents to a prospective purchaser of real estate that any facilities and services such as roads, sewers, water systems or drainage facilities will be built, constructed or maintained by the city shall be punishable as approve by law. 
(4)  Civil remedies. If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or maintained or any building, structure, land or water is used in violation of this chapter, the development administrator, through the city attorney, may institute any appropriate civil action or proceedings in any court to prevent, correct, or abate the violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to fine and imprisonment as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.02(A)-(H)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-34. - Action on building permits. 
    The development administrator shall be responsible for determining whether applications for building permits of the city are in accord with the requirements of this chapter, and no building permit shall be issued without written certification that plans submitted conform to applicable land development regulations. No building permit shall be issued by the development administrator except in conformity with the provisions this chapter, unless the development administrator shall receive a written order in the form of an administrative review, interpretation, special exception, or variance as provided by this chapter, or unless he or she shall receive a written order from the governing body or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-35. - Building permit procedures. 
(a)  Application information. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by two copies of the plot and construction plans drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; the exact size and location on the lot of the building or buildings to be erected or altered; the existing use of buildings on the lot, if any; the intended use of each building or buildings or parts thereof; the number of families the building is designed to accommodate; the location and number of required off-street parking and off-street loading spaces; and such other information with regard to the lot and existing and proposed structures as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Record of action on plans. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the development administrator, after marking such copy either as approved or disapproved and attesting to same by the development administrator's signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the development administrator as part of the public record. 
(c)  Display. All building permits shall be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the premises affected and protected from the weather whenever construction work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor, workman or any other person shall perform any building operations of any kind unless a building permit covering such operation has been displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall they perform building operations of any kind after notification of the revocation of said building permit. 
(d)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced in the form of actual construction within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced; provided, that, for cause, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed, and such extensions shall be in writing by the development administrator. 
(e)  Construction and use to be as provided in application; status of permit issued in error. 
(1)  Building permits issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by the development administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction different from that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as set out in this chapter. 
(2)  Statements made by the applicant on the building permit application shall be deemed official statements. Approval of the application by the development administrator shall in no way exempt the applicant from strict observance of applicable provisions of this chapter nor grant any rights or privileges to the applicant to proceed to construction, and the city council shall have the power to revoke such permit if actual construction has not commenced. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-36. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy, of any building, premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of land development regulation compliance shall have been issued by the development administrator stating that the proposed use of the structure or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of land development regulation compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this chapter upon completion of the work. 
(b)  Temporary certificate of compliance. A temporary certificate of land development regulation compliance may be issued by the development administrator for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as are necessary in the circumstances to protect the safety of occupants and the general public. 
(c)  Records; violations. 
(1)  The development administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of land development regulation compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(2)  Failure to obtain a certificate of land development regulation compliance as set out in this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by law. 
(3)  Certificates of land development regulation compliance issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by the development administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction different from that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-37. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees shall be established by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-38. - Assurance of completion of public improvements. 
    Where, by the terms of this chapter or other applicable regulations or ordinances of the city, provision is made for insuring to the city council that the public improvements required will be constructed as required, the following procedures and regulations shall govern. Before any building permit is issued in such situation, the city council shall require the applicant to present satisfactory evidence that full provision has been made for public improvements, including, but not limited to, utility lines, sanitary sewers. storm sewers, construction or reconstruction of streets or alleys, street signs, and traffic devices or signals. Where such public improvements are to be constructed by the applicant in accordance with the applicant's permit, the city council shall require security satisfactory to the city council in the form of (i) a deposit in cash or cashier's check or (ii) a performance and payment bond in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost of such improvements. The purpose of this requirement is to insure to the city council that the public improvements required will be properly and timely completed and paid for. The form of any such bond or sureties thereon shall be subject to the approval of the attorney for the city council as to form and correctness prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-39. - Special permits for temporary uses. 
    Certain uses are temporary in character. They vary in type and degree, as well as length of time involved. Such uses may have little impact on surrounding and nearby properties or they may present questions involving potential incompatibility of the temporary use with existing uses. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the following regulations shall govern temporary uses: 
(1)  Temporary use permits issued by city council. 
a.  The city council may issue a temporary use permit for the following uses: 
In agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts: commercial circuses, carnivals, outdoor concerts, and similar uses. 
b.  Requests for such a permit shall be submitted in writing to the development administrator together with such reasonable costs as the city council may determine through action in setting fees. The development administrator shall forward and shall erect a sign advertising the request on a prominent position on said land. The local planning agency shall handle such matters in a public session as part of a previously prepared agenda, however, no public notice and hearing is required. All matters relating to local planning agency consideration of temporary use permits shall be a public record. At the public session, any person may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The local planning agency shall submit its report and recommendations to the board of city council. The local planning agency report and recommendations shall be advisory only and not binding upon the city council. 
c.  Within a reasonable time after receiving the local planning agency report and recommendations, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the request. The city council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties involved. At the hearing, any person may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The city council shall take final action on the request by either approving, approving with conditions, or denying the request. 
d.  Prior to granting a temporary use permit, the city council shall insure that: 
1.  Any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably separate from adjacent uses. 
2.  Excessive vehicular traffic will not be generated on minor residential streets. 
3.  A vehicular parking problem will not be created. 
e.  The temporary use permit, if granted, shall be granted for a specific time period, at the end of which if the use permitted has not been discontinued, it shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
f.  Appropriate conditions and safeguards may include, but are not limited to, reasonable time limits within which the action for which temporary use permit is requested shall be begun or completed, or both. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Temporary use permits issued by development administrator. Certain uses are of short duration or do not create excessive incompatibility during the course of the use. The development administrator is authorized to issue temporary use permits for the following activities, after a showing that any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably separated form adjacent uses, excessive vehicular traffic will not be generated on minor residential streets, and a vehicular parking problem will not be created: 
a.  In any zoning district: Special events operated by nonprofit, eleemosynary organizations. 
b.  In any zoning district: Christmas tree sales lots operated by nonprofit, eleemosynary organizations. 
c.  In any zoning district: Other uses which are similar to subsections a. and b. above and which are of a temporary nature where the period of use will not extend beyond 30 days. 
d.  In any zoning district: Mobile homes or travel trailers used for temporary purposes by any agency of municipal, county, state, or federal government, provided such uses shall not be or include a residential use. 
e.  In any zoning district: Mobile homes or travel trailers used as a residence, temporary office, security shelter, or shelter for materials of goods incident to construction on or development of the premises upon which the mobile home or travel is located. Such use shall be strictly limited to the time construction or development is actively underway. In no event shall the use continue more than 12 months without the approval of the city council and the city council shall give such approval only upon finding that actual construction is continuing. 
f.  In agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts: Temporary religious or revival activities in tents. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.08), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-40. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Authority of council. The city council shall hear and decide only those special exceptions which are specifically authorized for them to pass on under the terms of article III of this chapter. The city council shall decide such questions as are involved in determining when special exceptions should be granted, determining appropriate conditions and safeguards or denying special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for a special exception, the development administrator shall examine such application and make his or her recommendation thereon together with all supporting documentation, and shall transmit a copy of the application, together with all supporting and explanatory information, to the city council and the city attorney. 
(2)  Prior to the city council's consideration of an application for a special exception, the city attorney shall render an opinion to the council as to whether the special exception application is in fact a special exception under the provisions of this chapter, and is within the province of the city council. 
(c)  Decisions. 
(1)  Prior to rendering a decision on an application for a special exception use, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application for approval of a special exception use. The city council shall fix a reasonable time of day for the hearing and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties involved. 
(2)  At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(d)  Conditions. In granting any special exception, the city council, in addition to the standards provided in article III of this chapter, shall find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest. In addition, the city council may: 
(1)  Require appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.09), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-41. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority of council. The city council may authorize a variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a request for a variance from the terms of this chapter, the development administrator shall transmit the request, together with all supporting documentation, to the city council. Concurrently, the development administrator shall transmit a copy of the appeal with all supporting and explanatory information to the city attorney. 
(2)  Prior to the city council's consideration of a request for a variance, the city attorney shall render an opinion to the city council as to whether the request is within the province of the city council. 
(c)  Decisions. 
(1)  In order to authorize any variance, the city council must and shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it if each specific case that all of the following conditions are present: 
a.  The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this chapter were to be carried out; 
b.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district; 
c.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
d.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, buildings or structures in the same zoning district; 
e.  The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire for economic or other material gain by the applicant or owner; 
f.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
g.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
(2)  In granting any variance, the city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The city council may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be begun or completed or both. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall the city council grant a variance to permit a use which is not generally or by special exception permitted in the zoning district involved or any use which is expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in the zoning district. No nonconforming use of neighborhood lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 02.05.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(02.05.10), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-42. - Local planning agency (LPA). 
    In addition to other responsibilities vested in the local planning agency by this chapter and other city ordinances, the city's local planning agency (LPA) shall review all applications for special exceptions, variances, zoning changes, all site plans, subdivision preliminary plats, and all applications for approval of planned unit developments (PUD), including concept plans and final development plans, and submit recommendations thereon to the city council. The city council or mayor may request that the LPA review any other matter requiring action by the city council, and submit a recommendation regarding such matter to the council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § 1(02.05.11), 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Secs. 54-43-54-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 54-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of site plan review is to assist both the city and the applicant in the review of certain applications for building permits, and to insure compliance with the provisions and intent of all applicable standards and requirements as set forth by the city. The procedure is intended to insure that the location of structures, circulation and parking facilities and other site amenities, quantities and standards are provided in the furtherance of the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare. It is also the step to determine whether public facilities have capacity available to service the new development. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.01), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-72. - Best development practices checklist. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide a checklist for the site plan review process. Applications for site plan review should generally address the items listed below, depending on the development type. However, strict adherence is not required. 
(1)  Land use practices. 
a.  Reduce vehicle miles of travel (VMT) and strip development by encouraging mixed-use development. 
b.  Contribute to the areas jobs-housing balance. 
c.  Encourage a mixture of land uses, including, residential, office, and neighborhood commercial and civic uses. 
d.  Develop in clusters and keep clusters small. 
e.  Place higher density housing near commercial centers and parks. 
f.  Phase convenience shopping and recreational opportunities to keep pace with housing. 
g.  Make subdivisions into neighborhoods, with well-defined edges and centers. 
h.  Reserve school sites in large developments; donate them if necessary to attract new schools. 
i.  Concentrate commercial development in compact centers or districts, rather than letting it spread out in strips along roadways. 
j.  Encourage shopping centers and business parks to become all-purpose activity centers. 
k.  Minimize impact of auto-oriented land uses, and/or incorporate pedestrian linkages by clearly establishing pedestrian walkways and bikeways. Utilization of brick pavers can be used to delineate pedestrian pathways to and between typical auto-oriented land uses. 
(2)  Transportation practices. 
a.  Design the street network with multiple connections and relatively direct routes. 
b.  Space through-streets no more than half a mile apart, or the equivalent route in a curvilinear network. 
c.  Keep speeds on local, residential streets to no more than 25 mph. 
d.  Keep speeds on arterials and collectors that are in residential areas to no more than 35 mph. 
e.  Use traffic calming measures in residential areas, such as speed humps with a 20-mph design speed. 
f.  Keep all streets as narrow as possible. 
g.  Align streets to give buildings energy-efficient orientation. 
h.  Avoid using traffic signals where possible and space signals for good traffic progression. 
i.  Provide networks for pedestrians and bicyclists as good as the network for motorists. 
j.  Provide pedestrians and bicyclists with shortcuts and alternatives to travel along high-volume streets. 
(3)  Environmental practices. 
a.  Encourage a systems approach to environmental planning. 
b.  Channel and guide development into areas that are already developed. 
c.  Preserve areas of high-quality habitat, as large and circular as possible, feathered at the edges and connected by wildlife and agricultural corridors. 
d.  Design around significant wetlands. 
e.  Establish upland buffers around all retained wetlands and natural water bodies. 
f.  Preserve significant uplands. 
g.  Restore and enhance ecological functions damaged by prior site activities. 
h.  Minimize runoff by clustering development and using efficient stormwater facilities, designed as amenities not eyesores surrounded by chain link fences. 
i.  Detain runoff with open, natural drainage systems. 
j.  Design man-made lakes and stormwater ponds for maximum environmental value. 
k.  Use reclaimed water on large developments with large landscaped areas. 
l.  Use and require use of xeriscape landscaping, where feasible. 
(4)  Housing practices. 
a.  Achieve an average net residential density of six or seven units/acre (site built housing only) of units per acre in accordance with the designated zoning district. 
b.  Use cost effective site development and construction practices. 
c.  Design in energy efficient features. 
d.  Supply affordable single-family homes for moderate-income families. 
e.  Supply affordable multifamily and accessory housing for low-income households. 
f.  Tap into government housing programs to broaden and deepen the housing/income mix, including the state housing initiatives partnership (SHIP) program. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.01(A)), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-73. - Development and uses requiring site plan review. 
    The following uses of land and development shall require a site plan for review and approval: 
(1)  Permitted uses. All permitted uses within all districts, except single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and their accessory uses and structures. Site plan review will also be required for placement of any prefabricated or modular units on nonresidentially-zoned properties, whether the units are intended for temporary or permanent use, except for those specific allowable temporary uses permitted in accordance with section 54-39. 
(2)  Special exception uses. All special exception uses within all districts. 
(3)  Alterations or remodeling. All building or structural alterations or remodeling, except single-family detached dwellings, where said alterations or remodeling affect 50 percent or more of the floor area of the principal building or use; or the cost of said alterations or remodeling exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the improvements on the site prior to the alterations or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.02), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 2013-13, § 1, 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 54-74. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  In order to expedite the review of a site plan, coordinate its local review in respect to the provisions of all applicable city ordinances, and to inform the city of a site plan in preparation, one or more pre-application conferences between the applicant and representative of the city's designated administrative staff is required. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.03), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-75. - Major development review. 
(a)  Generally. The city may, if in its opinion it is necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of an application for site plan review which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Encompasses two or more acres of land within the application. 
(2)  Proposes 20 or more dwelling or motel units or 50,000 square feet of nonresidential building area. 
(3)  Requires, by the nature and content of the application, professional expertise in one or more professions not available on the administrative staff of the city. 
(b)  Types of review. The types of review to be conducted under the major development review procedures may be classified in either, or both, of the following categories: 
(1)  Consideration of development issues or impacts arising from the physical aspects of project development including environmental, traffic, land use, density and similar impacts. 
(2)  Consideration of fiscal impacts identifying the cost of providing public services to the development and the tax revenues expected to be generated by the project. 
(c)  Payment of review costs. The cost of retaining said consultants shall be borne by the applicant in the manner set forth within a resolution of the city council concerning application and permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.04), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-76. - Submission requirements. 
(a)  Vicinity map and an infrared aerial of the site at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or such other scale as deemed appropriate by the designated development administrator. 
(b)  The boundary survey of the tract showing the location and type of boundary evidence and showing the location of all existing streets, buildings, railroads, bulkhead lines and easements, and other important features in or adjoining the property. The boundary survey shall be related to the state plane coordinate system if available. 
(c)  A site plan containing the title of the project, its date and scale, a north arrow and illustrations of the locations of all proposed buildings and structures, access and traffic flow, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, recreational facilities, landscaped buffer areas, refuse collection areas, and proposed utilities. 
(d)  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet, except where existing ground is on a slope of less than two percent, in which case either one-foot contours or spot elevations shall be provided where necessary, but not more than 100 feet apart in both directions. 
(e)  Proposed finished grading by contours supplemented where necessary by spot elevations, and in particular, at those locations along lot lines. 
(f)  All existing and proposed street right-of-way reservations and easements; their names, numbers and widths; canals and watercourses and their names as well as the owner, existing zoning, and present use of all adjoining properties. 
(g)  The density or intensity of land use to be allocated to all parts of the site to be developed together with tabulations by area and percentages thereof. Such allocations shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Total site area. 
(2)  Density (dwelling units per acre) or intensity (units per acre and/or ratio of gross floor area to total site areas). 
(3)  Percentage of site covered by buildings. 
(4)  Permeable space and landscaped areas. 
(5)  Vehicular circulation and parking areas. 
(6)  Location, area, and use of all other portions of the site. 
(h)  The location, size, and character of any common open space, and the form of organization proposed to own and maintain any common open space. 
(i)  The proposed location, general use, number of floors, height, and the net and gross floor area for each building to include outside display areas, and, where applicable, the number, size, and type of dwelling or transient units. 
(j)  Location, type, and size of vehicular entrances to the site. 
(k)  Location, type, size, and height of fencing, retaining wall, and screen planting where required under the provisions or this chapter. 
(l)  All off-street parking, loading space, and walkways, indicating type of surfacing, size, angle and width of stalls and aisles, together with schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(m)  All proposed signs and exterior lighting. 
(n)  Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and stormwater in accordance with the adopted design criteria and standards of the city, indicating the location, size, type and grade of ditches, catch basins, and pipes and connections to the existing drainage system. 
(o)  Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indication the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction. 
(p)  A landscape plan indicating the location, type, size, and description of all proposed landscape materials, including the limits and/or extent of tree removal and/or tree protection. 
(q)  An analysis of the projected impact of the new development on public facilities including the amount of traffic generated by the project and its affect on surrounding streets, and the amount of water and sewer capacity required. 
(r)  Identification of all protected trees on the site or in the right of way that may be disturbed by the project. Protected trees are identified in Chapter 54 Article XIV of the City of Monticello Land Development Code. 
(s)  Any additional data, plans or specification which the applicant believes is pertinent and will assist in clarifying the application. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.05), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-77. - Site plan review criteria. 
    In deciding whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a site plan, the entity with authority to render such decision shall determine: 
(1)  Whether the applicable zoning standards and requirements have been met. 
(2)  Whether the applicable criteria of the land development regulations have been met. 
(3)  Whether adequate capacity is available as required in the concurrency management system. 
(4)  Whether the requirements of other applicable regulations or ordinances which impose specific requirements on site plans and development have been met. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.06), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 2(05.06), 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-78. - Review procedures. 
(a)  Acceptance. Upon receipt of a site plan application and after payment of the appropriate application fees, the city's designated development administrator shall have 45 working days to determine its completeness, review site plan materials, and to issue a report to the applicant indicating the degree of conformance with required submissions under section 54-76 and all other applicable city codes and development standards. The development administrator's report may include a determination that a project should be considered a major development site plan review as authorized in section 54-75. 
(b)  Planning agency review. 
(1)  Upon determination that a site plan, after any necessary revisions, is in compliance with city codes and ordinances, or upon determination to recommend review of the site plan as a major development, the designated city development administrator shall, within 30 working days, prepare a report for the local planning agency for review at a public hearing. 
(2)  Notice requirements. No later than 30 days prior to the local planning agency hearing, a notice, sent by U.S. Mail, shall be issued to all owners of real property, as listed in the current year ad valorem tax rolls, located within 500 feet of the property under site plan review. The hearing shall also be advertised at least ten days prior to the hearing, 
(c)  City council review. An application for site plan approval, with the development administrator's report and the local planning agency's recommendation, shall be presented to the city council at the next available regular meeting following the conclusion of the public hearing and final action by the local planning agency. The council shall hold an advertised public hearing on the site plan, and, within 60 days from the conclusion of the public hearing, take action either declaring the site plan application subject to major development review as authorized under section 54-75; approving the site plan; approving with modifications; or denying the plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 11-1-2010) 
Sec. 54-79. - Modification of approved plan. 
(a)  Approval required. Any changes or amendments to a site plan approved by the city council shall require a resubmission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except that minor alterations and/or adjustments may be permitted by the development administrator provided that such alterations and/or adjustments do not: 
(1)  Affect more than 50 percent of the square footage of the approved site plan. 
(2)  Alter the use or uses of the approved site plan. 
(3)  Significantly change the concept intent or arrangement of the approved site plan. 
(4)  Result from a proposal to change the approved site plan but rather are a result of refinement and detailing of the site plan as approved. 
(b)  Required findings for approval by development administrator. In all cases where with development administrator acts in accordance with this section, he or she must and shall find before granting approval to the requested alterations that: 
(1)  The granting of the alterations would be in the best interest of the city. 
(2)  In the case of alterations to an approved site plan for a condominium, a majority of the owners in the affected condominium association have consented to the alterations and any applicable rules of said association have been met. 
(c)  Appeal of development administrator's action. The applicant or any directly interested party shall be the right to appeal any decision of the development administrator with respect to permitting alterations and/or adjustments to an approved site plan. Any such appeal shall be made to the city council within ten days of the development administrator's action upon which said appeal is based. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-80. - Expiration of approval. 
(a)  An approved site plan shall be effective for a period of 12 months from the date of approval by the city council. If a development order is not issued within such period, the approval for the site plan shall be null and void. 
(b)  Failure to comply with this section shall negate the approval of the subject site plan and modifications. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 05.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(05.08), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-81-54-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-121. - Districts established. 
    For the purposes of protecting, promoting, and improving the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the community, the incorporated area of the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts in the manner shown on the official zoning map: 
District Designation District Title R-1 Residential, Single-Family R-1A Residential, Single-Family/Mobile Home R-2 Residential, Multifamily B-1 Business, Central District B-2 Business, Highway I Industrial A Agriculture MU-BR Mixed Use, Business/Residential  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-122. - Official map. 
(a)  Generally. The official zoning map shall be entrusted to the custody of the city clerk and shall be located in city hall. It shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and shall bear the city seal under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referenced in Article III of the City of Monticello Land Development Regulations, Ordinance No. ____________ adopted on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ." 
(b)  Amendments. Approved amendments to the official zoning map shall be promptly noted on a true copy of the official zoning map by inserting the case number and date of approval on or near the affected parcel. 
(c)  Retention of earlier zoning maps. All zoning maps and regulations or remaining portions thereof which have had official force and effect in the city prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations shall be retained as public records. 
(d)  Replacement of official zoning map. If the official zoning map is damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may adopt, after due public notice, an updated official zoning map which will supersede the prior official zoning map. The updated official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The updated official zoning map shall be identified in the same manner as the original official zoning map, except that the certificate shall state "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ as part of Ordinance No. ____________ of the City of Monticello." (Insert date map was replaced.) Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-123. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    The following rules of interpretation shall be used to locate the district boundaries shown on the official zoning map: 
(1)  Boundaries following streets. Boundaries following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streets shall be construed to follow those centerlines. If a street is vacated, the district boundary shall be construed to remain in its location, except when ownership of the vacated street is divided other than at the center, in which case the boundary shall be construed to move with the ownership. 
(2)  Boundaries following lot lines. Boundaries following, or approximately following, lot lines shall be construed to follow those lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries following county and city limits. Those boundaries following, or approximately following, city limits shall be construed to follow those county and city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries following railroad lines. Those boundaries following, or approximately following, railroad lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. If a railroad right-of-way is vacated, the district boundary shall be construed to remain in its location, except when ownership of the vacated railroad right-of-way is divided other than at the center; in which case, the boundary shall be construed to move with the ownership. 
(5)  Boundaries following water bodies. Those boundaries following, or approximately following, the shorelines of water bodies shall be construed to follow and move with those shorelines. Boundaries following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water, shall be construed to follow and move with those centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries entering any body of water. Boundaries entering any body of water, but not continuing to intersect with other zoning boundaries, shall be construed to extend in the same direction in which they entered the body of water, until they intersect with other zoning boundaries. 
(7)  Boundaries parallel to or extensions of above features. Boundaries parallel to or extensions of the features indicated in subsections (1) through (6) above shall be construed to be parallel to, or extensions of, those features as the case may be. 
(8)  Other cases. Boundaries splitting existing lots in subdivisions and any other boundaries not determined by the above rules shall be determined by reference to the expressed distances on, or the scale of, the official zoning map. If the existing lot will not accommodate any of the uses permitted in the multiple districts indicated thereon, a rezoning to an appropriate district shall be required. 
(9)  Determination of boundaries. In cases where the rules set forth in this article cannot with certainty determine the true location of a district boundary, the city council shall render a determination. No boundary shall be changed except by the amendment process. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-124. - Scope; applicability. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for achieving the purposes of the article. It is not intended that this article interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; however, where this article imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(b)  Zoning affects all premises. No premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or altered, except in conformity with these regulations. If, because of an error or omission on the official zoning map, any property within the city is not shown as being included within a zoning district, the classification of such property shall be R-1 residence, single-family, unless changed by an amendment to this article. 
(c)  Yard, lot coverage, floor areas and building height requirements. Every building or accessory structure to be erected upon a lot shall meet all yard, lot coverage, floor area, and building height requirements of its district unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this article. 
(d)  Multiple use of required space prohibited. No part of a required yard, or other required open space, or of the off-street parking or loading spaces for one structure, shall be included as part of the yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space requirements for any other structure. 
(e)  Reduction of lot area prohibited. Except for any approved planned residential, planned commercial, or planned industrial development, no yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of its district. With the same exception, yards or lots designed after the effective date of such ordinance shall meet the requirements established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 97-1, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-125. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-4. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under the terms of this article. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.07.03(A), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.07.03(A)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-126. - Amendments. 
(a)  Amendment procedure. 
(1)  Initiation of amendment. The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or repeal the regulations and provisions of this article after public notice and hearings as provided by law consistent with the provisions of the Charter and applicable state statute and upon initiation by one of the following ways: 
a.  On its own motion. 
b.  On petition from the owners of 51 percent or more of the area involved in the proposed change. Whenever the fee simple owners of 51 percent or more of any property owners desire a change in zoning classification or any owner desires change of the conditions or regulations of any district or any other provision of this article, he or she shall make written application to the development administrator on a form and in a manner as set forth by the city, together with evidence of payment of the appropriate fee. Such written application shall be signed by the owner or his or her designated agent and shall include a list all owners of real property, as listed in the current year ad valorem tax rolls, which are within 500 feet of the property proposed for amendment. 
(2)  Planning agency review. Upon acceptance of a complete application for zoning amendment, the designated city development administrator shall, within 30 working days, prepare a report for the local planning agency for review at a public hearing. 
a.  Notice requirements prior to planning agency review. 
1.  At least ten days prior to the planning agency review of the re-zoning amendment, the meeting must be advertised. 
2.  A notice shall be sent by U.S. Mail to property owners within 500 feet of the subject property. This notice shall identify the property subject to the rezoning application, the nature of the proposed change, and the date when the local planning agency will review the proposed change. Where a condominium or cooperative building is involved, only the association through its duly registered agent or officer, need be notified. 
3.  At least ten days prior to the planning agency review, the owner of the property involved in a proposed zoning change shall conspicuously display a placard on the property with the following verbiage: 
NOTICE OF PROPOSED REZONING 
A Petition for Rezoning of this property from  (current zoning designation)  to  (proposed zoning designation)  will be considered by the Monticello Local Planning Agency at public hearing on  (date)  at  (time and a.m. or p.m.)  at City Hall, 245 S. Mulberry Street, Monticello, Florida 32344. 
Complete information on the re-zoning process is available at City Hall. 
The placard shall be placed on the real property proposed to be rezoned, at a location facing each public roadway which borders the property, and the verbiage shall be legible from the nearest roadway travel lane. The signs shall be yellow with black lettering, at least 48 inches by 48 inches in size. The signs shall be installed by secure posts and supports to prevent bending or tilting. 
b.  The local planning agency shall, within 60 days of completion of the public hearing, take action either recommending approval of the application; recommending approval with suggested modifications; or recommending denial of the application. 
(3)  City council action. Following the receipt of a request for a zoning amendment, the council shall hold a public first reading of the title of the proposed ordinance of rezoning, followed by an advertised public hearing on the zoning amendment request, as required by F.S. [Florida Statutes] and the Charter. 
(4)  Failure to give the notice prescribed shall not invalidate the action of the city council. 
(5)  Successive applications. No application for a zoning change shall be made within 12 months from the date of the scheduled public hearing before the city council of a previous application for substantially the same request, unless there has been a substantial change of conditions or character of the surrounding land area or the land in question. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 03.07.01, 03.07.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.07.01, 03.07.02), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 54-127. - Limited use district. 
(a)  Intent. The provisions of the limited use district are intended as an alternative elective process which would allow further limitation of the permitted use of any property. The general purpose is to permit certain land uses within a zoning district to the exclusion of other uses, which will allow land use to be directed to the circumstances surrounding the property and the individual application for zoning reclassification. Further, it is the intent, through the use of optional site-planning criteria, for a proposed development to be more sensitive to a neighborhood or the neighborhood community environment by offering protection from potential adverse influences. An applicant may seek to restrict the use of the land to one or more uses permitted within a specific zoning district proposed for rezoning, or may elect to file a site plan which would become part of the development standards on the property, upon approval of the city council. 
(b)  Definition. A limited use zone is an alternative elective zoning district which accommodates either or both of the following: 
(1)  A certain use or uses are permitted to the exclusion of all other uses authorized within the zoning district. 
(2)  A site plan is permitted to become part of the development standards upon approval by the city council. 
(c)  Eligibility. Minimum requirements shall be the same as those set forth in development standards under the zoning district sought. Any rezoning application may be amended to conform to the requirements of this district at any stage of the rezoning process. 
(d)  Site plan. When an applicant elects to submit a site plan, that site plan shall become part of said application and be binding upon the property in the event the same application is granted. A site plan shall be drawn to an appropriate engineer's scale to include the location and boundary of the site and in addition must include one or more of the following optional elements: 
(1)  The approximate size, location, height, or setbacks of all proposed buildings or other structures. The specified use of buildings and structures may be included. 
(2)  Off-street parking and loading plans, including circulation plans for vehicular movement, number and approximate limitation controls. 
(3)  Approximate location and size of open spaces and landscaped areas or buffering elements. 
(4)  Total acreage of the site and the calculated intensity for the project, either by density for residential uses, or square footage of gross floor area for nonresidential uses. 
(5)  Drawings indicating the general architectural themes, appearance and representative building types. 
(6)  Definitive covenants, grants, easements, dedications and restrictions to be imposed on the land, buildings and structures. 
(7)  Any other commitments of development specifications, limitations, constraints, standards, or proposed physical features not specifically included within subsections (1) through (6) above. 
(e)  Subsequent rezoning. Any property so zoned under these provisions may not be re-zoned for a period of five years from the date of LUD zoning. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.06), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-128-54-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 54-151. - Generally. 
District regulations shall be as set forth in the following schedule of district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-152. - R-1 residential, single-family district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the R-1 district is to delineate those areas defined by the Future Land Use Element of the city's comprehensive plan as suitable for low density development consisting of single-family units. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the R-1 district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Public park. 
(3)  Church. 
(4)  Library. 
(5)  Museum. 
(6)  Schools, nurseries, day cares, elementary and training schools, schools for the developmentally disabled. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(8)  Fish ponds. 
(c)  Special exception uses. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast home, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  On premises parking for guests; 
b.  No more than six guestrooms or 18 guests at one time; 
c.  Owner/operator must reside on premises of the bed and breakfast home; 
d.  Applicant must meet the requirements for licensing by the state department of business and professional regulation as per F.S. § 509.013. 
e.  For a bed and breakfast inn otherwise permitted, such inn may operate a restaurant for use by the general public, and may advertise the same, if all of the following criteria are met; provided, however, that such use shall have the approval and appropriate licensing of the state and/or other governmental agencies: 
1.  Restaurant scale/size. The restaurant dining area does not exceed eight seats per guest room. 
2.  Days and hours of operation. Days and hours of operation for dining are Monday through Saturday between 11:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., except as provided below. 
3.  Extended hours of operation. A bed and breakfast may serve meals to the general public after 5:30 p.m., provided the last seating is no later than 10:00 p.m. and the following standards are met: 
i.  Such inn shall have main access via an arterial roadway, or collector roadway where such inn fronts on a nonresidential use. 
ii.  Such inn shall maintain enough on-site parking spaces to accommodate the general public, based on the city parking standards. 
(2)  Professional offices and limited, residentially-compatible businesses, subject to the following requirements in the R-1 zoning district: 
a.  Purpose and intent. Limited to professional offices and limited, residentially-compatible businesses, fronting on U.S. Highway 19 and U.S. Highway 90 in areas designated as mixed-use office/residential on the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. Types of professional offices and limited, residentially-compatible businesses and sizes of buildings permitted within this residential zone must be sensitive to the adjacent residential environment and, thus, exclude those uses and building sizes which can negatively impact the surrounding residential area with traffic generation, parking, deliveries, noise, noxious odors, and aesthetic incompatibility. All business uses and activities shall be conducted exclusively and wholly within an enclosed building, except that activities associated with a business, excluding vending machines, may be permitted outside the enclosed building to the extent that such activities are residentially-compatible and do not otherwise constitute or create a nuisance to adjoining residential properties. 
b.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Professional and government offices. 
2.  Retail businesses involving the sale of merchandise on the premises within the enclosed buildings, but excluding pawn shops, sweepstakes or gaming parlors, liquor package stores, bars, taverns, cocktail lounges, drive-through facilities, food establishments with commercial kitchens, pet shops and boarding kennels, and other business activities similar to the foregoing. 
3.  Establishments involved in the rendering of a personal service, such as beauty salon, or business service, copying center, bicycle repair shop, recreational sporting equipment rentals, but excluding automobile or motor service/repair facilities, day cares, schools, tattoo, body art or fortune-telling businesses. 
c.  On premises parking for clients/customers, in accordance with parking regulations outlined in section 54-502. 
d.  Utilization of existing driveways for ingress and egress, or prior written approval from the city manager for a new driveway accessing the property from a city street. 
e.  No commercial dumpsters are allowed. 
f.  Allowable hours of operation: From 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 noon to 5:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
g.  The operation of the business may not generate excessive vehicular traffic to the premises, generate noxious odors, or create noise from machinery or equipment audible from any adjacent property. 
h.  Screening or buffering must be provided pursuant to the provisions of section 54-194 for all uncomplementary land uses. 
i.  Except as provided in subsection k. below, professional and business offices may utilize only structures in existence on March 3, 1998. 
j.  Such nonresidential uses shall be compatible with the historic resources in the neighborhood. 
k.  New structures intended specifically for the nonresidential uses authorized herein shall be no larger than 5,000 square feet, and may not be placed on the site of a residential structure which existed on March 3, 1998. 
l.  New structures intended specifically for such nonresidential uses shall be limited to an impervious surface ratio of 0.50. 
m.  Upon discontinuance of an approved special exception use granted in accordance with this section, as indicated by the discontinuance of a utility service to that location, the property will revert to residential usage only, and shall be subject to a separate special exception approval process for any subsequent nonresidential use. 
(d)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Detached garage. 
(2)  Swimming pool. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(4)  Accessory apartments to meet the needs of elderly persons may be allowed provided: 
a.  No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted on any residential lot; 
b.  An accessory apartment may be located within the principal structure or within a structure having a detached garage; 
c.  An accessory apartment shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure or 50 percent of the gross floor area of a structure having a detached garage; 
d.  The accessory apartment shall be located and designed so as not to interfere with the appearance of the principal structure as a one-family dwelling unit; 
e.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
(5)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, minimum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage, and maximum height are presented in tabular form in section 54-160. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 95-7, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.01), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 6-3-2014) 
Sec. 54-153. - R-1A residential, single-family/mobile home district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the R-1A district is to delineate those areas defined by the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan as suitable for low density development and to provide for a recognized need for low cost housing. Individual lots may be utilized for either single-family dwellings or mobile homes within this district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the R-1A district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Mobile home dwelling. 
(3)  Public park. 
(4)  Church. 
(5)  Library. 
(6)  Museum. 
(7)  Schools, nurseries, day care, elementary and training schools, schools for the developmentally disabled. 
(8)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses. None. 
(d)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Detached garage. 
(2)  Swimming pool. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(4)  Accessory apartments to meet the needs of elderly persons may be allowed provided: 
a.  No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted on any residential lot; 
b.  An accessory apartment may be located within the principal structure or within a structure having a detached garage; 
c.  An accessory apartment shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure or 50 percent of the gross floor area of a structure having a detached garage; 
d.  The accessory apartment shall be located and designed so as not to interfere with the appearance of the principal structure as a one-family dwelling unit; 
e.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this article shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
(5)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, minimum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage, and maximum height are presented in tabular form in section 54-160. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(g)  Lot size for mobile homes. Whenever any applicant for a mobile home permit shall own or have possession of or the right to occupy a lot in the city, in a platted subdivision, or any lot or portion of lot located therein, such mobile home usage, placement and occupancy shall be permitted, without the necessity of a variance, if the total lot or lots provide 5,000 square feet of usable land, regardless of frontage, width or depth of said lot. However, nothing herein shall be construed to omit the requirement of appropriate setbacks as they may apply to any R-1A residential lot. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 96-02, 2-4-1996; Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-154. - R-2 residential, multifamily district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the R-2 district is to provide for the development of multifamily and mobile home housing as defined and limited by the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan. Properties designated R-2 shall not exceed 15 percent of the total acreage of any single planning area nor shall they exceed ten percent of the total land area in the city. The R-2 zone shall not be applied within the established neighborhoods as specified in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the R-2 district: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family dwellings. 
(3)  Adult congregate living facilities. 
(4)  Mobile home parks. 
(5)  Public park. 
(6)  Church. 
(7)  Library. 
(8)  Museum. 
(9)  Schools, nurseries, day care, elementary and training schools, schools for the developmentally disabled. 
(10)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses. None. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include those uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, minimum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage, and maximum height are presented in tabular form in section 54-160. 
(f)  Building groups and spacing. The maximum length of any group of attached structures shall not exceed 150 feet. The minimum distance between building groups shall be 25 feet. 
(g)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 98-02, § 2, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.03), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 54-155. - B-1 business, central district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The B-1 district is intended to serve as the center of retail trade, financial and professional activity for the city and its service area. Its primary purpose is to group these specialized uses together in a compact area designed for pedestrian movement supported by limited off-street parking. It is intended to be applied in the area surrounding the junction of U.S. 90 and U.S. 19. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Office, business and professional. 
(2)  Store, convenience. 
(3)  Store, retail. 
(4)  Store, personal service. 
(5)  Financial institutions. 
(6)  Restaurants. 
(7)  Commercial parking facilities. 
(8)  Library. 
(9)  Museum. 
(10)  Fire station. 
(11)  Police station. 
(12)  Office, government. 
(13)  Church, schools and day care. 
(14)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exceptions uses. 
(1)  Town homes, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Structures must consist of at least two, attached single-family units with firewall(s) separating the units. Structures shall be either: 
1.  Two story; 
2.  Single story, with an eave height of 16 feet; or 
3.  Single story, with an eave height of at least 12 feet and a roof pitch of at least 8/12. 
b.  The design of each town home must be reflective of the surrounding styles in the traditional downtown area. 
c.  All proposed town home designs shall be submitted for review by the city's historical design review board, which shall make a recommendation regarding approval to the city council. 
d.  All town homes proposed for construction in any designated historic district must comply with the requirements in article VII of this chapter. 
e.  No town home will be approved as a special exception use until there has been an appropriate review, and a finding by the city that the proposed special exception complies with the requirements in section 54-191 and section 54-502 of this chapter. 
(d)  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings provided the residential floor area is less than 50 percent of the total floor area on the lot and that the minimum floor area per dwelling unit as specified in the R-2 district is met. 
(2)  A single-family dwelling unit as an accessory to a principal use provided that tenant separation requirements are met. 
(3)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. In addition to site plan review and other development requirements governing B-1 properties located in the City Historic District, the following development requirements are applicable to the B-1 Downtown Business District: 
(1)  Build-to line. Building facades must be located within ten feet of the right-of-way line. Space between right-of-way and façade must be landscaped and/or paved with non-concrete pedestrian pavers which meet accessibility standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Building frontages must meet the minimum percentage requirements of frontage as depicted in Section 54-160(b). 
(2)  Subdivision. Lots can be subdivided by owner to create conforming build-to line frontages. 
(3)  Corner lots. On corner lots, new buildings are considered primary facades and shall be oriented to both streets. These primary facades shall be considered opportunities for distinctive architecture. Entrances of new buildings on corner lots within the four corners of the courthouse circle shall be oriented to face the courthouse. 
(4)  Parking spaces. No new parking spaces shall be constructed within 25 feet of the build-to line. 
(5)  Garbage collection facilities. Applications for site plan approval for new construction or building additions comprising 1,750 square feet or more of interior floor space must contain a plan for garbage collection facilities and be approved by the city manager. The plan shall include estimates of garbage based on the most intensive use all units within the structure jointly. The garbage collection facility plan for structures containing commercial kitchen site plans shall include a plan for on-site storage of wet garbage. 
(6)  Single-family character structures. Structures located within the B-1 zoning district originally constructed before 1960 as single-family residences are a complement to the identity and function of the downtown business district. Therefore, lots containing existing single-family character structures are exempt from build-to frontage requirements so long as any proposed addition and/or new construction on those lots is situated behind the front façade of the structure, and no more than 50 percent of the original building is removed. 
(7)  Church lots and structures. Lots containing church structures and accessory church buildings in existence as of January 1, 2009 are a complement to the identity and historic urban character of the city and therefore, these lots are exempt from build-to frontage requirements for new construction so long as the building permit for the new construction is issued to a tax-exempt, Chapter 501(c)(3) church organization in existence as of January 1, 2009, and intended use for any church lot or structure addition is for church programs and function. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.04), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 1, 10-4-2005; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 54-156. - B-2 business, highway district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to delineate those areas defined by the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan for commercial development, suitable for those commercial activities which function relatively independently from pedestrian traffic. These activities typically require direct automobile access, and this district will normally be applied along traffic arteries. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the B-2 district: 
(1)  Automobile repair garage. 
(2)  Automobile service facility. 
(3)  Church. 
(4)  Financial institution. 
(5)  Hotel, motel and other short-term rentals. 
(6)  Office, business and professional. 
(7)  Restaurant. 
(8)  Store, convenience. 
(9)  Store, retail. 
(10)  Store, personal service. 
(11)  Self-storage facilities (mini-storage) (north of Pearl Street and south of Cherokee Street, only). 
(12)  Veterinarian. 
(13)  Day care and schools. 
(14)  Private clubs. 
(15)  Arcades and game rooms. 
(16)  Commercial parking facilities (north of Pearl Street and south of Cherokee Street, only). 
(17)  Fitness center and/or swimming facility. 
(18)  Library. 
(19)  Museum. 
(20)  Office, government. 
(21)  Fire station. 
(22)  Police station. 
(23)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwelling units, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All single-family residential dwelling units proposed for the B-2 zoning district shall be submitted for review to the city's local planning agency, which shall make a recommendation regarding approval to the city council. 
b.  In addition to local planning agency review, all proposed single-family dwelling units in the B-2 zoning district which lie in the designated historic district must comply with the provisions and review requirements in chapter 54, article VII of the Monticello City Code. 
c.  Proposed residential single-family units must meet the dimensional regulation requirements of single-family residential lots contained in section 54-160 of the Monticello City Code. 
d.  Proposed residential lots subject to approval under this section shall comply with the buffer standards found in section 54-194(b) of the Monticello Code. 
(d)  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the B-2 district: 
(1)  A single-family dwelling unit as accessory to a principal use provided that tenant separation requirements are met. 
(2)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, minimum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage and maximum height are presented in tabular form in section 54-160. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 95-02, 2-7-1995; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.05), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 2004-07, § 1(03.05), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 6-5-2007) 
Sec. 54-157. - I, industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the I district is to delineate those areas identified by the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan as suitable for industrial development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal use in the I district: 
(1)  Building supply. 
(2)  Manufacturing, assembly and processing operations. 
(3)  Printing. 
(4)  Trade shops. 
(5)  Warehousing. 
(6)  Wholesale packaging, supply and distribution. 
(7)  Schools. 
(8)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses. None. 
(d)  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the I district: 
(1)  Retail sales associated with and incidental to the principal use. 
(2)  Offices associated with and incidental to the principal use. 
(3)  Outside storage provided the screening requirements of section 54-194 are met. 
(4)  Other uses customarily incidental to a principal use. 
(e)  Manufacturing limitations. All manufacturing and business activities shall be done in a completely enclosed building. No bulk storage of flammable materials and no storage of explosives except as provided through Florida Statutes. 
(f)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, minimum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage and maximum height are presented in tabular form in section 54-160. 
(g)  Transitional setbacks. Where an industrial use abuts a residential district, a setback of 40 feet shall be required in addition to any screening requirements. 
(h)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-158. - A, agriculture district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for low intensity agricultural and residential activities in the areas designated as Agricultural by the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the A district: 
(1)  Field and tree crops. 
(2)  Grazing. 
(3)  Orchards. 
(4)  Dwelling, single-family. 
(5)  Plant nurseries. 
(6)  Schools. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses. None. 
(d)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Detached garage. 
(2)  Swimming pool. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(4)  Accessory apartments to meet the needs of elderly persons may be allowed provided: 
a.  No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted on any residential lot; 
b.  An accessory apartment may be located within the principal structure or within a structure having a detached garage; 
c.  An accessory apartment shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure or 50 percent of the gross floor area of a structure having a detached garage; 
d.  The accessory apartment shall be located and designed so as not to interfere with the appearance of the principal structure as a one-family dwelling unit; 
e.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this article shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
(5)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The property development regulations addressing minimum lot requirements, maximum floor area, required yards, maximum lot coverage and maximum height are presented in section 54-160. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(g)  Mobile homes. A mobile home may be permitted as a single-family residence on property zoned "agricultural" only in the event the owner resides thereon and the acreage zoned exceeds five acres. This regulation shall not permit an owner to re-zone from R-1 to agricultural for the sole purpose of establishing and locating a mobile home thereon. Agricultural land available for placement of mobile homes shall be restricted to those areas designated "agricultural" as of July 31, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 94-05, 12-6-1994; Ord. No. 97-2, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-159. - BR, mixed-use business/residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the BR district is to delineate those areas defined by the future land use element of the comprehensive plan, which by reference is made a part hereof, as suitable for residential and residentially-compatible uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted principal uses in the BR district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  Business and professional offices, excluding veterinarian offices. 
(4)  Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants, restaurants with fast food counters, and restaurants providing take-out or drive-through services. 
(5)  Financial institutions. 
(6)  Retail stores, excluding convenience stores. 
(7)  Personal service establishments, excluding laundry and dry cleaning facilities, and excluding automobile fueling and service establishments. 
(8)  Hotels and motels. 
(9)  Churches. 
(10)  Libraries. 
(11)  Day cares. 
(12)  Museums. 
(13)  Government offices. 
(14)  Essential services. 
(c)  Special exception uses. None. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include those uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
(e)  Property development requirements. The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be 7,500 square feet, with a minimum lot width of 75 feet. The minimum lot area for multifamily dwellings shall be 8,500 square feet, with a minimum lot width of 100 feet. The minimum lot area for nonresidential uses shall be 10,000 square feet, with a minimum lot width of 100 feet. New structures intended specifically for nonresidential uses shall be no larger that 7,500 square feet. Nonresidential uses shall be limited to an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. Minimum yard requirements shall be those applicable to R-1 single-family in section 54-160. The minimum floor area of single-family dwellings shall be 900 square feet. The maximum height of any structure shall be 30 feet. 
(f)  Other development requirements. Nonresidential uses require site plan review, pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter. The distribution of the mix of uses shall be within the range of 40 to 60 percent residential/40 to 60 percent nonresidential. For undeveloped parcels greater than 25 acres in size not currently included in this category on the June 1999 comprehensive plan future land use map, the nonresidential use component shall include a mix of commercial and recreational uses. Other applicable lot and use regulations are set forth in article IV of this chapter, Supplementary Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, 7-3-2001; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.08), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-160. - Schedule of dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Table A: Minimum lot area and minimum yard requirements. 
Minimum Yard Requirements District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Front Side Rear Corner Minimum Floor Area Maximum Lot Coverage Maximum Height R-1 Single-family 7,500 sq. ft. 75' 25' 10' 20' 25' 900 sq. ft. 50% 30' R-1A Single-family/Mobile Home 5,000 sq. ft. 75' 18' 10' 10' 25' *Note 1 50% 30' R-2 Multifamily 8,500 sq. ft. 100' 18' 10' 10' 25' Section 54-161 50% 30' Mobile Home Park 2.5 acres 100' 18' 10' 10' 25' N/A 45% 15' Mobile Home Space w/in MH park 5,000 sq. ft. 50' 18' 7' 10' 10' 400 sq. ft. 45% 15' B-1 Central Business None None See Table B Below N/A 100% 40' B-2 Highway Business 10,000 sq. ft. 100' 25' 10' 10' 25' N/A 50% 30' BR Mixed Use Business/Residential 7,500 sq. ft. 75' 25' 10' 10 25 N/A 50% 30' I Industrial 10,000 sq. ft. 80' 25' 15' 15' 25' N/A 75% 45' A Agriculture - 125' 25' 25' 25' 25' N/A 20% 45'  
*Note 1: Minimum floor area for single-family: 900 square feet. Minimum floor area for mobile homes: 400 square feet. 
*Note 2: One acre for residential use. Setbacks and floor area must conform to R-1. 
(b)  Table B: B-1 Downtown Business District build-to minimum frontage requirements. The following table establishes build-to frontage lines and minimum percentages for B-1 Downtown Business District Lots: 

(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.09), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 2, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 54-161. - Minimum floor areas for multiple-family units. 
    Minimum floor areas for multiple-family units are as follows: 
Unit Type Minimum Floor Area Efficiency 400 sq. ft. One bedroom 700 sq. ft. Two bedroom 900 sq. ft. Three or more bedrooms 900 sq. ft. plus 150 sq. ft. for each bedroom over 2 Hotel or motel room 250 sq. ft.  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 03.05.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(03.05.10), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-162-154-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 54-191. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Existing lots of record. A single-family structure may be constructed on any nonconforming lot in any residential district if said lot is less then the minimum area for a building lot in the district in which it is located, provided the following conditions exist or are met: 
(1)  Availability of adjacent vacant land. No structure shall be constructed on any nonconforming lot if the owner of said lot owns any adjoining vacant land which would create a conforming lot if said vacant land were combined with the lot deficient in area. 
(2)  Front, side and rear yards. No structure shall be constructed on any nonconforming lot unless it shall have front, side, and rear yards conforming to the minimums required for the district in which said lot is located. 
(b)  Yard regulations. Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of steps, sill, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental features projecting not more than four inches from the building wall, provided, however that roof overhangs up to 42 inches or one-half of the required yard, whichever is less, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-192. - Minimum yard regulations for accessory uses. 
(a)  Accessory structures in residential districts. Accessory structures without kitchen facilities may be erected in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  An accessory structure shall comply with the front and side yard setbacks of the principal structure. 
(2)  An accessory structure may extend into a required rear yard provided that it shall not occupy more than 15 percent of the rear yard. 
(3)  Air conditioning units, pool circulation pumps, and similar mechanical equipment may be located within a required rear yard provided, however, that no such equipment shall be located closer than five feet to any rear lot line. 
(4)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools and screen enclosures shall conform to all side and corner yard setbacks, but may extend to within ten feet of a rear property line. 
(b)  Accessory structures in other than R districts. Accessory structures shall comply with front yard requirements for the principal structure to which they are accessory and shall not be closer than ten feet to any side property line or five feet to any rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-193. - Garden walls, fences and hedges. 
    All garden walls, fences, or hedges located within the required front, side or rear yards shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-194. - Screening. 
(a)  Uncomplementary land uses identified. The following land use relationships constitute uncomplementary land uses and zones: 
(1)  Mobile home park uses or zones, when adjacent to single-family housing, multifamily housing, or office uses, or lands zoned primarily for such uses; 
(2)  Multifamily uses, when adjacent to single-family housing or lands zoned primarily for single-family housing; 
(3)  Office uses or zones, when adjacent to single-family housing use or lands zoned primarily for single-family housing; 
(4)  Commercial uses or zones, when adjacent to single-family housing, multifamily housing, mobile home park, or mobile home subdivision uses, or lands zoned primarily for single-family housing, multifamily housing, mobile home park, or mobile home subdivision uses; 
(5)  Industrial uses or zones, when adjacent to any nonindustrial uses or zones, other than nonresidential agricultural uses; 
(6)  Other land use conflicts. In any case where an unbuffered view exists within 500 feet from the side or rear service areas of any nonresidential land use to any single-family or two-family residential land use, uncomplementary buffer requirements shall apply as if such residential uses were located on immediately adjacent lands. 
(b)  Buffer standards relating to uncomplementary land uses and zones. All landscaped buffer strips in existence on the date this chapter takes effect shall be maintained in their present form, or, in the alternative, may be altered to comply with the following requirements. The following landscaped buffer strips shall be required for all new development or redevelopment which creates an uncomplementary land use: 
(1)  Width: A buffer strip of at least 20 feet in width along the property line where such conflict exists. 
(2)  Tree count: A ratio of one tree for each 121/2 linear feet of common boundary, with a minimum of 75 percent shade trees. 
(3)  Visual screen: A continuous visual screen at least eight feet in height at maturity, formed by two rows of shrub material, or existing natural vegetation which provides a continuous visual screen, running the entire length of all common boundaries. 
(4)  Reduced width alternative: For mobile home park, multifamily, or office uses or zones, a buffer fence having all required plan material placed toward the less intensive use and providing an access for maintenance may be combined with a ten-foot buffer strip as a substitution for the width required in subsection (1) above, if approved by the development administrator as meeting the objectives of this section. 
(c)  Buffer fence standards. 
(1)  Whenever a buffer fence is required, it shall be of sufficient height to obstruct view between adjoining properties, as determined by the development administrator, presumably a minimum of eight feet in height, unless the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the development administrator that the intent of this section will be met by a fence of lesser height under the particular circumstances. The buffer fence shall be solid opaque, constructed of durable materials appropriate for the intended use and consistent with materials commonly used in surrounding neighborhoods, and shall include provision for access to all landscape materials. 
(2)  The side of a fence facing a less intensive use shall have a finished appearance to furnish an aesthetically pleasing view. 
(3)  At least one-half of all required plant material shall be installed and maintained on the side facing the less intensive use, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(4)  Fencing shall be maintained in good repair. 
(d)  Additional material requirements for all landscape areas. The following requirements shall apply to all buffer strips and perimeter landscape areas required by this section: 
(1)  Ground cover. Grass shall be planted, or other ground cover shall be placed, on all areas of buffer strips and perimeter landscape areas which are not occupied by other landscape material. 
(2)  Mulch. Mulch material to a minimum compacted depth of two inches shall be provided for all planting areas. 
(3)  Prevailing requirement. Whenever development activity is subject to both the perimeter landscaping requirements and the uncomplementary land use buffer strip requirements of this section, the latter requirement shall prevail. 
(4)  Exclusions. No use shall be made of, nor development activity permitted in, the uncomplementary land use buffers and perimeter landscape areas except for: 
a.  Planting material approved as part of the landscape plan. 
b.  Completely underground utilities and essential, specifically approved, overhead or above-ground utilities which do not interfere with the mature growth of required plant material. 
c.  Grass ditches, with back slopes no steeper than 3:1, which can support the required landscaping materials. 
(5)  Buffer strip plant material. All shrub material used as a part of an uncomplementary land use buffer shall be a minimum height of 30 inches and have a minimum crown width of 24 inches when planted, shall be species capable of achieving a minimum height of eight feet at maturity, and shall be located in such a way as to maximize the screening potential. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-195. - Landscaping requirements for yards abutting public streets. 
(a)  Single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings. Required front and side yards abutting public streets shall be maintained in permeable landscaped vegetative green space with the exception of necessary driveways and walkways. 
(b)  Other uses. Required front and side yards abutting public streets, including required driveways and walkways, shall be maintained in permeable landscaped vegetative green space to a minimum depth as established in the following table: 
Average Lot Depth Minimum Depth 
of Required Green Area Less than 100 feet 5 feet Over 100 feet to 120 feet 8 feet Over 120 feet to 140 feet 12 feet Over 140 feet 10% of lot depth  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-196. - Permitted exceptions to height regulations. 
    No exceptions to the height regulations shall be permitted except as specifically provided for below: 
(1)  One community television antenna per principal structure and one or more mechanical equipment rooms, not exceeding ten percent of the roof area, may exceed the height regulations of the district within which it is located, however, such mechanical equipment rooms, their location and visibility from adjoining streets or properties should be the subject of site plan review considerations. 
(2)  A church spire or church tower may exceed the height regulations of the district within which it is located. 
(3)  No sign, nameplate, display, or advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any antenna, tower, or other structure which extends above the roof of the principal structure or height regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-197. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses, as enumerated in article III of this chapter, shall be permitted only upon authorization by the city council subsequent to a review and written advisory opinions by the development administrator, provided that such uses shall be found by the city council to comply with the following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  That the use is a permitted special use as set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(2)  That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected. 
(3)  That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located. 
(4)  That the use will be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the district where it is to be located. 
(5)  That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required herein, or otherwise required. 
(6)  That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided, that ingress and egress are so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets and that the use has adequate frontage on a public or approved private street. 
(7)  That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where it is located. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-198. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory uses shall be clearly supplementary and incidental to the principal use of the lot and shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is subordinate. 
(1)  No detached garage or other building shall be constructed, placed, erected or built before the construction of the main building. 
(2)  When the main building is on the front of the lot, an accessory structure shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the front yard area, shall comply with all requirements set forth for the district in which it occurs and shall be not more than one story or 13 feet in height. 
(3)  When the main building is on the front of the lot, an accessory structure shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the rear yard area. 
(4)  Where accessory buildings are erected in side yards, they shall conform with all the requirements set forth for accessory buildings in rear yards as set forth in subsection (2) above. 
(5)  In residential districts, accessory buildings shall not contain living quarters except servant's quarters for persons employed on the premises; no cooking facilities shall be provided in such quarters. 
(6)  Where an accessory building is used for garage purposes, it shall be used solely by the occupants of the premises, and shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle (11/2 tons maximum capacity). 
(b)  Private recreational facilities. Tennis courts, shuffleboard courts and similar uses of a recreational nature not to be covered by a structure may be constructed within yard areas except the required front yard, required street side yard or required street rear yard. However, any walls or fences constructed as a part thereof shall conform with section 54-193. In determining the percentage of coverage of a lot by buildings, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts and similar uses shall not be counted in such computations. Private recreational facilities within a structure shall conform with all pertinent accessory structure requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.08), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 54-199. - Automobile service facilities. 
(a)  Location of exits and entrances. Entrances and exits for vehicles to and from automobile service facilities shall not be closer than 30 feet to any intersection. 
(b)  Lot size. Automobile service facilities shall be located on a lot not less than 10,000 square feet and have a minimum frontage of 100 feet. 
(c)  Location of oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts. All oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts shall be located within an enclosed structure and shall be located no closer than 25 feet to any interior property line, provided, however, that they may be located within ten feet of a rear lot line if no access doors of any kind whatsoever, face said rear property line. 
(d)  Mechanical repair. All permitted mechanical repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed structure and shall be located no closer than 25 feet to any interior property line, except the rear property line which setback shall be not less than ten feet, provided that the requirement for access doors set forth in subsection (c) above is met. 
(e)  Gasoline pumps. Automobile service facilities shall have their gasoline pumps, including other service facilities set back at least 18 feet from any property or street line, except where the required front yard setback is greater. 
(f)  Storage of vehicles. No unlicensed vehicles shall be permitted to be stored on the premises. 
(g)  Screening. When adjoining a residential district or use, screening shall be provided as required. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.09), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-200. - Mobile home park design standards. 
    Mobile home parks shall be designed to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Automobile parking area. There shall be established and maintained within each park an automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of spaces within this area shall be equal to one for every four trailer sites. 
(2)  Access roads. Access roads shall be paved to the following minimum widths: 
a.  Eighteen feet where on-street parking is prohibited; 
b.  Twenty-five feet where on-street parking is allowed on one side of the access road; 
c.  Thirty-two feet where on-street parking is allowed on both sides of the access road. 
(3)  Driveways. Mobile home spaces may abut upon a driveway of not less than 25 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to the access road within the mobile home park. The sole vehicular access shall not be by alley, and all dead-end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space or a cul-de-sac. 
(4)  Pads. A minimum of six inches of compacted gravel, or other suitable pavement material, shall be installed for each trailer space. Size of pads shall be as follows: 
a.  Ten percent: Ten feet by 40 feet or larger. 
b.  Ninety percent: Ten feet by 60 feet or larger. 
(5)  Walkways. Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to service buildings. 
(6)  Sewer system. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer line or to a sewer system approved by the county health department. 
(7)  Park and recreation area. There shall be provided a park and recreation area having a minimum of 150 square feet for each mobile home space. Areas shall be consolidated into usable areas with minimum dimensions of not less than 30 feet. 
(8)  Management office and service buildings. Each mobile home park shall be provided with a management office and such service buildings as are necessary to provide facilities for mail distribution, storage space for supplies, maintenance materials and equipment, and laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers. Outside drying yards shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high solid fence. 
(9)  Trailers without sewage disposal facilities. Trailers, with or without toilet facilities, that cannot be connected to a sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted in a mobile home park. 
(10)  Prohibited uses. Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential uses within the mobile home parks. 
(11)  Screening. A mobile home park shall be entirely enclosed, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a solid wall, fence, or evergreen hedge not less than seven feet in height. Such wall, fence, or hedge shall not be constructed or planted within the required front yard setback. 
(12)  Sign. Each mobile home park shall be permitted to display, on each street frontage, one identifying sign of a maximum size of nine square feet. Said sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the mobile home park and may be lighted by indirect lighting only. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.10), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-201. - Drive-in facilities. 
    Drive-in facilities may be permitted only as an accessory use and only when the following provisions are met and approved by the city: 
(1)  Location and arrangement of exits and entrances. No drive-in accessory use shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles which is located closer than 30 feet to any intersection. Individual ingress and egress drives extending across public sidewalks and curbs shall be subject to the same standards and approvals as those for off-street parking access. 
(2)  Size and arrangement. No drive-in accessory use shall project into any front yard or, if applicable, street side yard further than the principal building. A maximum of six drive-in stalls is permitted and they shall be located so as to not restrict pedestrian access to any public entrance of the principal building. Any portion of the drive-in facilities, including access drives, which are located between the principal building and the required off-street parking shall have adequate pedestrian safeguards. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.11, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.11), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-202. - Home occupations. 
    Permitted home occupations operated in any dwelling unit may be operated only if they comply with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Where permitted. Within a single-family dwelling unit, or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit and only by the person or persons maintaining a dwelling therein and not more than one additional person shall be employed therein. 
(2)  Does not display or create outside the building any sign or other evidence of the home occupation. 
(3)  Does not exceed 20 percent of the total living area of the dwelling unit within which it is located, exclusive of any attached garage or accessory structure. 
(4)  A home occupation must be secondary to the use of the home for residential purposes. 
(5)  There shall be no display of goods, machinery, equipment or any performance of work visible or audible from any street or adjoining property nor shall any home occupation activity generate noxious odors. 
(6)  A home occupation may not generate excessive vehicular or pedestrian traffic to the residence, or otherwise negatively affect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(7)  Consultation with one individual at a time or providing individual instruction to one person at a time shall be deemed a home occupation. 
(8)  Group consultation or giving of group instruction of any type shall be considered to be a business enterprise not eligible for consideration as a home occupation. 
(9)  Animal boarding kennels involving more than five dogs and/or cats shall not be considered a home occupation allowable under this section. 
(10)  Bed and breakfast facilities are not considered home occupations allowable under this section, but are considered special exception uses in the R-1 zoning district and governed by section 54-152(c)(1) and section 54-197. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.12, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.12), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 54-203. - Special building setbacks for principal arterial roadways. 
    Along principal arterial roadways identified in the comprehensive plan, the minimum building setback shall be: 
(1)  Planned for two lanes: 25 feet from the established highway right-of-way. 
(2)  Planned for four lanes: 75 feet from the roadway centerline. 
These building setback requirements shall be applicable within all zoning districts excluding the B-1 central business district. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 04.13, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(04.13), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-204-54-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 54-241. - Intent. 
    The intent of the PUD district is to provide a flexible, alternative zoning procedure to encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land, within overall density and use guidelines set forth in elements of the comprehensive plan as these may be officially adopted and from time to time supplemented or amended. Furthermore, it is the general purpose of the PUD district classification to: 
(1)  Encourage enhancement and preservation of lands which are unique or of outstanding scenic, environmental, cultural and historical significance. 
(2)  Provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and safer networks of streets, promoting greater opportunities for public and private open space, and resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the general public. 
(3)  Encourage harmonious and coordinated development of the site, considering the natural features, community facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation in conformance with the thoroughfare plan, and land use relationship with surrounding properties and the general neighborhood. 
(4)  Facilitate determination of the development's anticipated impact on the tax base, the economy, population change, public facilities, and the environment, in order to enable a proper assessment of costs to be shared by the general public and those to be borne by the developer. 
(5)  Require the application of professional planning and design techniques to achieve overall coordinated development, eliminating the negative impacts of unplanned and piecemeal development likely to result from rigid adherence to the zoning classifications and standards found elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-242. - Eligibility. 
    The foregoing cited general purposes and the comprehensive plan elements, along with such standards and performance criteria cited herein, shall guide in the determination of eligibility for PUD application. In addition to the above criteria, the minimum development standards listed herein shall determine eligibility for the type of PUD proposed. 
(1)  Use. The proposed use or combination of uses shall be consistent with the general intent of the adopted goals and policies of the city and criteria established in this article. 
(2)  Developments of regional impact. 
a.  State criteria. In addition to the requirements stated herein, any application for PUD which meets the definition of a state development of regional impact under the rules of the administrative code of the Florida Department of State, or any amendments or additions thereto, must be accompanied by the reports and studies required for developments of regional impact. 
b.  Planned commercial center. This is intended to apply to properties that are located so as to serve residential areas conveniently with shopping facilities in planned centers, provide additional convenience facilities to the neighborhood or community, and provide transitional nonresidential, public, semi-public and residential uses. Application for planned commercial centers shall be accompanied by a study that provides as a minimum the inventory of existing population and number of households to be served within the intended market area and a projection of future growth for a ten-year period based on the city-county land use plan and approved plans for development in the projected market area. The study will evaluate the market area's suitability for a shopping, employment or service center of the size planned with a recommendation on the minimum floor area likely to be supported in the first stage of development and projections of future space needs. 
(3)  Minimum development standards. Any tract of land for which a PUD application is made must conform to the minimum standards stipulated in each of the following categories: 
a.  Shopping center. Minimum criteria for shopping center: 
Local Convenience Neighborhood Community Regional Floor area (sq. ft.) 10,000 40,000 100,000 400,000 Acres in size 1.5 4 10 30 Supporting (individuals) 1,000 2,000 5,000 100,000 Primary service area 1/2 to 1 mile 1 to 11/2 miles 11/2 to 3 miles Metropolitan Primary uses* Grocery, laundry and dry cleaners, barber and beauty shops Supermarket, drug and variety stores Department, variety, apparel and furniture stores General merchandise, also residential and recreational facilities Location Collector street within neighborhood Arterial and collector street intersection Arterial or expressway Arterial or expressway intersection  
    *Examples only. 
b.  Employment center. Minimum criteria for employment center: 
1.  Floor area: 50,000 square feet. 
2.  Acres in site: Five. 
3.  Location: Convenient to transportation centers, residential areas, and service centers (motels, banks, etc.) with direct access to a major thoroughfare. 
4.  Primary uses (examples only): Offices with permitted convenience facilities generally permitted in local convenience centers, including motels and banks, which shall not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area and which are designed to accommodate the needs of the principal use. 
c.  Service center. Minimum criteria for service center: 
1.  Floor area: Flexible. 
2.  Acres in site: Five. 
3.  Location: On or within direct access to major arterial streets so as to provide accessibility to all residents of the metropolitan area without disruption to traffic within or through neighborhoods. 
4.  Primary uses (examples only): Automotive service needs, repair of major household items, which generally offers services to more than one neighborhood. 
d.  Planned residential development. Planned residential development (PRD) is intended that the PRD offer flexible alternatives in the design and arrangement of residential housing types. The minimum area required for application is five acres. However, office and convenience commercial facilities are permitted as part of an application of 25 acres or more providing the office and convenience commercial facilities do not exceed five percent of the combined gross floor area of the residential uses. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross land area, excluding rights-of-way, must be reserved for open space and community facilities with at least one-half of this area maintained in open space increments of at least 12,000 square feet, which may include recreational facilities and supporting structures, but excluding parking areas. 
e.  Planned industrial center. A planned industrial center is intended to promote the concentration of industrial and/or wholesale distribution activities which are compatible with each other and within the general area proposed for such use. Industrial centers must be located on or have direct access to major arterial routes with convenient access to the interstate highway or rail and air transportation facilities without interfering with the mainstream of activity within the urban area. Primary use categories for types of industrial centers are: (i) wholesale distribution; (ii) light manufacturing; (iii) heavy manufacturing. It is also encouraged that limited convenience and support activities which support the primary function be included as part of the proposed development. Minimum area required for application is 25 acres. 
(4)  Configuration of lands. The tract of land for which the PUD application is made shall be a contiguous unified parcel with sufficient width and depth to accommodate the proposed use. Except for a capitol center, university or central city PUD, the minimum average width for any PUD application shall be 200 feet with a minimum average site width requirement of 40 percent of the site depth up to 1,000 feet in width. 
(5)  Ownership. All land included for purpose of development within a PUD district shall be owned by or be under the control of the applicant for such zoning designation, whether that applicant be an individual, partnership or corporation, or groups of individuals, partnerships or corporations. The applicant shall present proof of the unified control of the entire area within the proposed PUD district and shall state that if he or she proceeds with the proposed development he or she will: 
a.  Do so in accord with: (i) the concept plan of development officially adopted for the district; (ii) regulations existing when the amendment creating the PUD district is passed; and (iii) such other conditions or modifications as may be attached to the rezoning of the land to the PUD classification. 
b.  Provide agreements, contracts and proposed deed restrictions acceptable to the city and county for completion of the undertaking in accordance with the adopted concept plan as well as for the continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions, and facilities as are not to be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
c.  Bind his or her successors in title to any commitments made under subsections a. and b. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-243. - Concept plan information package. 
(a)  Professional services required. The concept plan submitted for approval shall be prepared by one or more persons registered in the state in the following professions: architecture, civil engineering, landscape architecture, land surveying, or a land use planner who has completed one of the following education or experience requirements: 
(1)  Received a graduate degree in planning and has been engaged two years in professional planning experience; 
(2)  Received a graduate degree in a field related to planning and has been engaged three years in professional planning experience; 
(3)  Received a bachelor's degree in planning and have had at least four years of work experience in the planning field, including at least three years of professional planning experience; 
(4)  Received a bachelor's degree and have had at least five years in the planning field, including at least three years of professional planning experience; or 
(5)  Have had at least eight years in the planning field, including at least three years of professional planning experience. Professional planning experience must be related to the planning of the unified development of urban communities and their environs, and any item of work experience must show initiative, judgment, substantial involvement, and personal accountability for definition of or preparation of significant substantive elements of the planning program. 
(b)  Legal description of site. This description shall be prepared by a land surveyor. The legal description shall be accompanied by a map at a scale suitable for reproduction for advertising for public hearing. 
(c)  Site conditions map. This map or series of maps shall be drawn to an acceptable scale and shall indicate: 
(1)  Title of the planned unit development and name of the developer. 
(2)  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to such external facilities as highways, shopping areas, and cultural complexes. 
(3)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing streets buildings, water courses, easements, section lines, and other important physical features within the proposed project. Other information on physical features affecting the proposed project may be required. 
(4)  Existing topography (latest U.S. Department of the Interior Geological Survey 7.5 minute series reproduced to scale of other use data will be acceptable). 
(5)  The location and size (as appropriate) of all existing drainage, water, sewer, and other utility provisions. 
(6)  Information about existing vegetative cover and general soil types as appropriate to the proposed project. 
(7)  The location and function of all other existing public facilities which would serve the site such as schools, parks, and fire stations. Notation of this information on a scaled map is acceptable. 
(d)  Concept plan. This plan shall be prepared at the same scale as the above site conditions map and shall indicate: 
(1)  Sketch plan for pedestrians and vehicular circulation showing the general locations and rights-of-way widths and the general design capacity of the system as well as access points to the major thoroughfare systems. A diagrammatic flow chart demonstrating the pattern of vehicular traffic movement to, within, and through the planned unit development shall be included as a supplement to this plan. The applicant is encouraged where acceptable, but not required, to submit one or more companion proposals for a pedestrian system, transit system or other alternative for the movement of persons by means other than privately owned automobiles. 
(2)  A general plan for the use of all lands within the proposed PUD. Such plans shall indicate the general location function and extent of all components or units of the plan, including low, medium, and high density residential areas (indicating the proposed density for each category); open space provisions such as golf courses, parks, passive or scenic areas; community serving recreation or leisure time facilities; and areas for such public or quasi-public institutional uses such as schools, churches, libraries, outpatient clinics, and public safety facilities. 
(3)  A statement indicating what proposed arrangements are made with the appropriate agencies for the provision of needed utilities to and within the planned unit development, including, if appropriate, water supply, treatment and distribution where on-site treatment is proposed; storm drainage collection and disposal; electric power; gas; sewage collection, treatment and disposal where on-site treatment is proposed; and communications (telephone, cable TV). 
(e)  Supportive report. A supportive report shall be prepared in conjunction with the above material and shall include: 
(1)  A statement indicating how the proposed project complies with the comprehensive plan and its components and the goals and policies for development of the city. 
(2)  A general description of the proposed development including: 
a.  The total acreage involved in the project. 
b.  The number of acres devoted to the various categories of land use shown on the site development plan, along with the percentage of total acreage represented by each category of use and component of development plus an itemized list of uses proposed for each of the components which shall be the range of uses permitted for that section of the planned unit development. 
c.  The number and type of dwelling units involved for the overall site and for its components; dwelling unit per acre calculations along with population projections for each. 
d.  A description of the projected service areas for nonresidential uses (neighborhood, community or regional) along with the projected population data necessary to support these facilities. 
e.  The establishment of minimum design standards which shall govern the site development such as lot shape and size, internal streets and pedestrian ways, open space provisions, off-street parking demands, visual screens, general buffer and landscape areas. 
(3)  A proposed concept plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Delineation of the components in map form along with the order in which they shall be submitted for final development plan approval. 
b.  The approximate dates for filing final development plans. 
c.  The approximate schedule for construction of required or permitted improvements of common open space within each component, including any complementary buildings. 
d.  The proposed schedule for dedication of improvement of public rights-of-ways, easements and properties. 
(4)  A statement and/or map indicating which streets or roads (and pedestrian ways as appropriate) are proposed for public ownership and maintenance and whether approval is sought as part of the concept plan for private roads, if any, within the community. 
(5)  A statement and/or map on drainage which generally shows existing drainage conditions, wet weather areas, areas of frequent flooding, points of discharge from the project, and anticipated quantities of water generated from the development. Where conditions dictate, a statement on the proposed method of discharge of run-off within and from the site shall be furnished. 
(6)  A statement which shall indicate the proposed method of governing the use, maintenance and continued protection of the open space and community serving facilities. 
(7)  Dedication of public rights-of-way and easements may be required as a condition for approval by the local planning agency or city council. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-244. - Procedures for concept plan approval. 
    All applications for PUD development shall be processed in the following manner: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. Prior to submitting an application for approval of a planned unit development, the applicant or his or her representative shall confer with the development administrator. The applicant is encouraged to submit a tentative land use sketch for review and to obtain information on any projected plans, programs or other matters that may affect the proposed development. This information should include: 
a.  The proper relationship between the proposed development and surrounding uses, and the effect of the plan upon the comprehensive plan of the city. 
b.  The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, utilities, and other public facilities and services within the proposed planned unit development. 
c.  The character, design and appropriateness of the proposed land uses and their adequacy to encourage desirable living conditions, to provide separation and screening between uses where desirable, and to preserve the natural amenities of streams, wooded areas, and similar natural features. 
d.  The adequacy of open space and recreation areas, existing and proposed, to serve the needs of the development. 
e.  The adequacy of the land area and of the surrounding areas to accommodate future expansion, if needed. 
(2)  Preapplication. After plans have been formulated and prior to formal application for local planning agency review, the applicant shall submit his or her plans to the development administrator. The development administrator may advise the applicant of any recommended adjustments or additional necessary information for formal application. 
(3)  Technical review. The applicant shall submit his or her proposal for formal review to the development administrator a minimum of 45 days prior to public hearing before the local planning agency. The development administrator shall review the plans and submit to the applicant an itemized list of comments and any stipulations and/or requested additional material and data determined necessary. The development administrator shall then submit his or her findings to the local planning agency. 
(4)  Local planning agency hearings. In accordance with established review procedures, the local planning agency shall review the application and determine whether the proposed plan meets the intent of the planned unit development district and whether it complies with the comprehensive plan and the goals and policies for development of the city. The local planning agency shall then submit its recommendations in writing to the appropriate governing body. 
(5)  Action by city council. The city council shall review all the materials and comments submitted in a public hearing, not sooner than 15 days, nor longer than 60 days from the date of the local planning agency disposition. The action of the city council may be conditional and may impose restrictions and standards of development for the PUD district. In any event a final determination must be made within six months of the original public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-245. - Applicability of concept plan. 
(a)  If approved by the governing body the concept plan and all other information and material formally submitted with the application shall be adopted as an amendment to this chapter and shall become the standards of development for the planned unit development. All future developments shall conform to the standards adopted for the planned unit development regardless of changes in ownership. 
(b)  Upon such approval and subsequent amendment, construction may proceed for public and/or approved private roads, utility installations, community serving open space, and recreational facilities not involving residential use, but including clubhouses and other accessory and related facilities, governmental structures, and similar uses. Such construction shall be in accord with the concept plan as approved. Except as provided above, no construction permit shall be issued for lands zoned PUD until an appropriate PUD final development plan has been approved in the manner hereinafter set out. 
(c)  Application for approval of a PUD concept as set forth herein may be made notwithstanding the fact that there may exist at the time of application conflicting restrictive covenants on the land, but final approval of the PUD concept shall then be conditioned on the invalidation or modification of any such restrictive covenants within six months from the date of conditional approval so as to conform to the approved PUD concept. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-246. - Establishment of district. 
(a)  Status of land. Upon approval of the concept plan, the property shall be designated PUD concept on the official zoning map. The only construction permitted on the property until approval of the final development plan is that construction provided for in section 54-245. The property shall remain PUD concept until approval of final development plan. 
(b)  Changes in concept plan. It is not intended that the planned unit development district concept plan so approved shall be inflexibly applied, but rather, the development of the planned unit development district shall be in conformance with the concept plan subject to modification due to changed economic, social, or demographic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-247. - Final development plan. 
    Except as permitted under concept plan approval, the applicant shall submit a final development plan prior to commencing development on property zoned PUD concept. Approval of components of the planned unit development zoning district plans shall be according to the development schedule approved under the concept plan. The following data and information is required in addition to the material submitted under the concept plan: 
(1)  Professional services required. Same as set forth in section 54-243(a). 
(2)  Detailed statement of objectives. A detailed statement of objectives indicating: 
a.  The general purpose of the development. 
b.  The type dwellings to be constructed. 
c.  The method and time schedule of development and improvement of the project. 
d.  The disposition of open space to be provided. A boundary survey shall be prepared by a land surveyor showing all public rights-of-way and easements. 
(3)  Site conditions map. A site conditions map drawn to an appropriate engineer's scale sufficient to show detail shall show the location of the existing property lines both for private property and for public property, existing contours shown at a contour interval of two feet, streets, buildings, watercourses, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts and drain pipes, water mains, public utility easements, wooded areas, streams, lakes, marshes, and any other physical condition affecting the area. 
(4)  Final development plan. A final development plan or plans shall be drawn to an appropriate scale showing: 
a.  The boundaries of the site, topography, and proposed grading plan. 
b.  The width, location, typical sections, and names of proposed streets. 
c.  The width, location and names of surrounding land use. 
d.  The use, size, location and height of all proposed buildings and other structures. 
e.  The off-street parking and loading plan. 
f.  A circulation diagram showing vehicular and pedestrian movements including any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed. 
g.  Drawings indicating the general architectural themes, appearance and representative building types except for detached single-family dwellings and accessory structures. 
h.  Provisions for the control of signs including size, shape and appearance. 
i.  The location and size of common open spaces and public or quasi-public areas. 
(5)  Utility service plan. A utility service plan showing: 
a.  Existing drainage and sewer lines. 
b.  The disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater. 
c.  The source of potable water. 
d.  The location and width of all utility easements or rights-of-way. 
(6)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan showing: 
a.  Landscaped areas. 
b.  All specimen trees or groups of specimen trees 36 inches in diameter or larger, indicating those to be retained, removed, or relocated. 
c.  The location, height, and material for walks, fences, walkways, and other manmade landscape features. 
d.  Any special landscape features such as, but not limited to, man-made lakes, land sculpture, and waterfalls. 
(7)  Statistical information. Statistical information including: 
a.  Total acreage of the site. 
b.  Maximum building coverage expressed as a percentage of the site area. 
c.  The area of land devoted to landscaping and/or open spaces usable for recreation purposes expressed as a percent of the total site area. 
d.  The calculated density for the project. 
(8)  Development schedule. The development schedule shall contain the following information: 
a.  The order of construction of the proposed stages delineated in the final development plan. 
b.  The proposed date for the beginning of construction on said stages. 
c.  The proposed date for the completion of construction on said stages. 
d.  The proposed schedule for the construction and improvement of common open space within said stages, including any complementary buildings. 
(9)  Covenants and restrictions. Definitive covenants, grants, easements, dedications and restrictions to be imposed on the land, buildings, and structures, including proposed easements for public utilities and instruments relating to the use and maintenance of common open spaces and private streets. Such instruments shall give consideration to access requirements of public vehicles for maintenance purposes. 
(10)  Bylaws of association or nonprofit corporation. If the applicant elects this method of administration of common open space, the proposed bylaws of the association or the certificate of incorporation and the corporate bylaws of the nonprofit corporation shall be submitted to the city council for its files. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-248. - Site development standards. 
    Exemption from the normal requirements of this chapter may be permitted when the developer demonstrates to the local planning agency that adequate provisions have been made in the planned unit development for sufficient light and air, that the density of development is compatible with surrounding land uses, that pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation systems are safe and efficient, that the development will progress in orderly phases, and that the public health, safety and general welfare will be protected. However, where higher or more restrictive specific standards for use, height, setback, visual screens, rights-of-way, sign control and open space are adopted as part of the concept plan, no exceptions or variations from said standards shall be granted in the final development plan. For PUD, the required general development standards are as follows: 
(1)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions shall be the same as those set forth in the schedule of district regulations in article II, division 2 of this chapter for the following PUD applications, unless other use concepts are approved as part of the concept plan: 
a.  Planned commercial center (B-2). 
b.  Planned residential development (R-2). 
c.  Planned industrial center (I-1). 
(2)  Residential density. Residential density shall be determined by the maximum set forth in the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan. However, an increase in density may be permitted when it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the features of the property and the conditions of the concept plan represent a development alternative which does not significantly increase the impact (anticipated by the land use element) on the neighborhood and community. 
(3)  Setback and height standards. Setback and height standards are the same as set forth in the schedule of district regulations in article III, division 2 of this chapter, except variation might be granted when stated in the concept plan, as approved, or in the final development plan, providing such variations are consistent with and aid in the accomplishment of the PUD district as set forth in section 54-241(1), (2) and (3). 
(4)  Visual screens. Visual screens proposed under the same concept plan or final development plan shall have the same minimum requirements as those set forth in this chapter unless acceptable alternatives are proposed and approved as part of concept or final plan approval. 
(5)  Off-street parking, loading and unloading regulations. Off-street parking, loading and unloading regulations shall be the same as are required under article VIII of this chapter except that minimum requirements for off-street parking spaces may be reduced when approved under the final development plan. The applicant must provide evidence that minimum requirements may be varied due to the unique character of the proposed developments such as multiple use of parking facilities by activities which function at different hours and which can utilize common facilities, provided, further, the effect of said reduction will be to place the area thus economized into landscaped or natural open space to be available for future parking needs should conditions change. 
(6)  Minimum design standards. Minimum design standards for public and private rights-of-way and minimum construction standards for streets, drainage systems and utility systems shall be the same as are required under the subdivision regulations unless acceptable alternatives providing equal or higher performance are approved in the final development plan. 
(7)  Standards of development. The standards of development are subject to land development regulation requirements unless acceptable alternatives are approved under the final development plan. 
(8)  Sign control. Article IX of this chapter (sign regulations) shall apply to all PUD applications unless acceptable alternatives are approved as part of the final development plan. 
(9)  Common open space. 
a.  The city council may require that the petitioner provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of any common open space, and such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common open space by sale, or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the common open space). Any transfer shall conform to the conditions of the final development plan. 
b.  In the event that the organization established to own and maintain common open space, or any successor organization shall at any time after the establishment of the planned unit development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition, in accordance with the final development, the city may serve written notice upon such organization and/or the owners or residents of the planned unit development and hold a public hearing to determine any deficiencies. If deficiencies of maintenance are not corrected within 30 days after such notice and hearing, the appropriate governing body shall call upon any public or private agency to maintain the common open space for a period of one year. When the city determines that the subject organization is not prepared or able to maintain the common open space, such public or private agency shall continue maintenance for yearly periods. 
c.  The cost of such maintenance by such agency shall be assessed proportionately against the properties within the planned unit development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a lien on said properties. 
d.  The amount of any lien imposed hereunder shall become due and payable at the city clerks office on a date to be determined by the governing body at the public hearing. All such liens shall be of the same nature and to the same extent as liens for general county taxes and be collectible in the same manner and with the same fees, interest and penalties for default in payment and under the same provisions as to sale and forfeiture as apply to general county taxes. Collection of such liens with such interest and penalties and with a reasonable attorney's fee, may also be made by foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction and it shall be lawful to join in any suit for foreclosure any one or more lots or parcels of land by whosoever owned upon which such liens are delinquent; provided that failure to pay any installment of principal or interest of any lien when such installments shall become due shall, without notice or other proceedings, cause all installments of principal remaining unpaid to be forthwith due and payable with interest due thereon at the date of default; but if before the sale of the property for delinquent lien payments, the amount of such delinquency shall be paid with all penalties, interests, costs, and attorney's fees, further installments of the principal shall be due and payable and shall be due and payable at the times at which the same would be due if no such default had occurred. 
(10)  Dedication of public facilities. The city council may, as a condition of approval and adoption in accordance with the final development plan, require that suitable areas for easements and public rights-of-way be set aside, dedicated and/or improved for public use. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.08), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-249. - Procedure for final approval. 
    Procedure for approval of a final development plan for a PUD shall be processed in the following manner: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. Prior to submitting a formal application for final development plan approval, the applicant shall confer with the city superintendent in the review and processing of the application. The applicant shall also submit the materials needed for final approval to the city superintendent for informal review. The superintendent shall review the information and advise the applicant of any recommended adjustments or necessary additional information prior to formal application. 
(2)  Development administrator review. The materials required under the final development plan shall be submitted a minimum of 45 days prior to review by the development administrator. The development administrator shall prepare an itemized list of comments to be submitted to the city council which shall report on the final plan's compliance with the intent and standards set forth in the concept plan. 
(3)  City council review. The city council shall review the application for final plan approval. Any conditions attached to final plan approval by the city council must be part of the material required for plan approval and must be resubmitted by the applicant for final plan approval. 
(4)  Compliance with adopted concept plan. The following intensity, density, floor area, ground area and building height variations are permitted to be transferred within the final plan components according to the following schedule, providing such variations do not represent a net increase in the overall intensity, density, use, floor area or ground coverage adopted for the PUD under the concept plan. The variations shall not: 
a.  Increase the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than ten percent. 
b.  Involve a reduction of the area set aside for common open space nor the substantial relocation of such area. 
c.  Increase by more than ten percent the floor area proposed for nonresidential use. 
d.  Increase by more than ten percent the total ground areas covered by buildings or a change of more than eight feet in the height of the buildings. 
e.  Vary substantially from street layouts or proposed land uses not stipulated in the concept plan. Modifications in the design of streets and utilities in a manner approved by the city council shall not constitute a substantial variation from the concept plan. The burden shall be upon the applicant to show the city council good cause for any variation between the concept plan and the final development plan as submitted for final approval. If the final development plan, as submitted, contains substantial variations from the concept plan, the city council may, after a meeting with the applicant, refuse to grant final approval and shall, within five days of such action, so advise the applicant in writing why said variations are not in the public interest. 
(5)  Administrative discretion. When unforeseen circumstances occur during site development which may result in minor shifts, extensions, alterations, or modifications of buildings or structures, such may be authorized by the city superintendent if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final development plan. 
(6)  Applicability of adopted plan; amendments to plan. If approved, the final development plan and all other material and information submitted formally with the application, and any provisions placed on the property by the local planning agency or city council, shall be adopted as amendments to the land development regulations shall become standards of development for the planned unit development. All future development shall conform to the adopted standards regardless of any changes in ownership, provided further that no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless standards herein are complied with. 
(7)  Zoning designation. Upon approval of a final development plan, the property shall be designated PUD on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.09), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-250. - Violations. 
    Any violation of the concept plan or final development plan or any other requirement adopted as part of the amendment to the land development regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 06.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(06.10), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-251. - Retention of consultants. 
    The city may, if in its opinion it is necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of any portion of a PUD application. The cost of retaining said consultants shall be borne by the applicants in the manner set forth within a resolution of the city council concerning applications and fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § 3(06.11), 1-4-2005) 
Sec. 54-252. - Standards of development for Monticello Pines Subdivision, Phase I, Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
    The final development plan for Monticello Pines Subdivision, Phase I, Planned Unit Development (PUD), and all other materials and information submitted formally in connection with the application for approval thereof, including but not limited to the Revised Phase I Final Development Plan Narrative, Correspondence Regarding Off-Site Road Improvements (letter from Bill Tellefsen-Jefferson County Planning Official), Response to City of Monticello Review Comments on 26 Nov. 2008 Final Development Plan Submittal, and the city engineer's application review comments, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the standards of development for said PUD. All future development shall conform to the adopted standards, regardless of any changes in ownership. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any portion of the PUD unless the standards are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 11-3-2009) 
Secs. 54-253-54-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NATURAL RESOURCE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 54-271-54-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, amended Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 54-301-54-305, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.01, adopted Aug. 7, 1990; Ord. No. 95-04, arts. 1-5, adopted June 6, 1995; and Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1(07.01.10), adopted Sept. 7, 2004. 

Subdivision 1. - Administration 

Sec. 54-301. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Monticello, hereinafter referred to as "this division." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Intent. The purposes of this division and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(d)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This division is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this division and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this division. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. This division shall not create liability on the part of city council of or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-302. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this division applies. This division shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Monticello, as established in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Jefferson County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated ____________ , and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this division and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at City Hall, 245 Mulberry Street. 
(1)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 54-305 of this division the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this division and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(d)  Other laws. The provisions of this division shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This division supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this division and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This division shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this division. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-303. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The city manager is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this division consistent with the intent and purpose of this division and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this division without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 54-307 of this division. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this division; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this division is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this division. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this division is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 54-307 of this division. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this division. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 54-306 of this division for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to [subsection (d)]; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this division and the Florida Building Code and this division to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of City of Monticello are modified. 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this division and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this division; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this division and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at City Hall, 245 S. Mulberry Street. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-304. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this division, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this division and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this division for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this division: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(c)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 54-305 of this division. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(d)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this division shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this division, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(e)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this division or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(g)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Northwest Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-305. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this division shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this division but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this division. 
(b)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is four feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than four feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(c)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection (d) of this section and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection (d). 
(d)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-306. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
a.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with subsection 54-305(b)(3)b. of this division, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
b.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection (a)(2)a. of this section. 
c.  Manufactured homes. The building official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-307. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The city council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this division. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the city council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  Appeals. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this division. Any person aggrieved by the decision of city council may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The city council shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection (f), the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection (g), and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The city council has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this division. 
(1)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 54-305(c) of this division. 
(d)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this division, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection 54-307(c)(1), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(f)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this division, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(g)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this division or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the city council that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-308. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this division, shall be deemed a violation of this division. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this division or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Subdivision 2. - Definitions 

Sec. 54-309. - General. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this division, have the meanings shown in this [subdivision]. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this division and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this division or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-310. - Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this division or a request for a variance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled flood resistant design and construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 3, 1986. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 3, 1986. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this division (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this division. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this division, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this division and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 3, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 3, 1986. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01, ] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in F.S. § 320.01) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this division, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this division or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Subdivision 3. - Flood Resistant Development 

Sec. 54-311. - Buildings and structures. 
    Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to subsection 54-304(b)(1) of this division, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 54-307 of this division. 
Sec. 54-312. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with subsection 54-305(b)(1) of this division; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 54-303 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-313. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 54-305(c)(1) of this division demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this division, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-314. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this division. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 54-304(d)(1) or (2) of this division, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 54-304(d)(2) of this division, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 54-304(d)(1) of this division, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-315. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection 54-305(a) of this division for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 54-304 of this division for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-316. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 54-306(c) of this division shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 54-317. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this division or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of subsection 54-303(d) of this division if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 54-303(d) of this division. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 54-303(d) of this division. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 54-303(d) of this division. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 54-305(c)(3) of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 54-318-54-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS 

Sec. 54-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wetlands means land that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do or would support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term includes, but is not limited to, swamp hammocks, hardwood swamps, riverine cypress, cypress ponds, bay heads and bogs, wet prairies and freshwater marshes. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-332. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect, preserve, and enhance, where feasible, the natural functions of wetlands within the city. It is also the intent of this division to apply the standards for development in this division in and adjacent to wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-333. - Determination of existence of wetlands on or adjacent to site. 
    The following regulations shall apply to development requiring a site plan or a subdivision plat in or adjacent to wetlands: 
(1)  Wetlands which require a Northwest Florida Water Management District permit are exempt from subsections (2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section. 
(2)  During the review of development plans, the development administrator, the city superintendent, or other city agents shall use the National Wetlands Inventory maps, the Jefferson County Soils Survey, aerial photography, applicant-provided information, or other applicable data to determine the existence of wetlands on or adjacent to the site. 
(3)  If these materials indicate that wetlands may exist on or adjacent to the property, a site inspection will be performed by the development administrator or a qualified subcontractor to determine if wetlands are present and, if so, the wetlands boundaries. 
(4)  Based on this assessment, the development administrator shall make recommendations for development within or adjacent to the wetlands and for required mitigation, if any, consistent with the provisions of sections 54-334, 54-335 and 54-336. 
(5)  The development administrator, city superintendent, or other city agents shall conduct a site visit with the developer or developer's representative and locate the wetlands boundaries, or will provide the developer with a photocopy of an aerial photograph or map of the area with the wetlands boundaries clearly marked, whichever is available. The city will not provide a survey of the wetlands boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-334. - Permitted uses in wetlands. 
(a)  The following uses shall be permitted in wetlands provided that they do not adversely affect the functions of wetlands within the city: 
(1)  Recreation; 
(2)  Fish and wildlife management; and 
(3)  Open space. 
(b)  As an alternative to filling, functional isolated wetlands may be utilized within the surface water management system of a project as approved by the city. 
(c)  Maximum residential density within all water's edge wetlands and functional isolated wetlands larger than one acre shall be one dwelling unit per 21/2 acres. 
(d)  All subdivision plats and multifamily residential plans shall be reviewed by the development administrator or the city superintendent to determine utilization or protection of wetlands during plat or site plan review. 
(e)  Any allowed filling of wetlands shall be limited to the structural building area requirements, the 100-year flood elevation requirement for first floor elevations, and a single primary access to the on-site structures. The amount of fill and the extent of the filled areas shall be the minimum required to accomplish these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-335. - Prohibited uses in wetlands. 
(a)  All other development, except as provided above, shall be prohibited in wetlands unless: 
(1)  Access to the water is required through water's edge wetlands; 
(2)  The activity has no feasible alternative location; 
(3)  The activity does not impair the function of the wetland; or 
(4)  The activity enhances the function of the wetland. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial uses shall not be permitted in wetlands. 
(c)  Disposal of solid or liquid wastes, and applying or storing pesticides and herbicides, shall be prohibited in any wetland. 
(d)  Public facilities shall not be located within wetlands unless the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The facilities are water-dependent, such as mosquito control facilities; 
(2)  The facilities are water-related, such as boat ramps, docks, or surface water management facilities; 
(3)  The facilities are not adversely affected by periodic flooding or standing water; 
(4)  The building structures are floodproofed and located above the 100-year flood elevation, or removed from the floodplain by appropriately constructed dikes or levees; or 
(5)  The facilities are found to be in the public interest, and there is no feasible alternative location. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-336. - Relationship to other requirements. 
    In addition to meeting the requirements of this division and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, development plans shall comply with applicable federal, state, and water management district regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-337. - Mitigation. 
    Any development in wetlands shall provide for the replacement of lost wetlands caused by the project. Mitigation shall occur at a ratio of two units of replacement wetlands for each one unit, or fraction thereof, of lost wetlands (a 2:1 ratio). Mitigation should generally be in-kind and on-site; however, alternative wetland community types and mitigation sites may, at the sole option of the city, be considered in lieu of in-kind and on-site mitigation if the latter is not a practical option. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.02.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.02.06), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-338-54-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GROUNDWATER AND WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 54-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Protected wellhead means those wellheads with a permitted capacity of 100,000 GPD or more. 
    Wellhead protection area means all land within a 660-foot radius of an existing or designated protected wellhead. 
    Zone of exclusion means all land within a 300-foot radius of an existing or designated protected wellhead. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.03.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.03.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-362. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to safeguard the drinking water of the citizens of the city. This is accomplished through ensuring the protection of the principal source of water for domestic, agricultural, and industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.03.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.03.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-363. - Restrictions on development. 
(a)  Development within zone of exclusion. No development activities shall take place in the zone of exclusion. 
(b)  Prohibited uses and development activities within wellhead protection zone. The following land uses are prohibited within wellhead protection zone: 
(1)  Landfills. 
(2)  Facilities for the bulk storage, handling or processing of materials on the Florida Substance List (F.S. ch. 442). 
(3)  Activities that require the storage, use, handling, production or transportation of restricted substances: agricultural chemicals, petroleum products, hazardous/toxic wastes, industrial chemicals, medical wastes, etc. 
(4)  Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities. 
(5)  Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, and similar facilities. 
(6)  Mines. 
(7)  Excavation of waterways or drainage facilities which intersect the water table. 
(c)  Special restrictions on development allowed within wellhead protection zone. 
(1)  Stormwater management practices shall not include drainage wells and sinkholes for stormwater disposal where recharge is into potable water aquifers. 
(2)  Where development is proposed in areas with existing wells, these wells shall be abandoned, including adequate sealing and plugging according to F.A.C. ch. 17-28. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.03.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.03.02), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-364-54-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 54-391. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and that occurs immediately following, a rainfall. 
    Stormwater management system means the system, or combination of systems, designed to treat stormwater, or collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater on, through and from a subdivision or land development activity. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the stormwater that flows from the land surface of a site either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.04.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.04.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-392. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to minimize the adverse effects of development activities due to stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.04.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.04.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-393. - Exemptions; applicability. 
(a)  Exemptions. The following are exempted from this division: 
(1)  Bona fide agricultural activities. 
(2)  Maintenance activity that does not change or affect the quality, rate, volume, or location of stormwater flows on or off the site. 
(3)  Action taken under emergency conditions to prevent immediate harm or danger to persons or property. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a stormwater permit from the state department of environmental protection in accordance with F.A.C. ch. 62-25, "Regulations of Stormwater discharge," shall be required for all new development except the construction of one single-family dwelling unit, duplex, triplex, or quadruplex that is not part of a larger common plan of development. 
(2)  For those developments using the swale exemption pursuant to F.A.C. 62-25.030(1)(c), the applicant shall provide calculations and other supporting documentation as part of the development permit approval process demonstrating that the treatment required by F.A.C. ch. 62-25 is obtained. 
(3)  The construction of a one single-family dwelling unit, duplex, triplex or quadruplex that is not part of a larger common plan of development shall use site suitable best management practices to minimize the off-site effects of stormwater. The following standards shall apply: 
a.  Prior to and during land clearing and construction, a sediment control barrier shall be installed between the area to be cleared and wetlands or waters. In addition, flow paths of stormwater from surrounding lands shall be determined; if stormwater flow is toward areas to be cleared, measures shall be taken to redirect the stormwater toward vegetated land. 
b.  Only those areas necessary for construction activities should be cleared. During construction, sediment barriers shall be inspected and maintained, and building debris shall be removed from the stormwater flow path and deposited into trash receptacles. 
c.  Stormwater impacts shall be minimized by using site suitable best management practices which maximize infiltration of stormwater and minimize off-site discharge. Stormwater flow paths for property as it is planned to be developed shall be determined and berms, shallow depressions, swales, landscaping, and other stormwater management practices shall be included in the site plan to intercept, infiltrate, and treat stormwater before it reaches wetlands or waters. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.04.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.04.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-394. - Design of stormwater management system. 
(a)  A stormwater management system shall be provided to assure that the stormwater peak discharge rate, volume and pollutant load is not greater after development than before development. 
(b)  The stormwater system shall be designed in accordance with F.A.C. ch. 62-25, with the exception of the following city requirements: 
(1)  Detention with filtration systems shall not be allowed unless the applicant demonstrates that no other alternative is feasible, that the proposed filtration system discharge will meet applicable water quality standards and that the applicant shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance of the system. 
(2)  Off-line retention systems shall be used whenever the soil conditions will allow percolation of the treatment volume within 72 hours. 
(3)  When soil conditions will not allow infiltration practices to be used, the stormwater system shall consist of a wet detention system with vegetated littoral zone. 
(4)  To enhance the effectiveness of the wet detention system, landscape retention pretreatment practices such as swales or the placement of raised storm sewer inlets in grassed areas shall be employed in combination with the detention system unless site conditions prohibit such practices. 
(5)  Other stormwater management practices may be used provided the applicant demonstrates that the stormwater management system will provide treatment equivalent to that provided by off-line retention systems. 
(c)  To provide flood protection, the stormwater generated by the development from a 25-year frequency 24-hour duration storm event shall be controlled by a detention facility and released at a rate of discharge not to exceed the peak discharge rate from the site in its undeveloped condition. Special engineering features shall be incorporated to minimize the transport of pollutants remaining in the detention facility. 
(d)  No direct connection between retention and detention facilities shall be allowed. Flow from the retention facility shall be filtered naturally by percolation through the soil. 
(e)  All detention facilities shall discharge design flows through structural discharge facilities. When direct discharge will degrade waters of natural streams, wetlands, environmentally sensitive areas, or lands naturally receiving sheet flow, the discharge structure shall direct the flow to an intermediate spreader swale system. 
(f)  All discharge structures shall be designed to trap floating debris and pollutants on site. 
(g)  A 20-foot-wide maintenance berm will be required around wet detention facilities and those dry facilities with slopes steeper than 4:1. 
(h)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed for ease of maintenance and operation and low maintenance costs. It is suggested that the required stormwater system be integrated into a site's open space and landscaping and that they be used as recreational or park areas. The system should be constructed in such a manner (i.e., gentle slopes, grassed, plantings, etc.) that it will be an amenity to the development. 
(i)  Projects that are to be developed in phases will normally require the submission of a master plan of the applicant's contiguous land holdings. Applications for individual project phases may be considered only when the phases and the stormwater systems are totally independent of adjacent lands. 
(j)  An erosion and sediment control plan to retain sediment on-site shall be required. The plan shall describe, in detail, the type and location of control measures, the stage of development at which they will be put into place and provisions for maintenance. 
(k)  The stormwater system designed shall include an operation and maintenance manual which specifies all maintenance activities that will be needed to assure that the system continues to function as designed. A copy of the operation and maintenance manual shall be provided to the owner of the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.04.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.04.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-395. - Stormwater management plan. 
    It is the responsibility of the applicant to include in the stormwater management plan sufficient information for the city and the state department of environmental protection to evaluate the effectiveness and acceptability of the stormwater management system. The plan shall contain maps, charts, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, calculations, construction plans and specifications, soils information with special attention to limitations to development, extent of proposed topographic changes after development, land use information and any other information as appropriate to demonstrate that the proposed stormwater management system meets the requirements set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 07.04.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(07.04.04), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-396-54-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2013, deleted the former Art. VII, §§ 54-421-54-458, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 08.01, 08.02, 08.04-08.09, 08.11, adopted Aug. 7, 1990; Ord. No. 96-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1996; Ord. No. 96-05, adopted June 4, 1996; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2001; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 2006; and Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 2010. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-421. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic design review board of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within as designated historic district. 
    Demolition by neglect means deterioration of a historic property or a contributing structure in a designated historic district by virtue of the withholding of ordinary maintenance and repair, to the extent that the property or structure could be reasonably expected to become unsafe. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general arrangements of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site which affect the historical character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the city council. 
    Historic property means an individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the city council. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any structure, site or work of art within a historic district, and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; 
(2)  Demolition of an historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 54-422. - Penalty. 
    Any person who carries out or causes to be carried out any work in violation of this article shall be required to restore the subject improvement, building, site, structure, appurtenance, or landscape feature, either to its appearance prior to the violation or in accordance with a certificate of appropriateness required by the city council. Such person will also be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 per day between the day on which the work is cited as being in violation of this article and the date on which the development administrator certifies and verifies to the city council that the violation has been corrected. This civil remedy may be obtained through proceedings before a court of competent jurisdiction, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other civil or criminal prosecution and/or penalty otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-423. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of properties in the city is among its most valued and important assets, that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people, and that the official listing of the historic district on the National Register of Historic Places reinforces the city's special historic character, and in order to stimulate revitalization of the districts and properties and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions and thereby promote and stimulate business, the city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of these land development regulations to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of historic places (i.e., districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value). 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-424. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  When required. After the designation of an historic property or an historic district, no material change in the appearance of a designated historic structure or surrounding property shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to the city for review by the historic design review board and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Emergency repairs which are temporary in nature and are necessary to assure the structural integrity of an historic property or to eliminate an unsafe condition shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. Emergency temporary repairs shall be allowed to remain for no longer than three months, with an extension allowed for up to 12 months, upon application to the historic design review board. 
(2)  Paint color does not require an application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  New construction. The city council shall issue certificates of appropriateness for new structures proposed for construction within designated historic districts or on designated historic properties. These structures shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setback, and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the board's design guidelines as outlined in subsection (f). 
(2)  Alterations, reconstruction, major repairs. 
a.  When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness for alterations, reconstruction, major repairs, or maintenance to existing buildings requiring review, the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards of Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guide. These standards shall be liberally interpreted with the understanding of economic need relative to reasonable use of a structure, while keeping in mind the intent of the city to preserve, restore and protect historic resources of the city. These standards shall be applied in accordance with the contributory nature of individual structures and open spaces within the historic district. Contributory structures shall conform to the most stringent standards of appropriateness, with emphasis on preservation and restoration. Noncontributory structures that have their own historic or architectural merit should also be preserved, with restoration work as appropriate. Noncontributory structures that could feasibly contribute to the historic district, but have been subjected to unsympathetic alterations should be restored to their original contributory form if appropriate alterations are economically feasible. All work on structures and appurtenances, regardless of their contributory nature, shall be done in a manner that does not detract from the historical or architectural character of the historic district or historic property. 
b.  In considering proposals for alterations to the exterior of historic buildings and structures and in applying development and designation standards, the documented, original design of the building may be considered, among other factors. 
c.  Any material change in the exterior appearance of any existing nonhistoric building, structure or appurtenance in a designated historic district will be generally compatible with the form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture and location of historic buildings, structures or sites adjoining or reasonably approximate to the nonhistoric building, structure or site. 
(d)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, neither the historic design review board nor the city council shall consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior appearance. 
(e)  Technical advice. When dealing with difficult technical questions, the board and the city council shall have the power to seek expert advice. 
(f)  [ Visual compatability. ] All improvements to buildings, structures and appurtenances within a designated historic district shall be visually compatible. Visual compatibility will be defined in terms of the following criteria: 
    Height. The height of proposed buildings or modifications will be visually compatible in comparison or relation to the height of existing structures and buildings. 
    Front façade proportion. The front façade of each building or structure will be visually compatible with and in direct relationship to the width of the building and to the height of the front elevation of other adjacent or adjoining buildings within a historic district. 
    Proportion of openings (windows and doors). The openings of any building within a historic district will be visually compatible with the openings exemplified by the prevailing historic architectural styles within the district. The relationship of the width of windows and doors to the height of windows and doors among buildings within the district will be visually compatible. 
    Rhythm of solids to voids-front façades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front façade of a building or structure will be visually compatible with the front façades of historic buildings or structures within the district. 
    Rhythm of buildings on streets. The relationship of the building of buildings to open space between it or them and adjoining buildings will be visually compatible with the relationship between historic sites, buildings or structures within a historic district. 
    Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of entrances and porch projections to the sidewalks of a building will be visually compatible with the prevalent architectural styles of entrances and porch projections on historic sites, buildings and structures within a historic district. 
    Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship of materials and texture of the façade of a building will be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the historic sites, buildings and structures within a historic district. 
    Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building or structure will be visually compatible with the roof shapes of a historic site, building or structure within a historic district. 
    Walls of continuity. Appearances of a building or structure such as walls, wrought iron, fences, evergreen landscape masses, or building facades, will form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to insure visual compatibility of the building to historic buildings, structures or sites to which it is visually related. 
    Scale of building. The size of a building, the building mass in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, balconies and porches will be visually compatible with the building size and building mass of historic sites, buildings and structures within a historic district. 
    Directional expression of front elevation. A building will be visually compatible with the buildings, structures and sites in its directional character: vertical, horizontal or nondirectional. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-425. - Procedure for consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Filing of application for certificate of appropriateness for consideration by the historic design review board and the city council. A pre-application meeting with city staff is encouraged. The purpose of this conference is to discuss the nature of the application as well as its compatibility with the City Code and certificate of appropriateness review criteria. 
    A completed application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed with the historic design review board, c/o City Clerk, Monticello City Hall, at least 35 days prior to the board meeting at which such application is to be considered. An applications may be scheduled for public hearing at a regularly-scheduled meeting of the historic design review board, or, if a regularly scheduled board meeting is more than six weeks away, at a specially-called public meeting of the board, subject to availability of board members. 
(b)  Content of application and plans. All applications must be signed by the property owner or duly authorized agent for the property owner. Each application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by the required fee, as may be established by city council resolution. A completed application package shall include 15 copies of the application and exhibits. Exhibits should include, at a minimum, detailed plans and elevations of the existing and/or proposed building(s), indicating all dimensions, surface materials, design features and elements, texture, landscaping, and all attachments such as signs, lighting fixtures, balconies, awnings and appurtenances which are attached to the walls or roof. Elevations shall indicate window design and all architectural elements. In addition, exhibits should include a site plan indicating the location of buildings (existing and proposed), streets, sidewalks, parking spaces, fences and other major site features. Detailed photos showing the existing and proposed street elevations are encouraged. 
(c)  Public hearings on application for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. At least ten days prior to the meeting to review a certificate of appropriateness, the historic design review board, through city staff, shall provide public notice of the meeting in accordance with F.S. ch. 286, and shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform, in writing, the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  Response to application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The historic design review board shall hold a public hearing on the certificate of appropriateness and recommend that the city council approve, or approve with conditions, the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the board shall consider guidelines as outlined in section 54-424, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The historic design review board may recommend that the city council deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(3)  The historic design review board may continue a hearing upon request of the applicant or upon determining that additional information is required. 
(e)  City council review of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  Within 45 days of the rendering by the historic design review board of a recommendation on an application for certificate of appropriateness, the city council shall conduct a publicly-noticed hearing on the application, after which, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove an application for a certificate of appropriateness based on the criteria contained in this section. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the city council. 
(2)  Except in circumstances in which the city council and an applicant have mutually agreed to extend the time period of reaching a decision, failure of the city council to act within 45 days of its first public hearing on the application for certificate of appropriateness shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(3)  In the event the city council rejects an application, it shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons to the applicant. The city council may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application. A re-application will be processed in the same manner as a new application, as outlined in this section. 
(4)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the city council shall be binding upon the development administrator or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits, and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. It shall be the responsibility of the city council to provide written notice to the development administrator, or such other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits, of the city council rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(f)  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in an undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the city council, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the city council may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall be a situation not of the person's own making, which is: (i) a problem unique to a specific property, or (ii) in order to comply with this article, the person will conflict with another ordinance of the city. 
(g)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. Work not in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness shall be halted before it is completed. 
(h)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within one year of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable at the city council's discretion. 
(i)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The city council and the board shall each keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all proceedings in connection with said application. 
(j)  Acquisition of property. The board may, where such action is authorized by the city council, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-426. - Demolition or relocation permit applications. 
(a)  Authority to comment on demolition or relocation permit applications. The historic design review board and the city council shall have the authority to comment on any request for a permit to demolish or relocate a structure within a historic district, or classified as a historic property. 
(b)  Action on permit. The historic design review board shall have the authority to recommend approval or denial of demolition or relocation permits within its jurisdiction to the city council, who shall have the final decision in said matter. 
(c)  Review of post-demolition and post-relocation plans. The city council shall not grant demolition permission or relocation permission without reviewing at the same time the plans for the building that would replace the structure being demolished or removed. 
(d)  Demolition or relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the historic deign review board shall make a recommendation to the city council, supported by a written report, whether one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The structure is of such interest or quality that it would reasonably meet national, state, or local criteria for designation as an historic or architectural landmark. 
(2)  The structure is of such unusual or uncommon design texture or materials that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense. 
(3)  Retention of the structure would aid substantially in preserving and protecting a structure which meets subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 
Where the historic design review board determines that one or more of these criteria are met, no certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation shall be recommended. 
(4)  Feasible alternatives to demolition or relocation. No certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation shall be considered until an applicant has demonstrated that no other feasible alternative to demolition or relocation can be found. The historic design review board and city council may ask interested individuals and organizations for assistance in seeking an alternative to demolition or relocation. On all demolition or relocation applications, the question of economic hardship for the applicant shall be considered, as well as a determination whether the landmark can be put to reasonable beneficial use without the approval of the demolition or relocation application. In the case of an income-producing building, the historic design review board shall also determine whether the applicant can obtain a reasonable return from his or her existing building. The board may ask applicants for additional information to be used in making these determinations including, but not limited to, evidence that the plans for a new building on the site will be implemented. If the applicant fails to establish the lack of a reasonable beneficial use or the lack of a reasonable return, the board shall recommend denial of the demolition or relocation application. 
The agency may recommend a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation even though the designated landmark or designated landmark site has reasonable beneficial use if: 
a.  The board determines that the property no longer contributes to a historic district or no longer has significance as an historic, architectural or archeological landmark; and 
b.  The board determines that the building demolition or relocation on the designated property is required by a community redevelopment plan or the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-427. - Maintenance and use of historic property. 
    Ordinary maintenance, including painting or repainting a structure, or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on historic property, that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, is excluded from review. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building codes, or to prevent any property owner from making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-428. - Historic preservation strategies and incentives. 
    The purpose of this section is to begin the process of creating incentives to encourage historic preservation and economic development. Application for tax credits/incentives should be made in cooperation with the city and the historic design review board, when applicable. 
(1)  Twenty percent rehabilitation tax credit. 
a.  A tax credit lowers the amount of tax owed, compared to a tax deduction, which lowers the amount of income subject to taxation, pursuant to section 48(g) of the Internal Revenue Code. In general, a dollar of tax credit reduces the amount of income tax owed by one dollar. 
b.  The 20 percent rehabilitation tax credit equals 20 percent of the amount spent in a certified rehabilitation of a certified historic structure. For example, a $20,000.00 rehabilitation would result in a $4,000.00 income tax credit. The 20 percent tax credit is administered jointly by the U.S. Department of the Interior and the Department of the Treasury. The National Park Service (NPS) acts on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior, in partnership with the state historic preservation officer (SHPO) in each state. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) acts on behalf of the Secretary of the Treasury. 
c.  Application for the 20 percent rehabilitation tax credit should be made in cooperation with the city and the local historic design review board. 
(2)  Tax exemptions for historic properties. This incentive involves the freezing of increases in property tax for historic structures. Local government must approve a local ordinance for tax abatement for historic properties. 
(3)  Community redevelopment agency/tax increment financing. The local government must define the area, through a study, characterized by "slum and blight" to be eligible for the tax increment financing incentive program. All property tax increases are to be used in the district. 
(4)  Grants. There are a variety of state and federal grant programs for rehabilitation of public buildings. It may be possible to rehabilitate the old high school for this purpose to preserve the structure and promote economic development. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-429. - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be taken by aggrieved persons from the decisions of the city council in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-430. - Prevention of demolition by neglect. 
(a)  The following shall apply to maintenance and repair of historic property or contributing structures in a designated historic district, as well as any other historic property designated as such by the city: 
(1)  The owner, lessee, or other person in physical control of the structure shall comply with all applicable codes, laws and regulations governing the maintenance and safety of property including but not limited to city ordinances, as applicable. It is the intent of this section to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior features of a structure designated as a historic structure or a contributing structure to a historic district, and the interior portions thereof when such preservation is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the exterior. All such buildings shall be preserved against such decay and deterioration, and shall be free from structural damage through prompt correction of any of the following defects: 
a.  Facades which may fall and injure members of the public or property; 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports; 
c.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members, which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
d.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
e.  Any fault or defect in the building which renders it not properly watertight or structurally unsafe; and 
f.  Any other fault or defect in the building which may render such structure unsafe. 
(b)  In the event that a historic property or contributing structure in a designated historic district, or any other historic property designated as such by the city, is not in good repair and appears to be in the course of being demolished by neglect, the owner of record shall be notified by the historic design review board of the condition of the structure and the items in need of repair. The board shall request a meeting with the owner of the historic property and, if appropriate, the tenant. At such meeting, the board shall present ways to improve the condition of the property. If the owner and/or tenant does not meet with the board, or otherwise fails to take action to improve the condition of the property, the board shall notify the code enforcement officer and request that he/she conduct an investigation. Upon receipt of such notification, the code enforcement officer shall conduct an investigation, and thereafter take such action(s) as that officer deems appropriate, including reporting any apparent violations of state law to the appropriate official(s). 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Secs. 54-431-54-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 54-451. - Generally. 
    The title of the board established by this division shall be the "Monticello Historic Design Review Board." Board members shall be appointed in accordance with section 54-452 and will have advisory authority in recommending historic property and historic district designation; providing recommendation to the city council on applications for certificate of appropriateness and applications for demolition or structure relocation; and other powers as outlined in section 54-456. The area of geographic responsibility of the historic design review board shall be coterminous with the boundaries of the City of Monticello. Board responsibilities shall be complementary to those of the state historic preservation office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-452. - Organization and operation of the historic design review board. 
(a)  Membership. The historic design review board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. Board members shall own property in and be residents of the city. Board members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. At least one member shall be an architect if such an individual is reasonably available to serve. 
(b)  Term of office. Members shall serve staggered four-year terms. There is no limit on the number of consecutive terms which may be served. 
(c)  Appropriations. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses if prior approval is given by the mayor and city council. The city council shall also make available to the historic design review board such appropriations as it may see fit for expenses necessary in the conduct of historic design review board work or to carry out delegated responsibilities of the board. 
(d)  Continuing education. Each board member should make a reasonable effort to attend state historic preservation office training programs. 
(e)  Participation in planning and survey activities. Board members are encouraged to participate in city land use and planning activities and to assist in the efforts of the city and community historic preservation organizations in research and survey of historic properties. 
(f)  Officers. The historic design review board shall elect from within the board a chair, who shall be the presiding member; a vice-chair, who shall preside in the chair's absence of disqualification. The city clerk shall serve as the secretary for the historic design review board. Terms of all elected officers shall be for one year, and officers may serve unlimited consecutive terms. 
(g)  Disqualification of members. If any member of the historic design review board shall find that his or her private or personal interests are involved in a matter coming before the historic design review board, he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from all participation in that case. No member of the historic design review board shall appear before the historic design review board as agent or attorney for any person. 
(h)  Vacancies. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by the city council within 60 days. 
(i)  Removal of member for cause or for absenteeism. Members of the historic design review board may be removed for cause by the city council after filing of written charges, a public hearing, and a majority vote of the city council. Failure of any member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the board without being excused by the board shall automatically be considered forfeiture of the office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-453. - Rules for transaction of business. 
    The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of recommendations of applications, and shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The board shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendment to this article. Such rules of procedure shall be available in written form for public inspection and to persons appearing before the historic design review board. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-454. - Meetings and quorum. 
    The historic design review board shall meet at least four times per year at regular intervals at the call of the chair, or at the written request of a majority of members, and/or within 45 days after receipt of a matter to be acted upon by the historic design review board. A majority of the appointed regular members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
    All meetings of the historic design review board shall be public and have a publicly available agenda prior to the meeting. All decisions of the board shall be made in a public forum. A record of all its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations shall be made, which record shall be a public record on file in city hall [in] the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-455. - State reporting requirements. 
    During any period in which the city is designated as a certified local government by the State of Florida, the city shall make available sufficient staff to undertake the delegated responsibilities of the historic design review board, including the reporting requirements as follows: 
(1)  Provide the state historic preservation officer with 30 calendar days prior notice of all four regular meetings of the board and provide the state historic preservation officer with agendas of all meetings. 
(2)  Submit minutes of each meeting to the state historic preservation officer within 30 calendar days. 
(3)  Submit record of attendance of the historic design review board member to the state historic preservation officer within 30 calendar days after each meeting. 
(4)  Submit public attendance figures for each meeting to the state historic preservation officer within 30 calendar days after each meeting. 
(5)  Notify the state historic preservation officer of change in board membership within 30 calendar days of action. 
(6)  Notify the state historic preservation officer immediately of all new historic designations or alterations to existing designations. Such inventory materials shall be compatible with the Florida Site File. 
(7)  Submit amendments to the City of Monticello historic preservation code to the state historic preservation officer for review and comment at least 30 calendar days prior to adoption. 
(8)  Submit an annual report by November 1 of each year covering activities of previous October 1 through September 30 which includes, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  A copy of the rules of procedure. 
b.  A copy of the City of Monticello historic preservation code. 
c.  Resume of historic design review board members. 
d.  Changes to the membership of the historic design review board. 
e.  New local historic district or historic property designations. 
f.  New National Register listings. 
g.  Review of survey and inventory activity with a description of the system used. 
h.  Program report on each grant-assisted activity. 
i.  Number of projects reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-456. - Powers. 
    The historic design review board shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all historic properties within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction and make such inventory open to the public. 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or boundary changes relating to the historic district. 
(3)  Review applications for alterations, relocations, demolitions and new construction or other activities that may affect locally designated historic properties. 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the historic designation of any place, district, site, building or structure be revoked or removed, for cause. 
(5)  Make recommendations on the restoration or preservation of any historic properties acquired by the city. 
(6)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction, and participate in survey and planning activities of the certified local government program. 
(7)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the local governing body or the board itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
(8)  Recommend design guidelines for historic properties or districts. 
(9)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program. 
(10)  Make recommendations regarding the receipt of donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property. The board shall not obligate the city council without prior consent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-457. - Designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by historic design review board. 
(1)  The board, upon city council approval, shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. Duplicates of all inventory materials will be provided to the state historic preservation office. 
(2)  The board may prepare formal nominations when proposing historic districts or historic properties. These nominations shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designated properties. The nomination of structures to the National Register of Historic Places shall follow the federal guidelines for such actions as outlined in section 54-458. 
(3)  When considering National Register nomination proposals and other actions that may impact properties which are normally evaluated by a professional in such discipline before rendering a decision, the board may seek expertise in this area before rendering a decision. This can be accomplished through consulting (e.g. universities, private preservation organizations, or regional planning commissions) or by other means that the state historic preservation officer determines appropriate. 
(b)  Designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Boundaries shall be clearly defined for historic districts and historic properties. The boundaries shall be shown on maps and/or the official zoning map of the city. 
(2)  Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (more than 50 years old); 
b.  Nonhistoric (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
c.  Intrusion (structures less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the historical character of the district). 
(c)  Designation standards. 
(1)  To qualify as a historic property or historic district, individual properties, structures, sites or buildings, or groups of properties, structures, sites or buildings will have significant character, interest or value as part of the historical, cultural, aesthetic and architectural heritage of the city, state or nation. To qualify as a historic property or historic district, said property or properties must fulfill one or more of the criteria set forth below. 
(2)  A building, structure, site or district will be deemed to have historical or cultural significance if it meets the following criteria: 
a.  Is associated in a significant way with the life or activities of a major person important in city, state or national history (i.e., the homestead of a local founding family); 
b.  Is the site of a historic event with significant effect upon the city, state or nation; 
c.  Is associated in a significant way with a major historic event, whether cultural, economic, social, military, or political; 
d.  Exemplifies the historical, political, cultural, economic or social trends of the community in history; or 
e.  Is associated in a significant way with a past or continuing institution which has contributed substantially to the life of the city. 
(3)  A building, structure, site or district is deemed to have architectural or aesthetic significance if it fulfills one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by one or more distinctive architectural styles; 
b.  Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, period or method of construction; 
c.  Is a historic or outstanding work of a prominent architect, designer, landscape architect, or builder; or 
d.  Contains elements of design, detail, material, or craftsmanship of outstanding quality or which represented, in its time, a significant innovation or adaptation to the North Florida environment. 
(4)  A building, structure, site, or district will be deemed to have historic significance if, in addition to or in the place of the previously mentioned criteria, the building, structure, site or zone meets historic development standards as defined by and listed in the regulations of and criteria for the National Register of Historic Places, as prepared by the U.S. Department of the Interior under the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. 
(d)  General matters affecting designation of both historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Making application for designation of historic district or historic property. 
a.  An historical society, neighborhood association, with affected property owners' consent, or a group of two or more consenting property owners may apply for historic district designation. 
b.  A property owner may apply for historic property designation. 
c.  The application shall be on a form prescribed by the city for such purposes, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. The fee shall be adopted by the city council by resolution, and may be revised from time to time as the council deems appropriate. 
(2)  When the completed application and the appropriate fee have been submitted to the city, the board shall review the application at a public hearing. The board may review several applications at one hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published in one issue of a newspaper of general paid circulation in the county and of general interest and readership in the community at least five days prior to said hearing. 
Following the public hearing, the board shall make a recommendation to the city council for approval or rejection of the application(s). If the board votes to approve the application(s), it shall submit its recommendation to the city council for a proposed ordinance for designation of the historic district(s) or historic property or properties. 
(3)  A decision to accept or reject the recommendation of the board shall be made at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. If the recommendation is accepted by the city council, an ordinance shall be adopted by the council designating the historic district(s) or the historic property or historic properties. 
(4)  The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearing shall be published in two consecutive issues of a newspaper of general paid circulation in the county and of general interest and readership in the community, and written notice of the hearing shall be delivered or mailed to all owners and occupants of subject properties. All such notices shall be published, delivered or mailed not more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the property shall constitute legal notification under this article. 
(5)  Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic district or historic property shall identify each property to be designated by street address, set forth the name of the owner of the designated property or properties, and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the city prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property. 
(6)  Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic district or historic property shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(7)  Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each designated property located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district. 
(8)  The city council shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including local historical organizations. 
(9)  The city council has the authority to amend and/or rescind the local designation as necessary. 
(10)  Upon denial of an application for designation, there shall be a 12-month waiting period before any applicant may resubmit the proposal unless the agency waives said waiting period based on consideration of the following factors: 
a.  There is presented new evidence bearing upon the subject matter of the written petition which could not reasonably have been presented to the agency at the time of the previous hearing on the written petition; or 
b.  Failure to waive said 12-month waiting period constitutes a hardship to the applicant resulting from an inadvertent mistake in the written petition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-458. - Review of proposed nominations to the National Register. 
    The historic design review board, when acting under the designation as a certified local government program, will be responsible for developing or receiving documentation necessary to nominate properties within the district or local properties designated as historic properties to the National Register. The board shall: 
(1)  Evaluate nomination proposals received for completeness in a timely manner. Should be nomination proposal not be technically complete, the board shall notify the proposal's sponsor in writing, identifying the technical deficiencies, with 30 days after receipt of the nomination proposal. 
(2)  If the nomination is technically complete, the historic design review board shall consider the nomination proposal, either on its regular agenda, or at a specially called meeting. Notification of its intention to consider a nomination proposal shall be provided at least 30 days, but not more than 75 days, prior to the board meeting at which the nomination proposal will be considered to the following: 
a.  Owner(s) of record of the property. The list of owners shall be obtained from official tax records. Where there is more than one owner listed, each separate owner shall be notified. 
b.  The chairman of the Jefferson County Board of County Commissioners and mayor of the City of Monticello. Within 30 days after receipt of the nomination proposal, the chairman of the board of county commissioners and mayor shall submit, in writing, to the historic design review board, a recommendation as to whether or not the property shall be nominated to the National Register. 
c.  State historic preservation officer. 
(3)  Nomination proposals shall be considered by the historic design review board at an advertised public meeting, and all votes on nomination proposals shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent record of the commission meeting. All nomination proposals shall be forwarded, with a record of official action taken by the historic design review board and the recommendation of the mayor and chairman of the board of county commissioners, to the state historic preservation officer within 30 days after the historic design review board meeting at which they were considered. If either the historic design review board or chairman of the board of county commissioners or the mayor, or all, support the nomination, the state historic preservation officer shall schedule the nomination proposal for consideration by the Florida National Register Review Board as part of the normal course of business at the next regular meeting. 
(4)  Any person or organization which supports or opposes the nomination of a property to the National Register shall be afforded the opportunity to make its views known in writing. Objection by a property owner to nomination to the National Register must be notarized. All correspondence or other filings regarding a nomination proposal shall become part of the permanent record concerning that proposal and shall be forwarded by the historic design review board to the state historic preservation officer. 
(5)  Nomination proposals to be considered by the historic design review board shall be on file at city hall and available for public access for at least 30 days but not more than 75 days prior to the board meeting at which they will be considered. A copy shall be made available by mail when requested by the public, 
(6)  Any person may appeal the historic design review board decision regarding a national register nomination by filing such appeal to the state historic preservation officer within 30 days of receipt of the written decision of the historic design review board. 
(7)  Certified local government review and notification procedures do not apply when a federal agency nominates a property under its ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 10-1-2013) 
Secs. 54-459-54-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSPORTATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 54-471-54-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES 

Sec. 54-491. - Location of parking facilities generally. 
    Off-street parking facilities required by this article shall be located upon the same plot or parcel of land such facilities are intended to serve, or upon a plot of land, the nearest property line of which is located within 600 feet air line measurement of the nearest property line it is intended to serve, in instances of off-street parking facilities not contiguous to the parcel of land such facilities are intended to serve. The owner shall furnish to the development administrator a binding legal agreement assuring that the parking facilities will remain available as long as the facility that they are intended to serve exists. All off-street parking facilities required under this article shall be located on property whereon such off-street parking use is a permissible use and shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-492. - Utilization of yards for parking facilities. 
(a)  Residential districts. In all residential districts, required parking spaces for single-family and two family dwellings may be permitted in any setback areas or yards and shall be counted as meeting off-street parking requirements, except that, within a required front yard, all parking shall be located in a driveway or turn-around. 
(b)  Other districts. In all districts for all other permitted uses, approved permitted uses with site plan review or approved special exception uses, required front, street side or street rear yards may be used for off-street parking, except as limited herein. A maximum of 80 percent of a required front yard may be used for off-street parking. Parking area surfaces shall not extend closer than five feet to any abutting side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-493. - Size of parking spaces. 
    Each parking space required and provided pursuant to the provisions of this division shall not be less than nine feet in width and 19 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-494. - Handicapped parking. 
    Every parking area designed to serve a use available for the public shall provide spaces measuring 12 feet in width by 19 feet in length and designate such spaces as "handicapped parking." The placement of such spaces shall be convenient to the entrance of the principal building and shall be designed so that the handicapped person need not go around the vehicle to get to a curb cut. One space per each 25 parking spaces or portion thereof shall be provided. In no case shall more than four spaces per principal use be required. The number and placement of such handicapped parking shall be the subject of development plan review. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-495. - Access to parking area. 
    The plan for ingress and egress to and from the off-street parking area and landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the city. No curbs or sidewalks may be cut or altered in any manner without a permit from the city and all other applicable county or state agencies. Minimum width of an aisle designed and intended for the maneuvering of an automobile into a parking space shall be in conformance with the accompanying illustration. The parking plan must be so arranged that each automobile may be placed and removed from the parking space assigned thereto and taken to and from the property without the necessity of moving any other automobile to complete the maneuver. No access or egress way shall be closer than 30 feet to an existing street intersection. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-496. - Identification of parking spaces. 
    Each parking space required and provided pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be distinguished and separated from adjoining parking spaces by means of three-inch painted stripes. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of the owner or operator of any building, structure or use affected by this division to maintain such identification markings so that parking spaces at all times are distinguishable from on another. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-497. - Number of parking spaces required. 
(a)  There shall be provided at the time of the construction of any main building or structure, or at the time any main building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, or at the time any use or occupancy of an existing building is changed to a use or occupancy which increases the requirements for off-street parking, minimum off-street parking facilities with adequate provisions for ingress and egress, in accordance with the requirements of this section and the schedule of off-street parking requirements, as prescribed in this division. 
(b)  When units or measurements determining number of required off-street parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any such fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall require a full off-street parking space. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-498. - Combined parking facilities. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent collective provision for, or joint use of, off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses by two or more operators, provided that the total of parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the several individual uses computed separately in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.08), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-499. - Use of parking facilities for parking of commercial vehicles. 
    Off-street parking facilities supplied by the owner or operator to meet the requirements of this division shall not be used by commercial vehicles owned, operated or used in the business of such owner during regular hours. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.09), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-500. - Parking lot design criteria. 
    All surface parking areas shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Materials. Off-street parking facilities including access aisles and driveways shall be surfaced with a hard, dustless materials, and maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition; provided that driveways, access aisles and parking spaces for public and private schools offering academic courses may be surfaced with grass or lawn. In all instances bumper stops shall be required. 
(2)  Drainage. All off-street facilities for the use of the public required by this division shall be drained so as not to cause any nuisance on adjacent or public property, and any lighting thereon shall be so arranged and designed as to prevent any glare or excessive light on adjacent property. Such facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(3)  Landscaping. 
a.  Perimeter landscape area requirements. 
1.  Front perimeter landscape area. A ten-foot-wide strip of land along the entire front perimeter of a site, located between the front property line and any vehicular use area, shall be landscaped. Width of sidewalks shall not be included within the ten-foot-wide front perimeter landscape area. 
2.  Side and rear perimeter landscape areas. A six-foot-wide strip of land along the entire side and rear perimeter of a site, located between the side and rear property lines and any vehicular use area, shall be landscaped, except that where a perimeter landscape area is between a side or rear property line and a vehicular use area used as an accessway, only a four-foot-wide strip of land shall be required to be landscaped. 
3.  Agreement with adjacent property owner. When side or rear perimeter landscape areas are required on adjacent properties, the owners of such adjacent properties may agree to the installation of only one such landscape area on the adjacent boundary, as long as such agreement is binding on both property owners and their successors in interest and is approved as part of the permit application by the development administrator. 
b.  Landscape material requirements in perimeter landscape areas. 
1.  Tree count. The total tree requirement within the perimeter landscape areas shall be determined by using a ratio of one tree for each 25 linear feet of required landscape perimeter area, or major portion thereof, with no less than 75 percent of said trees being shade trees. All trees shall be provided at least 133 square feet of planting area each. This provision is not intended to require trees to be equally spaced 25 feet apart. Creating design and spacing is encouraged. 
2.  Ground cover. Grass or other ground cover shall be placed on all areas within all perimeter landscape areas not occupied by other landscape material or permitted accessways. 
c.  Visual screen in perimeter landscape areas. A visual screen shall be placed within required perimeter setback landscape areas, running the entire length of such areas except for permitted accessways. The visual screen shall consist of landscape materials sufficient to provide, at a minimum, an opaque, continuous screen at least 30 inches high at maturity. 
d.  Use of perimeter landscape areas. Overhang areas, vehicle stops or other design features shall be used so that parked vehicles do not overhang more than two feet into perimeter landscape areas. 
e.  Interior landscape areas. 
1.  Size. In vehicular use areas within the interior of a site, one 400-square-foot planting area shall be required for every 5,000 square feet of vehicular use area, or major portion thereof, and at least three two-inch, or two three-inch, caliper shade trees together with other landscape material shall be planted within each such planting area. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and shall be no less than 12 feet in width, exclusive of curbing. Whenever linear medians at least 50 feet long having shade trees spaced no greater than 15 feet on center are used, the minimum width may be reduced to eight feet exclusive of curbing. There shall be an additional 400 square feet of planting area for every eight parking spaces above the minimum number required in this chapter. 
2.  Overhang. Vehicle stops or other design features shall be used so that parked vehicles do not overhang more than two feet into any interior landscape area. 
3.  Ground cover. Interior landscape areas shall be planted in grass, or other ground cover, not exceeding eight inches in height. 
4.  Natural areas landscaping waiver. As an incentive to preserving natural areas, up to one-half of the required interior landscape area may be waived when an equal area within the vehicle use area is preserved in a natural state. To qualify for such a waiver, preserved natural areas must be at least 800 square feet in size and be approved by the development administrator as meeting the objectives of this section. 
5.  Landscaping functional waiver. When an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the development administrator that strict application of this subsection will interfere with the function of vehicular use areas, the development administrator may permit relocation of required landscaping or other substitutions which will improve functioning provided that the intent of this subsection is met by such modifications. 
(4)  Aisle widths. Aisle widths for various types are as follows: 
Parking Stall Angle Aisle Width 30 degrees   11 feet 45 degrees   13 feet 50 degrees 14.5 feet 55 degrees   16 feet 60 degrees 17.5 feet 90 degrees   22 feet  
Aisles shall be not less than 22 feet in width when not designed to serve a particular parking configuration or when designed to serve parallel parking. Aisles may be reduced to not less than 11 feet in width when serving parallel parking on a one-way drive providing the parking spaces are located only on one side of said drive. 
(5)  Permeable off-street parking facilities. When ten or more off-street parking spaces are required for any nonresidential use, a percentage of the required number of spaces may be surfaced with a stable, porous material which may include grass, gravel or other permanent but permeable surface material. These parking areas shall be clearly marked as to purpose and maintained for that purpose. Within grassed or sodded parking areas, if parking demand is such that grass or lawn is damaged to such an extent that it ceases to grow, then surfacing of the area with either a hard, dustless material or other porous material in accordance with this subsection is required. The maximum number of parking spaces that may be grassed is as follows: 
Total No. of Parking Spaces 
Required Number or Percentage of Parking Spaces That May Be Surfaced With Grass Under 10 spaces 0 percent 10 or 11 spaces 1 parking space 12 or 14 spaces 2 parking spaces 15 or more spaces 20 percent rounded off to nearest whole number  
All off-street parking spaces provided above the minimum number required both for residential and nonresidential land use may be surfaced with pervious material in accordance with this subsection. All access aisles must be surfaced with a hard, dustless material in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.10), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-501. - Off-street loading berths. 
    In any district, in connection with every building or building group or part thereof, hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of 4,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by commercial or industrial uses or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths or unloading berths as follows: 
4,000-24,999 sq. ft. 1 berth 25,000-39,999 sq. ft. 2 berths 40,000-60,000 sq. ft. 3 berths For each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 1 berth  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.11, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.11), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-502. - Schedule of off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  The schedule of off-street parking requirements is as follows: 
Use Spaces Required per Unit (1) Single and two-family dwellings and town houses 2 spaces per dwelling unit. (2) Multifamily dwellings 11/2 spaces per each efficiency and one bedroom unit, 2 spaces per each two bedroom unit, 1/2 space per each additional bedroom. (See Note 1 for special parking requirements for the elderly and handicapped.) (3) Bowling alley 4 spaces per bowling lane. (4) Child care center 1 space for each 400 square feet plus 5 additional spaces. (5) Churches or other places of worship 1 space per 4 permanent seats in the main auditorium or chapel area. (6) Social, swimming, golf, and tennis clubs 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area plus 2 per each court, 1 space per each 100 square feet of pool area, 2 spaces per each hole of golf, except for a restaurant which shall be the same as (12) below. (7) General business, commercial, personal service establishments and professional offices located in the B-1 Zoning District No off-street parking required General business, commercial, personal service establishments and professional offices located in the B-1 Zoning District with accessory uses, as outlined in section 54-155(d) As provided in (1) General business, commercial, and personal service establishments and professional offices in all other zoning categories, except for medical or dental offices or clinics as provided for in (11) One space per each 300 square feet (8) Hotels, motels and motor inns 1 space per each guest room, plus 1 per 300 square feet of nondwelling unit floor area except for a restaurant which shall be the same as (12) below. (9) Libraries, art museums and similar cultural facilities 1 space per 500 square feet. (10) Mortuaries and funeral homes 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof with a minimum of 25 spaces. (11) Medical or dental offices or clinics 1 space per each 150 square feet of floor area. (12) Restaurants, nightclubs or other eating places 1 space per each 50 square feet of customer service area plus 1 per each 400 square feet of other area. (13) Theaters, auditoriums, or other places of public assembly 1 space per each 4 seats. (14) Accessory commercial uses in motels and hotels 1 per 500 square feet except for a restaurant which shall be the same as (12) above. (15) Industrial warehouse or wholesale commercial uses 1 space per 750 square feet. (16) General industrial and manufacturing uses 1 space per 500 square feet.  
(b)  The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced as follows: 
(1)  Reduction in number of required off-street parking spaces for multifamily housing for the elderly and handicapped. 
a.  The definition of multifamily housing for the elderly and handicapped for the purpose of determining required parking spaces is as follows: Residential development occupied exclusively by elderly or handicapped persons as either tenants or owners. To qualify as an elderly or handicapped person or family, the occupants must meet one or more of the following definitions: 
1.  Elderly person means a person who is 62 years of age or over. 
2.  Handicapped person means any person who is 18 years of age or over and who has an impairment or a developmental disability which is expected to be of a long-continued and indefinite duration and is a substantial impediment to his or her ability to live independently or to operate an automobile. 
3.  Elderly or handicapped family means: 
i.  A family of two or more persons, one of whom is elderly or handicapped; 
ii.  The surviving members of any family described in subsection i. above living with the elderly or handicapped member of the family at the time of his or her death; or 
iii.  Two or more elderly or handicapped persons living together or one or more such persons living with an individual who assists in their care. 
(2)  Reduction in number of required paved off-street parking spaces. The project site plan must demonstrate that the total number of off-street parking spaces required for multifamily dwellings can be provided. However, only 0.75 parking space per dwelling unit is required to be installed. Of this required amount, a minimum of 0.5 parking space per dwelling unit shall be surfaced with a hard, dustless material. The remaining 0.25 parking space per dwelling unit and any additional spaces provided may be surfaced with grass or other permeable material. The balance of the area required for off-street parking may be left in its natural state but must be available for additional off-street parking if the facility changes to multiple-family uses for the nonelderly or nonhandicapped. If housing for the elderly and/or handicapped changes to multiple-family uses, then the full provisions of off-street parking shall be met for such multiple-family use prior to any multifamily occupancy on a multiple-family basis. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 09.12, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.12), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 4-1-2008) 
Secs. 54-503-54-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSPORTATION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-521. - Purpose; scope. 
    This division establishes minimum requirements applicable to the development transportation system, including access management, street design, parking and loading, and bicycle and pedestrian access. The standards in this division are intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development, and to assure that all developments adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good engineering and development design practices. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.13), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-522. - Access management. 
(a)  Generally. In order to maximize roadway level of service this section shall set standards for the number of access points, the separation between access points, frontage on service roads and common driveways, alternative designs and access to residential lots. All proposed developments shall meet the following standards for vehicular access and circulation: 
(1)  Number of access points. 
a.  All projects shall have access to a public right-of-way. The number of access points shall be as follows: 
Type of Development Number of Access Points Preferred Type of Access Residential, <75 units* 1 Residential/minor collector Residential, 75+ units* 2 Minor collector Nonresidential, <300 required parking spaces 1 Collector Nonresidential, 300-999 required parking spaces 2 Major collector Nonresidential, 1,000+ required parking spaces 2 or more Major collector  
*Additional access can be allowed to accommodate clustering or to allow for protection of natural features. 
(2)  Additional access points. Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (1) above: 
a.  A nonresidential development, or a multifamily residential development, on a corner lot may be allowed one or more points of access. However, no more than one access shall be onto an arterial. 
b.  Schools may have one additional access, provided that the additional access drive is limited to school bus use only. 
(b)  Separation of access points. 
(1)  The separation between access points onto arterial and collector roadways, or between an access point and an intersection of an arterial or collector with another road, shall be as shown in the following table: 
Distance Between Access Points Functional Class of 
Roadway Speed Limit (mph) 45 35 25 State road FDOT standards Arterial 250 feet 150 feet 75 feet Collector 200 feet 100 feet 50 feet Local 150 feet  75 feet 50 feet  
    *Except as provided by section 54-523(a). 
(2)  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent roadway or driveway. 
(3)  The city may reduce the connection spacing requirements in situations where they prove impractical. 
(4)  Variations from these standards may be granted by the city at the discretion of the planning official where the effect would be to enhance the safety or operation of the roadway. An example might include a pair of one-way driveways in lieu of a two-way driveway or alignment of driveways with existing median openings. 
(c)  Frontage on service roads and common driveways. 
(1)  Projects proposed on arterials and major collectors shall include frontage or service roads, and shall take access from the frontage road rather than the arterial or major collector. Frontage road design shall conform to FDOT standards. This access requirement may be met through the use of interconnecting parking lots which abut the arterial or major collector facility. 
(2)  Adjacent uses are encouraged and may be required by the county to share a common driveway provided that appropriate access easements are granted between or among the property owners. 
(d)  Alternative designs. Where natural features or spacing of existing driveways and roadways cause the foregoing access requirements to be physically infeasible, alternate designs may be approved. 
(e)  Access to residential lots. 
(1)  Access to nonresidential uses shall not be through an area designed, approved, or developed solely for residential use, except when the nonresidential use and the residential use areas are all included within and approved as part of a master plan development. 
(2)  All lots in a proposed residential subdivision shall have frontage on and legal access from a public street meeting the requirements of this chapter, except as specifically provided herein. 
(3)  No new residential subdivision lot shall have driveway access to an arterial street, except where specifically approved for such access by the planning commission. 
(4)  A residential subdivision shall have only one entranceway to one abutting public street, except when: 
a.  A second entranceway is necessary to alleviate a demonstrated traffic safety hazard. 
b.  The subdivision is located on both sides of the public street providing access, in which case one entranceway is permitted on each side of the public street. 
c.  The entranceway provides the only access to more than 75 lots, in which case a second entranceway is permitted. 
d.  Clustering of the density is involved and to allow for proper clusters when other entrances are needed. 
e.  The subdivision abuts two public streets then equal access is allowed on both streets. 
(f)  Joint and cross access. 
(1)  Adjacent commercial or office developments that are major traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. 
(2)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements, shall be established wherever feasible along arterial roadways. 
(3)  Shared parking areas shall be allowed to reduce required parking spaces, as determined by the city. 
(4)  Pursuant to this section, property owners shall: 
a.  Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use of driveway and cross access. 
b.  Record an agreement with the deed that the remaining access rights along the roadway will be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway. 
c.  Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of the property owners. 
(g)  Access connection and driveway design. Driveway width shall meet the following guidelines: 
(1)  If the driveway is a one-way in or one-way out driveway, then the driveway shall be a minimum width of 12 feet and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection. 
(2)  For two-way access, each lane shall have a width of ten feet and a maximum of four lanes shall be allowed. Whenever more than two lanes are proposed, entrance and exit lanes shall be divided by a median. 
a.  Driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of FDOT Standards Index, Roadways and Traffic Design Standard Indices, latest edition. 
b.  Driveway approaches shall be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. 
c.  Driveway width and flare shall be adequate to serve the volume of traffic and provide for rapid movement of vehicles off of the major roadway. 
d.  The length of driveways shall be designed in accordance with the anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation. 
(h)  Emergency access. In addition to the minimum side, front and rear yard setbacks, all building and other development activities such as landscaping shall be arranged on-site so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles. 
(i)  Nonconforming access features. Permitted nonresidential access connections in place as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that do not conform with the standards herein shall be designated as nonconforming, and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards under the following conditions: 
(1)  When new access connections permits are requested. 
(2)  Substantial enlargement or improvement. 
(3)  Significant change in trip generation. 
(4)  As roadway improvement allows. 
(j)  Double or reverse frontage lots. 
(1)  Access to double or reverse frontage lots shall be required to be on the street with the lower functional classification. 
(2)  When a residential subdivision is proposed that would abut an arterial, it shall be designed to provide through lots along the arterial with access from the interior local road. 
(k)  Shared access. Subdivisions with frontage on the state highway system shall be designed into shared access points to and from the highway. Normally a maximum of two accesses shall be allowed regardless of the number of lots or businesses to be served. 
(l)  Connectivity. 
(1)  The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to coordinate with the existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the subdivision. 
(2)  Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided as deemed necessary by the city to provide access to adjoining properties or to logically extend the street system into the surrounding areas. 
(3)  Collector and local residential streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or facilitate emergency access and evacuation. 
(m)  Site plan review checklist for transportation. 
(1)  Applicants shall submit a preliminary site plan for review by the planning department. At a minimum, the site plan shall show: 
a.  Location of access points on both sides of the road where applicable. 
b.  Distances to neighboring constructed access points, median openings, traffic signals, intersections, and other transportation features on both sides of the property. 
c.  Number and direction of lanes to be constructed on the driveway, plus striping plans. 
d.  All planned transportation features (such as auxiliary lanes, signals, etc.). 
e.  Trip generation data or appropriate traffic studies. 
f.  Parking and internal circulation plans. 
g.  A detailed description of any requested variance and the reason the variance is requested. 
(2)  Subdivisions and site plan review shall address the following access considerations: 
a.  Is the road system designed to meet the projected traffic demand and does the road network consist of a hierarchy of roads designed according to the function? 
b.  Does the road network follow the natural topography and preserve natural features of the site as much as possible? Have alignments been planned so that grading requirements are minimized? 
c.  Is access properly placed in relation to sight distance, driveway spacing and other related considerations, including opportunities for joint and cross access? Are entry roads clearly visible from the major arterial? 
d.  Do units front on residential access streets rather than major roadways? 
e.  Is automobile movement within the site provided without having to use the peripheral road network? 
f.  Does the road system provide adequate access to buildings for residents, visitors, deliveries, emergency vehicles and garbage collection? 
g.  Does the pedestrian path system link buildings with parking areas, entrances to the development, open space and recreational and other community facilities? 
(3)  The city reserves the right to require traffic and safety analysis where safety is an issue or where significant problems already exist. 
(4)  Upon review of the access application, the planning department may approve the access application, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
(5)  Any application that involves access to the state highway system shall be reviewed by the state department of transportation for conformance with state access management standards. Where the applicant requires access to the state highway system and a zoning change, subdivision or site plan review is also required, development shall be coordinated with the state department of transportation. 
(6)  If the application is approved with conditions, the applicant shall resubmit the plan with the conditional changes made. Second applications may only be rejected if conditional changes are not made. 
(7)  If the application is denied, the city shall provide an itemized letter detailing why the application has been rejected. 
(8)  All applications, whose application is approved or approved with conditions, have 30 days to accept the permit. Applicants whose permits are rejected or approved with conditions have 60 days to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.13.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-523. - Street design standards. 
(a)  General design standards. 
(1)  All new streets in a new development shall be designed and constructed pursuant to the standards herein. Paved streets which the city has agreed to accept shall be dedicated to the city upon completion, inspection, and acceptance by the city. 
(2)  The street system of the proposed development shall, to the extent practicable, conform to the natural topography of the site, preserving existing hydrological and vegetative patterns, and minimizing erosion potential, runoff, and the need for site alteration. Particular effort should be directed toward securing the flattest possible grade near intersections. 
(3)  Streets shall be laid out to avoid environmentally sensitive areas as defined in article VII of this chapter. 
(4)  Private local streets may be allowed within developments that will remain under common ownership or control, provided they are designed and constructed pursuant to the standards contained in this division. If the land included in the development is to be subdivided, the requirements of subsections 54-523(e) (2)-4) and section 54-493 must be met. If all the land included in the development is not under common ownership when the development plan is approved, the development plan approval must be contingent on the requirements of subsections 54-523(e) (2)-(4) and section 54-493 being met the same as for a private street subdivision. 
(5)  The street layout in all new developments shall be coordinated with and interconnected to the street system of the surrounding area. 
(6)  Streets in proposed subdivisions shall be connected to rights-of-way in adjacent areas to allow for proper inter-neighborhood traffic flow. If adjacent lands are unplatted, stub outs in the new development shall be provided for future connection to the adjacent unplatted land. 
(7)  Residential streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic. This shall not be construed to encourage or discourage traditional grid traffic patterns. 
(8)  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall be less than 75 degrees. 
(9)  New intersections along one side of an existing street shall, where possible, coincide with existing intersections. Where an offset (jog) is necessary at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be no less than 150 feet. 
(10)  No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of the intersecting street. 
(b)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along: 
(1)  Arterial streets: Both sides. 
(2)  Collectors: One side. 
(3)  Local streets: One side. Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards and policies. 
(4)  Where new development is adjacent to existing development with sidewalks, the new development shall be required to provide a connecting sidewalk. 
(c)  Paving widths. Paving widths for each street classification shall be as provided in Table 54-523. 
TABLE 54-523 
Pavement Widths ROW Widths Street Type Number of Lanes 
No parking unless noted Gutter Curb & Gutter No Curb & Gutter Curb & No Curb & Gutter 1.  Residential*;xhg; 2-9' moving 
cul-de-sac 
25 lots max.  18'  18'  50'  60' 2-9' moving 
loop street  18'  18'  50'  60' 2-9' moving 
bicycle lane  22'  22'  50'  60' 2.  Residential subcollector;xhg; 2-10' moving  20'  20'  50'  60' 2-10' moving 
bicycle lane  24'  24'  60'  60' 2-10' moving 
1-8' parking  28'  28'  60'  60' 3.  Residential collector;xhg; 2-11' moving  22'  22'  60'  60' 4.  Minor collector;xhg; 2-12' moving  24'  24'  60'  60' 2-12' moving 
bicycle lane  28'  28'  60'  60' 5.  Collector;xhg; 2-14' moving  28'  28'  60'  60' 2-14' 
moving bicycle lane  32'  32'  60'  70' 6.  Major collector;xhg; 4-12' moving  48'  48'  70'  80' 4-12' moving 
6' median  54'  54'  80'  90' 7.  Minor arterial;xhg; 2-14' moving  28'  28'  60'  70' 4-12' moving 
6' median  54'  54'  80'  90' 8.  Arterial;xhg; 2-14' moving  28'  28'  60'  70' 4-12' moving 
12' median  60'  60' 100' 100'  
    *For cul-de-sac and loop streets only (stub street dead ending into undeveloped property is to be considered a subcollector). 
FIGURE 54-523A. TYPICAL ROADWAY SECTION 
(d)  Curbing requirements. 
(1)  Curbing may be required for the purposes of drainage, safety, and delineation and protection of pavement edge along some proposed streets where determined necessary through the development review process. 
(2)  All curbing shall conform to the construction standards contained in this section or as permitted by the development administrator. 
(e)  Shoulders. Shoulders, where required, shall measure at least four feet in width and shall be required on each side of streets and shall be located within the right-of-way. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other material permitted by the development administrator. Shoulders and/or drainage swales are required as follows: 
(1)  Shoulders are required on all residential access and residential subcollector streets. 
(2)  All residential collector streets shall provide four-foot-wide shoulders on both sides of the street. Shoulders should be grass surfaced. In no case shall the shoulders be paved. Pedestrian or bicycle traffic areas that are paved shall have shoulders on both sides unless they are connected to the street paving. Then a shoulder is only required on the side not connected to the paving. 
(3)  Where shoulders are required by the state department of transportation. 
(4)  Collector streets where curbing is not required. 
(5)  Arterial streets where curbing is not required. 
(6)  Shoulders are not required when curbing is used. 
(f)  Acceleration, deceleration, and turning lanes. 
(1)  Deceleration or turning lanes may be required by the city along existing and proposed streets as determined by a traffic impact study required by article VIII of this chapter or where the city can justify the need. 
(2)  Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards: 
a.  The lane width shall be the same as the required width of the roadway moving lanes. 
b.  The lane shall provide the full required lane width for its full length. It shall not be tapered. 
c.  The minimum lane length shall be as follows: 
TURNING 
ROADWAY STOP CONDITION FREE RIGHT Design Speed of Road 
(mph) Length of Taper Minimum Deceleration Lane Length 30 N/A - - 35 170 105  80 40 190 135 110 45 210 165 140 50 230 195 170 55 250 210 200 60 270 230 230  
(3)  Acceleration lanes are only required when indicated as needed by a traffic impact study. The design shall be as per FDOT standards. Where needed, a paved taper shall be provided for right hand turns. 
(g)  Cul-de-sac turnarounds. An unobstructed 12-foot-wide moving lane with a minimum outside turning radius of 42 feet shall be provided at the terminus of every permanent cul-de-sac. 
(h)  Stub streets. 
(1)  Residential collector and higher order stub streets may be permitted or required by the city provided that the future extension of the street is deemed desirable by the city or conforms to the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Temporary turnarounds shall be provided for all stub streets providing access to five or more lots or housing units. Where four or fewer units or lots are being served, a sign indicating a dead-end street shall be posted. 
(i)  Clear visibility triangle. For new subdivisions the clear visibility triangle shall be a part of the required easement or common area for the road. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, place, grow, maintain or allow to be constructed, erected, placed, grown or maintained, any building structure, fence, wall, sign, canopy, tree, vegetation or obstruction of any kind within the clear visibility triangle on any property which is located at the corner of intersecting streets or driveways, as described below: 
(1)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two feet and ten feet above the grade, measured at the centerline of the intersection. 
(2)  The horizontal area formed by a triangle, the apex of which is the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines, the legs of which extend 25 feet along said street right-of-way lines and the hypotenuse of which connects the ends of the legs; and 
(3)  When the street right-of-way line adjacent to the major road is ten feet or less from the face of the curb, edge of pavement or edge of the driving surface the horizontal area formed by a triangle, the apex of which is the point of the intersection of the lines formed by the projection of either the face of the curb, edge of pavement, or the edge of the driving surface, the legs of which extend ten feet along the minor road, and the hypotenuse of which connects the ends of the legs; or 
(4)  In the event of balanced traffic volume or equally controlled right-of-way (i.e., no major/minor roadway condition) or as determined by the director of public works, or his or her designee, based upon sound engineering practices, the additional ten-foot by 100-foot triangle as defined in this section shall apply to all approaches. See Figures 54-523A, B, C and D. 
(5)  As used in this subsection the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
a.  Major road means one which has the right-of-way or larger traffic volume; or as determined by the director of public works, or his or her designee, based upon sound engineering practices. 
b.  Intersecting streets in addition to meaning the intersection of streets of public right-of-way may also mean a private driveway or a private street and its intersection with a public street. 
c.  Street right-of-way line means that line denoting the edge of the right-of-way of the street and being identical with the property lines of persons owning property fronting on the streets. For the purposes of establishing the clear visibility triangle as described in this subsection, the "street right-of-way line" for a private driveway or private street shall be set as a parallel line ten feet from the face of the curb, edge of pavement or edge of the driving surface. 
(6)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Utility facilities; 
b.  Traffic control devices. 
(j)  Signage and signalization. The developer shall deposit with the county sufficient funds to provide all necessary roadway signs and traffic signalization as may be required by the county, based upon county or state traffic standards. At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection, and one at each "T" intersection. Signs shall be installed under light standards and free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signs shall conform to county standards. 
FIGURE 54-523B 
FIGURE 54-523C 
FIGURE 54-523D 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(09.13.02), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-524-54-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS 

Sec. 54-551. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertise means to inform, to notify, to announce, or to attract public attention by emphasizing desirable qualities in order to arouse a desire to purchase or invest. 
    Animated sign means any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves in any fashion whatsoever; and sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights, or lighting device or devices which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part thereof automatically. The term "animated sign" shall not include revolving signs. 
    Arterial street is defined as defined by the comprehensive plan. 
    Banner means any hanging sign possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. This classification shall not include plastic or fabric signs which are permanently attached within a rigid frame and which are intended to be used as a permanent sign. National flags, flags of political subdivisions, and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of this article. 
    Bench sign means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed adjacent to a public right of way. 
    Canopy. See Marquee . 
    Changeable copy sign means any poster board, bulletin board, neon sign, screen, surface or wall, with characters, letters or illustrations affixed thereto or thereon, by any method or means whatsoever that can be changed, rearranged, or altered without changing the face of the poster board, bulletin board, neon sign, screen, surface or wall. 
    Construction sign means any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
    Copy means the wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form. 
    Development sign means a sign which, by symbol or name, identifies a development. It may also provide an index of uses (tenants) included in the development. 
    Directional sign means a sign permanently or temporarily erected by or with approval of any authorized government agency to denote the route to any city, town, village, historic place, shrine, or hospital; signs directing and regulating traffic; notices of any railroad, bridge, or other transportation activity necessary for the direction or safety of the public; signs, notices, or symbols for the information of aviators as to location, directions, and landings, and conditions affecting safety in aviation; signs, notices, or symbols as to the time and place of civic meetings; and/or notices erected or maintained upon public property giving the name of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises or the street number thereof. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign having two display surfaces, not necessarily displaying the same copy, which are usually parallel and back to back and not more than 24 inches apart. When the display surfaces of a double-faced sign are not parallel the interior angle created by said surfaces shall not exceed 60 degrees and the two surfaces shall not be more than 24 inches apart at the apex of said angle. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and shall include the painting of wall signs. 
    Establishment means a commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business, or financial entity. 
    Flashing sign means a sign designed to attract attention through the use of a flashing, changing, revolving or flickering light source, or a change of light intensity. 
    Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premises along a street on which it borders. 
    Frontage, building, means the length of an outside building wall on a street. 
    Ground sign means any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. 
    Identification sign means a sign which depicts the name and/or address of a building or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a means of identifying said building or establishment. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign which contains a source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source including indirect lighting, neon, incandescent lights, back lighted, and reflectorized signs which depend upon automobile headlights for an image. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign illuminated with a light directed primarily toward such sign, including back lighted signs, and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible. 
    Internally illuminated sign means a light source which is enclosed within the sign and viewed through a translucent panel. This type of illumination is often referred to as direct. 
    Mansard sign means any sign attached to or erected against a mansard of a building, with the face horizontally parallel to the building wall. Since said sign is to be mounted parallel to and within the limitations of the building wall on which same is to be mounted, the same is deemed to be a wall sign and not a roof sign. 
    Marquee means a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building line or property line. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign, legal at the time of its erection, which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
    Off-site sign means a sign relating in its subject matter to premises other than the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities available on premises other than the premises on which the sign is located, including but not limited to billboards. 
    On-site sign means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises. 
    Painted wall sign means any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
    Permanent sign means a sign permanently affixed to a building or to the ground. 
    Political sign means a sign identifying and urging voter support for or opposition to a particular issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
    Portable sign means any sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols. 
    Premises means an area of land with its appurtenances and building which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
    Projecting sign means any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall. 
    Promotional sign means: 
(1)  A sign designed and intended to promote the sale of unplatted land where more than one lot and/or principal building is involved. 
(2)  A sign designed and intended to advertise the grand opening of a business, special promotions or similar events. 
    Public service sign means a sign designed to render a public service such as but not limited to "time and temperature" signs and "flashing news" signs. 
    Real estate sign means a sign which advertises the sale, rental or development of the premises upon which it is located. 
    Residential district means all land zoned R-1, R-1A, and R-2, as well as that zoned A when used solely for residential purposes. 
    Revolving sign means any sign so erected or constructed as to periodically change the direction toward which any plane containing the sign surface area is oriented. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure. 
    Sandwich sign means any sign, double or single faced, which is portable and may readily be moved from place to place. 
    Shopping center means a group of two or more retail and service establishments of more than 25,000 square feet gross floor area on the ground floor and located on commonly owned property, sharing the same parking facilities and connected together by common walls, interior aisles, or malls. 
    Sign means any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device which: 
(1)  Is used to announce, direct attention to identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known; and 
(2)  Is designed to be visible from any street or adjoining property. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms building or landscaping, or any architectural embellishment of a building not designed to communicate information. 
    Sign face means the area of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
    Sign height means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign, or it's frame or supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
    Sign number. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be single display surface or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component or element shall be considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign or ground sign with sign surface on both sides of such sign shall be constructed as a single sign, and the total area of such sign shall be the area computed on a single side. 
    Sign structure means any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
    Sign surface area. The surface area of a sign shall be computed for the entire area within the periphery of a regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed, but not including structural elements of the sign bearing no advertising matter. The surface area of a sign shall be measured from the outside edges of the sign or the sign frame, whichever is greater. 
    Snipe sign means any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence post, or any other similar object located or situated on public or private property. Snipe signs shall not include "posted property" signs. 
    Street means a public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic, including highways, thoroughfares, lanes, roads, ways, boulevards, and other terms, but not including alley ways between buildings and lots, parking lots, and driveways. 
    Subdivision sign means any sign designed to identify a subdivision or neighborhood. 
    Temporary sign means a sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood, or other light material and intended to be displayed for a short period of time. Included in this category are retailers' signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a sale or "special" offer and banner signs. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall. 
    Window sign means any sign placed inside or upon a window facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.11, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.11), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-552. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be punished as required by law. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-553. - Purpose; applicability; additional requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this article is to establish a set of standards for the fabrication, erection, and use of signs, symbols, markings, or advertising devices within the city. These standards are designed to protect and promote the health and safety of persons within the city and to aid and assist in the promotion of business and industry by providing regulations which allow and encourage creativity, effectiveness, and flexibility in the design and use of such devices, while avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article shall apply within the city. 
(c)  Applicability of other requirements. 
(1)  Signs or other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with the city building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(2)  In the event any of the provisions of this article are in conflict with other applicable requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-554. - Permits; inspections. 
(a)  Permit required; exceptions. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to erect, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining a sign permit; provided however, that incidental signs not more than two square feet are allowed, without a permit, in residentially zoned areas, containing political, religious or ideological messages. 
(2)  When a sign permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of said permit without prior approval of the development administrator. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the development administrator. 
(3)  The following activity shall not require a sign permit: The changing of the advertising copy or message on signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
(b)  Application for permit. 
(1)  In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter or relocate any sign under the provisions of this article, an applicant therefor shall submit to the development administrator a sign permit application which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector; 
b.  The location by street address of the proposed sign structure; 
c.  Complete information as required on application forms provided by the development administrator, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of the proposed sign (for identification purposes only), and such other date as are pertinent to the application; 
d.  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings, and materials to be used; 
e.  Application, and required information for such application, for an electric permit for all electric signs if the person erecting the sign is to make the electrical connection. 
(2)  Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the city harmless for all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. Each applicant shall present to the building official on request a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(3)  For off-site signs, such applicant shall obtain and attach to this application the written consent for the erection of such sign of the person having the right to use and possession of the premises on which the sign is to be erected. 
(4)  The development administrator shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(c)  Certain signs to be certified by registered engineer. The following signs shall be designed, signed and certified by a Florida registered engineer, who shall submit sufficient data to enable the development administrator to determine whether the sign complies with this article: 
(1)  All roof signs. 
(2)  Projecting signs over 24 square feet in area. 
(3)  Off-site signs or ground signs over 100 square feet in area. 
(4)  All signs with unusual structural features. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. It shall be the duty of the development administrator, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, to issue to the applicant a written permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the development administrator from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if upon further review of information submitted with the application, or of newly acquired information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(e)  Expiration of permit. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of issuance. 
(f)  Identification tag. 
(1)  The development administrator shall attach or require to be attached to the sign a tag which shall have printed or impressed thereon "CITY OF MONTICELLO SIGN PERMIT," the number thereof and the year of its issuance. 
(2)  No sign as herein defined, unless specifically exempted, shall be erected, displayed, rebuilt, repaired, painted or otherwise maintained which does not have such tag securely attached thereto, or to its supporting structure, in such manner as to be plainly visible from the street or roadway. 
(3)  The absence of an identification tag shall be prima facie evidence that the sign or advertising structure is being operated in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon, any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and may be ordered immediately removed by the development administrator. 
(h)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the development administrator. 
(i)  Revocation of permit. The development administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this article within 30 days after notification in writing. 
(j)  Permit fees. Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant must pay a fee of follows: 
(1)  For each permit for signs, illuminated or not, $0.20 per square foot on each face. 
(2)  For each permit for a painted wall sign, $0.20 per square foot on each face. 
(3)  The minimum permit fee for each sign as described in subsections (1) and (2) above shall be $15.00. 
(4)  A double fee shall be paid in addition to any other penalties levied for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-555. - Removal, alteration or maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Removal of illegal signs. The development administrator shall remove or cause to be removed any and all signs constructed or maintained in the city in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Abandoned signs. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any on-site sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three months or more, or any on-site sign which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent on-site signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six months or more. An abandoned on-sign is prohibited and shall be taken down and removed by owner, agency, or persons having beneficial use of the building, structure, or land upon which such is found, within 30 days after written notice by the development administrator. 
(c)  Maintenance of sign and supports. All signs for which a permit is required by this article, including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if provided, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(d)  Maintenance of surrounding area. Weeds and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of ground signs for a distance of ten feet, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be permitted under or near such signs. 
(e)  Notice to remove or alter sign. If the development administrator finds that any sign regulated under this article is unsafe or unsecure, or is a menace to the public, he or she shall give written notice of such findings to the owner, agent or lessee thereof. If the owner, agent, or lessee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 30 days after said notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply by the development administrator at the expense of the owner, agent, or lessee, of the sign or of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(f)  Removal of dangerous signs. The development administrator may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed immediately. 
(g)  Authority to remove improperly maintained signs. A permit issued by the development administrator for a sign shall, by and upon its receipt and acceptance by the contractor, owner, agent or lessee of said sign, authorize the removal, at the expense of said owner, agent, or lessee, of said sign or of the property on which it is located if not properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-556. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The following signs shall be removed or made to conform to this article within 90 days of its adoption: 
(1)  Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable material. 
(2)  All temporary signs other than those permitted herein. 
(3)  Any signs, except portable signs, that are not affixed to a building or the ground or that are located on public property or within a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Bench signs. 
(b)  Nonconforming portable signs shall be removed or made to conform to this article within one year from the adoption of this article. Within seven days from the adoption of this article, any animated component of any portable sign shall be turned off. Prior to the end of the one-year conformance period, sign permits may be issued for portable signs which were lawful as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  Nonconforming permanent animated signs shall be made to conform to this article within 90 days from the adoption of this article. 
(d)  Nonconforming permanent on-site signs and off-site signs shall be made to conform or be removed according to the following schedule, all time periods beginning as of the date that the sign becomes nonconforming: 
(1)  Off-site signs, five years. 
(2)  On-site signs, five years. 
(3)  Any nonconforming permanent on-site sign or offsite sign which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement value shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with this article. 
(4)  A nonconforming permanent on-site sign or off-site sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that substitution or interchange of letters and face panels on nonconforming signs shall be permitted through the period of nonconformity established by this article. 
(5)  Not less than 12 months before the expiration of a period of nonconformity, the development administrator shall give written notice that the nonconforming on-site sign or offsite sign shall be made to conform. 
(6)  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the development administrator is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner, agent or lessee of said sign or of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(e)  For lawfully erected signs which are located in areas annexed subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the required time periods for conformity with this article shall begin on the effective date of annexation. 
(f)  Nonconforming permanent on-site signs and nonconforming permanent off-site signs may be maintained and repaired but shall not be structurally or mechanically extended or altered to further the nonconformance except as required by the building official in cases where it has been determined that there exists imminent danger to the public safety. 
(g)  Nonconforming real estate signs shall be removed or made to conform within one year of the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-557. - Variances. 
(a)  Application of the provisions of this article may be varied by the city council, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and, where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the code involved would result in unnecessary or unique hardship. 
(b)  Requests for variances regarding any part of this article or the enforcement thereof shall be made in written form to the city superintendent. 
(c)  Variance procedures shall apply both to signs which are nonconforming as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and to new signs erected after the date of adoption. 
(d)  Decisions of the city council shall be final, subject, however, to such legal remedy as any aggrieved party might have. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-558. - General requirements; prohibited signs. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Vertical clearance. Signs extending or hanging over any public or private sidewalk or pedestrian way shall not be less than nine feet above the surface of such way. Signs extending or hanging over any public or private vehicular way shall not be less than 15 feet above the surface of such way. 
(2)  Obstruction to vision at street intersections. All signs shall comply with the requirements for preserving visibility at street intersections contained in section 54-523. 
(3)  Distance from residential districts. Signs on properties in commercial or industrial districts which abut a residential district shall not be erected closer than 15 feet to any residential district boundary line. 
(4)  Protection of residential properties from glare or reflection of light. Illuminated signs, including neon signs, shall not produce more than one foot-candle of illumination four feet from the sign. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  Off-site signs. 
(2)  On-site signs which are not designed, constructed, or maintained in accordance with these provisions, which are not compatible with the objectives of this article, or which do not meet the requirements of all applicable city, county, state and federal codes. 
(3)  Lights and signs that resemble any traffic control device, official traffic control signs, or emergency vehicle markings. 
(4)  Signs or other advertising matter as regulated by this article erected at the intersection of any streets or in any street right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or which makes use of words "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or are a hazard or a nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(6)  Animated signs except public service signs. 
(7)  Banners or flying paraphernalia, except an official federal, state, county, or city flag, and one symbolic flag not to exceed 15 square feet in area for each institution or business. 
(8)  Signs which produce noise or sounds capable of being heard even though the sounds produced are not understandable sounds. 
(9)  Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odor. 
(10)  Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which causes radio or television or other communication interference. 
(11)  Motion picture mechanism in conjunction with any outdoor advertising structure, accessory sign, or advertising statuary used in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public street or sidewalk. 
(12)  Signs erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct, or be attached to, any fire-fighting equipment, window, door, or opening used as a means of ingress or egress or for fire-fighting purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any opening required for proper light and ventilation. 
(13)  Signs erected on public property other than signs erected by public authority for public purposes. 
(14)  Signs, except "posted property" signs, which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(15)  Signs attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked on a public thoroughfare for the sole purpose of advertising. 
(16)  Sandwich signs. 
(17)  Snipe signs. 
(18)  Window signs which identify or advertise activities, services, goods, or products available within the building, and which collectively cover more than 20 percent of the window glass surface area. 
(19)  Bench signs. 
(20)  Flashing signs incorporated onto or attached to portable signs. 
(21)  Tethered inflatable signs, either on-site or off-site, except as otherwise permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-559. - Standards for on-site signs. 
(a)  Applicability. Unless otherwise specified, the standards in this section shall apply. 
(b)  On-site permanent signs exempt from permit. The following on-site permanent signs may be erected without securing a permit, subject, however, to meeting all other applicable codes and regulations: 
(1)  One professional name plate for each premises. Each professional name plate shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(2)  One occupational sign for each premises, denoting only the name, street, number and business of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building. Each occupational sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(3)  One bulletin board and identification sign per street frontage for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions located on the premises of said institutions and not exceeding 48 square feet in area where said institution is located in a residential district. 
(4)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures. 
(5)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
(6)  Nonadvertising directional signs or symbols (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, no trespassing) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property, not to exceed two square feet in area. 
(7)  Identification signs at the entrance drive of residences, estates, farms, ranches, and plantations which do not exceed two square feet in area. 
(8)  Window signs which identify or advertise activities, services, goods, or products available within the building, and which collectively cover 20 percent or less of the window glass surface area. 
(9)  Signs incorporated on machinery or equipment at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths, and gasoline pumps. 
(b)[c]  Permanent signs for which permit is required. 
(1)  Ground or freestanding signs, wall signs, mansard signs, marquee and canopy signs, and roof signs. Ground signs, wall signs, mansard signs, marquee and canopy signs, and roof signs, except where otherwise provided, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Zoning districts where allowed. Except where otherwise specifically provided, these signs shall be allowed only in zoning districts other than residential districts and agricultural districts. 
b.  Maximum surface area. Aggregate surface area of all signs, including free-standing sign structures and supports, shall not exceed two square feet of area for each foot of building frontage occupied by the business displaying signs, or one square foot of area for each foot of frontage of property occupied by the building. Square footage for double-faced freestanding signs may be calculated using only one side of the surface area. 
Maximum aggregate surface area allowed for each building or property frontage is as follows: 
1.  Within the B-1 zoning district and mixed-use business/residential zoning district: 40 square feet. 
2.  Within all other zoning districts where allowed: 160 square feet. 
c.  Multiple occupancy buildings. Where a single building or complex of buildings contains two or more separate activities or establishments, the individual establishments located in such multiple occupancy buildings shall be permitted wall signs and wall sign area as though each were located in an individual building with individual street frontage. Such multiple occupancy buildings shall be permitted one ground sign with surface area not to exceed one square foot of property frontage of the building or two square feet per foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 150 square feet. 
d.  Maximum number of signs . Only one ground sign and one wall, mansard, marquee, canopy, projecting, or roof sign shall be allowed for each premises, except that on corner and double frontage lots, two ground signs and two wall, mansard, marquee, projecting, or roof signs are allowed provided that premises with more than one street frontage may utilize up to the maximum sign surface area allowed for each frontage, but no transfers of allowable area may be made from one frontage to another. 
e.  Ground or freestanding signs . 
1.  Location. All freestanding signs must front on a public road right-of-way or a paved dedicated access easement, whichever is the principal access to the property and must meet general requirements in [section] 54-558. 
2.  Setback and size. All setbacks referred to herein are from the property line abutting the public right-of-way. Height is measured from the crown of the abutting public right-of-way. The maximum size allowed for the sign varies in relation to the setback as follows for all zoning districts where such signage is allowed unless expressly specified otherwise in this Code: 
Setback Maximum Height of Sign Structure Maximum Size of Sign Structure Maximum Size of Surface Within the Structure More than 40 feet 20 ft. 120 sq. ft. 60 sq. ft. Over 20 feet to 40 feet 10 ft. 80 sq. ft. 40 sq. ft. Over 10 feet to 20 feet 8 ft. 48 sq. ft. 24 sq. ft. Over 2 feet to 10 feet 5 ft. 25 sq. ft. 15 sq. ft. 0 feet to 2 feet No signs permitted  
3.  Lighting. Lighting for signage may be accomplished by either internal or external sources. The source of illumination for externally-illuminated signs may not be visible from any abutting right-of-way or any adjacent property. Internally illuminated signs must have the lighting source concealed within the sign. All lit signs must comply with section 54-558(a)(4). 
4.  Permanent freestanding signs shall have irrigated landscape consisting of ground cover, shrubs and/or trees. 
f.  Maximum projection of wall signs. Wall signs may not project more than 12 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. 
g.  Mansard signs. Unless otherwise specified, the mansard roof portion of a structure may be used for the mounting of a sign, provided such sign shall not extend above the highest point of the mansard roof line upon which the sign is mounted. 
h.  Marquee signs and canopy signs. Signs or sign structures located on a marquee or canopy shall be affixed flat to the surface and shall not be greater than two feet in vertical dimension above the marquee and shall not extend horizontally beyond the marquee or canopy. An identification sign may extend vertically below the marquee or canopy, but may not exceed the dimensions of one foot by six feet, nor exceed the width of the marquee or canopy, whichever is less. 
i.  Projecting signs . All projecting signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Projecting limitations: Four feet beyond the surface of the portion of the building to which it is attached or designed. 
2.  Surface area and height limitations: 
Building Height Area Limits Maximum Height of Sign Above Ground 1 or 2 Story 12 sq. feet 12 feet 3 Story 32 sq. feet 20 feet Over 3 Story 42 sq. feet 25 feet  
3.  Only one project[ing] sign per building. 
j.  Roof signs. All roof signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Only on-site signs shall be allowed. 
2.  No part of any roof sign or roof sign structure shall project beyond the building wall. 
(2)  Shopping center signs. For each shopping center, signs bearing the name and identification of the shopping center and of the establishments on the premises shall be allowed subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Signs for identification of shopping center and shopping center establishments. 
1.  Maximum number of signs. One ground sign for the first 500 lineal feet of frontage adjacent to a street and one additional ground sign for each additional 500 lineal feet of frontage or major fraction thereof. 
2.  Maximum surface area. Maximum surface area for each shopping center ground sign shall be based on the gross leasable area (GLA) within the shopping center as follows: 
i.  Neighborhood shopping center, at least 25,000 but less than 100,000 square feet GLA: 175 square feet. 
ii.  Community shopping center, at least 100,000 but less than 300,000 square feet GLA: 200 square feet. 
iii.  Regional shopping center, at least 300,000 square feet GLA or more: 300 square feet. 
b.  Signs for establishments in shopping center. Each establishment located within the shopping center shall be allowed one sign not to exceed 21/2 square feet of surface area for each lineal foot of store frontage with a maximum surface area of 200 square feet, and one hanging marquee sign not to exceed the dimensions of one foot by six feet not to exceed the width of the canopy, whichever is less. 
c.  Orientation toward residential neighborhood. Shopping center identification signs shall not be located on the rear or sides of a shopping center when such display would orient the signs to a residential neighborhood. 
(3)  Subdivision signs. Two permanent subdivision signs may be located at each entrance to a subdivision provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  Such signs shall contain only the name of the subdivision and motto, if any, and shall not contain promotional or sales material. 
b.  The signs shall not create a physical or visual hazard for motorists entering or leaving the subdivision. 
c.  An acceptable legal entity shall be provided to assure the maintenance of the subdivision signs. 
d.  The signs shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
e.  The signs shall each not exceed 40 square feet in area. 
(4)  Multiple-family residential development and mobile home park signs. One wall or ground sign may be located on the site of a multiple-family residential development or mobile home park provided that it is not more than two square feet in area for each unit up to 16 for maximum sign area of 32 square feet. Such sign shall be not more than eight feet in height. Where a multiple-family residential development or mobile home park is located on more than one street, one sign may be displayed on each street. 
(5)  Signs in historic districts. The erection of permanent signs requiring permits for individual historic properties and for establishments within a historic district shall require a certificate of appropriateness as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
(d)  Temporary signs exempt from permit. The following on-site temporary signs may be erected without securing a permit, subject, however, to meeting all other applicable codes and regulations: 
(1)  Legal notices and official instruments. 
(2)  Flags or insignias of a governmental, religious, charitable, or fraternal organization, except when displayed in connection with a commercial promotion. 
(3)  Decorative flags and bunting for a city-wide celebration, conventions, and commemorations when authorized by the city council for a prescribed period of time. 
(4)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(5)  One nonilluminated, double-faced, real estate sign per street frontage not exceeding in face area: 
a.  In residential zoning districts R-1, R-1A and R-2: 
1.  Four and one-half square feet where the property being advertised has a frontage of less than 500 lineal feet. 
2.  Sixteen square feet where the property being advertised has a frontage of 500 lineal feet or more. 
b.  In all other districts, 16 square feet where the property or structure being advertised has a frontage of less than 200 lineal feet. 
c.  In all other districts, 32 square feet where the property or structure being advertised has a frontage of 200 lineal feet or more. 
Multiple-listing strips and "sold" signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign. Signs shall be removed when ownership has changed or the property is no longer for sale, rent, or lease. "Open for inspection" signs not exceeding 41/2 square feet in area may be allowed on property that is open for inspection. 
(6)  One construction sign per street frontage located on property where building is actually in progress under a current building permit. This shall be a ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet and may include the names of persons and firms performing services, labor, or supplying materials to the premises. Such sign must be removed before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(7)  Any temporary yard sign provided such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(e)  Temporary signs for which permit is required. 
(1)  Development signs. Signs designed and intended to advertise and promote the sale or rental or lease of lots and/or structures in any subdivision shall be permitted as follows: One sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be permitted for the first 20 building sites, plus one additional sign for each additional 50 building sites or parts thereof not to exceed one such sign for each street entrance into the subject subdivision. Such signs shall be permitted only within the confines of the subdivision. Permits for such development signs shall be issued for a period of one year only, subject to renewal on application. Such permits may be renewed by the development administrator only after determination that the promotion of the subdivision is active. 
(2)  Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary subdivision signs shall be allowed to identify subdivisions where an active building and development program is underway. Such signs shall be nonilluminated wall or ground mounted and shall be allowed for a maximum legal effective period of not more than two years. Such signs shall be removed when the permit becomes void, or when 75 percent of the lots in the subdivision have been conveyed or had principal buildings erected on them. Subdivision development signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. Such signs shall be set back not less than 15 feet from any side property line and shall be no greater than ten feet in height. In such cases where the subdivision abuts more than one street, one such temporary subdivision sign may be erected on each street frontage. 
(3)  Temporary signs for public or semi-public events or functions. A nonilluminated temporary sign announcing any public, charitable, educational, or religious event, issue, or function may be allowed on the site of the sponsoring public, charitable, educational, or religious institution and/or on the site of the event, issue, or function, itself. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Signs shall not be utilized for more than 60 days. 
(4)  Temporary signs for new businesses. A new business, or a business in a new location with no permanent signs, may obtain a permit for a temporary sign of up to 32 square feet in sign area or the maximum permitted sign area for any one ground mounted permanent sign for such occupant, whichever is lesser, for a period of not more than 60 days or until installation of permanent signs, whichever shall occur first. A temporary ground sign shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(5)  Banners, flying paraphernalia, and inflatable signs. A permit may be granted for the use of onsite banners, flying paraphernalia, and tethered inflatable signs for no more then seven calendar days in any six-month period. 
(6)  Portable signs. A permit may be granted for the erection of one portable sign on the premises of a business or institution provided that the portable sign shall: 
a.  Be allowed for not more than seven calendar days in any six-month period; 
b.  Not exceed 40 square feet in sign surface area; 
c.  Not utilize flashing illumination; 
d.  Be set back a minimum of ten feet from a right-of-way line; 
e.  Not be allowed to be placed in a parking space that is required to meet the minimum parking requirements of the city; 
f.  Not be allowed in any residential district. 
(7)  Pennants, flags and similar devices. Although the use of pennants, flags, banners, whirlers or similar devices is prohibited anywhere in the city, a singular exception to such prohibition shall be that such devices may be used in conjunction with the opening of a new place of business, provided that such devices shall not be installed prior to opening day nor shall remain longer than seven calendar days after opening day. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.08, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.08), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 54-560. - Off-site directional signs. 
    Each business or institution which is not located on an arterial street or a major collector street may display one off-site directional sign subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Location. 
a.  Off-site directional signs may be located in any zoning district. 
b.  Off-site directional signs shall not be allowed where visible only from a local street. 
c.  An off-site directional sign shall be located at the major intersection nearest to the business or institution displaying the sign. 
(2)  Type of sign allowed. Ground sign. 
(3)  Maximum sign surface area. Up to 16 square feet, but any such square footage shall be deducted from the allowance for on-site signs allowed under this article and only one such sign shall be allowed per intersection corner. 
(4)  Maximum sign height. Eight feet. 
(5)  Minimum setback. Five feet from the nearest right-of-way line. 
(6)  Illumination. Off-site directional signs shall not be illuminated. 
(7)  Permission required for placement. No off-site directional sign shall be located on any property without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, or trustee. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.09), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-561. - Enforcement. 
    This article may be enforced pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 10.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(10.10), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-562-54-590. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-591. - Title. 
    The provisions of this article shall constitute and be known as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Monticello, Florida." 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-592. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a landowner, lessee, developer, contractor or other legal entity, including agents, employees, independent contractors or others in privity with any of the above, or any natural person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, governmental body, agency or official involved in the construction, development or sale of subdivisions or the lots therein. 
    Council means the city council of the City of Monticello, Florida. 
    Dwelling unit means a single room or unified combination of rooms, regardless of form of ownership, that is designed for residential use by one family. The definition shall include but not be limited to condominium units, individual apartments and individual houses. 
    Engineer of record means a professional engineer registered to practice in the state who performs the engineering functions required herein on behalf of the applicant. 
    100-year floodplain means any land which is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year whether or not such land is designated as a flood hazard area by the Federal Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Plat means any plan, map, sketch, chart or other graphic representation of the subdivision of land. 
    Primary drainage system means a collection of watercourses, storm drains and culverts that are responsible for the main flow of stormwater runoff through the city. A watercourse, storm drain or culvert is in the primary drainage system if its 25-year return frequency flood flow is greater than 250 cubic feet per second. 
    Shade tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well shaped, well branched and has moderate to heavy density of shade. Shade trees are categorized as major or minor based on the following size characteristics: 
(1)  Major: Has an overall mature height of at least 35 feet and normally develops and average mature crown spread of more than 30 feet in the Jefferson County area of Florida. 
(2)  Minor: Has an overall mature height of at least 20 feet and normally develops an average mature crown spread of more than 20 feet in the Jefferson County area of Florida. 
    Subdivision means a division of any parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of any transfer of ownership, right to possession or building development. Also, the establishment of a street and the replatting of existing plats. 
    Superintendent means the city superintendent for Monticello, Florida. 
    Surety device means evidence of security adequate to assure the installation and completion or maintenance of all required improvements for a subdivision. Acceptable surety devices include a cash deposit, a surety bond, an executed escrow agreement between the applicant and a bank or other financial institution, or any other financial assurance acceptable to the council guaranteeing installation or maintenance of all required improvements within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.10, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.10), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-593. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Issuance of permits and certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  No building permit or permit to connect to a public street may be issued for construction within a subdivision unless the subdivision: 
a.  Is exempt under section 54-594(b); 
b.  Has been approved as a minor subdivision under section 54-595; or 
c.  Has received preliminary plat approval under section 54-596, and construction plan approval under section 54-597. 
(2)  No certificate of occupancy may be issued for a building within a subdivision of which recording is required prior to the recording of the plat. Further, no certificate of occupancy be issued within such subdivision until sufficient subdivision improvements have been completed as required by the approved construction plans necessary to serve the building for which the certificate of occupancy is sought. 
(3)  All subdivision lots shall conform to this chapter. 
(b)  Reference to plat. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to transfer, sell or agree to sell land by reference to, exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision without having complied with this article unless such transfer, sale or agreement to sell pertains to the entire subdivision. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to negotiate to sell land by reference to, exhibit of or other use of a plat of a subdivision without having complied with this article, where such plat contains a combination of two or more of the following: lot dimensions, roads, lot and block designations, easements, subdivision name, common areas, or subdivision improvements, unless such negotiation is for the sale of the entire subdivision. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the use of plats which do not comply with this article in the sale of land by metes and bounds. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-594. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. This article shall be applicable to any subdivision of property in the city unless exempted by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following subdivisions are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A division of land into parcels of not less than ten acres each where no new streets or easements of access are planned for dedication to the public. 
(2)  A division by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  A subdivision of land located on an existing road, the right-of-way of which is owned by the public, within which subdivision not more than ten dwelling units can be constructed, and which contains no new streets or easements of access. 
(4)  A division of land for purposes of conveyance, where such division was lawful under regulations in effect at the time such division was made, and where vested rights have been acquired by the applicant in reliance upon such regulations as set forth below: 
a.  In the following cases a summary determination of exemption shall be made by the city upon a demonstration by the applicant that: 
1.  The plat was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
2.  Either: 
i.  All subdivision improvements necessary to serve each lot shown on the plat were constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; or 
ii.  Prior to such effective date, streets were in place on the land described in the plat, which are capable of being traversed by an ordinary passenger vehicle, and not less than 25 percent of the lots were sold pursuant to bona fide purchase to different owners in parcels of not more than four lots each. 
An applicant aggrieved by a determination of the city may appeal such determination in writing to the council within 30 days of such determination. 
b.  In the following cases, the determination of exemption shall be made by the council upon a demonstration by the applicant that: 
1.  The plat was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
2.  Either: 
i.  Substantial physical on-site development of the land described in the plat took place prior to such effective date; or 
ii.  There is evidence of substantial good-faith reliance, by the developer, upon prior governmental regulations. 
3.  A determination of exemption under these conditions can be made only when the city or council makes an express finding that granting the exemption will not substantially and adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  A resubdivision of a lot which is contained within a subdivision which has received preliminary plat approval, when the density proposed in the resubdivision was approved in the preliminary plat. 
(6)  The city council may exempt portions of subdivisions which qualify for exemptions in accordance with subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(7)  An exemption shall not be permitted where the land to be subdivided has been previously exempted from this article. 
(c)  Annexation. Subdivisions initially located in the unincorporated area of the county, and which are subsequently annexed into the corporate limits of the city, may proceed as provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section to the extent that rights are vested in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b)(4). The appropriate city staff or the city council may exempt portions of subdivisions which quality for exemptions in accordance with subsection (b)(4), if development is in accord with the requirements of previously existing subdivision regulations. Subdivisions, or portions of subdivisions, which are annexed and which are not vested as specified in subsection (b)(4), are required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-595. - Minor subdivision review. 
(a)  The following divisions of land, other than those for which plats are recorded or exempt in accordance with this article, are minor subdivisions: 
(1)  A subdivision of land located on an existing road where the right-of-way is not owned by the public, within which subdivision not more than ten dwelling units can be constructed, and which subdivision contains no new streets or easements of access; or 
(2)  The resubdivision of lots previously exempted, platted or described as a lot by a recorded deed, if: 
a.  The resubdivided lots comply with all requirements in effect at the time of resubdivision; and 
b.  The number of lots created will be equal to or less than the number of lots existing before resubdivision. 
(b)  Review as a minor subdivision shall not be permitted where the land to be subdivided has previously been part of a minor subdivision or an exempt subdivision. 
(c)  Applications for approval as a minor subdivision shall be filed with the city. The decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny shall be made by the city within 15 days of receipt of a complete application. 
(d)  The 100-year floodplain or a setback line above the 100-year floodplain shall be delineated on the plat. 
(e)  Minor subdivisions shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 54-596, 54-597 and 54-598. 
(f)  An applicant aggrieved by a determination of the city may appeal such determination in writing to the council within 30 days of such determination. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-596. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  [Approval.] A preliminary plat must be approved for any subdivision in the city, unless exempt in accordance with section 54-594, or approved as a minor subdivision under section 54-595. 
(b)  Best development practices check list. Subdivision design should be developed in accordance with the following best development practices checklist: 
(1)  Land use practices. 
a.  Reduce vehicle miles of travel (VMT) and strip development by encouraging mixed-use development. 
b.  Contribute to the areas jobs-housing balance. 
c.  Encourage a mixture of land uses, including, residential, office, and neighborhood commercial and civic uses. 
d.  Develop in clusters and keep clusters small. 
e.  Place higher density housing near commercial centers and parks. 
f.  Phase convenience shopping and recreational opportunities to keep pace with housing. 
g.  Make subdivisions into neighborhoods, with well-defined edges and centers. 
h.  Reserve school sites in large developments; donate them if necessary to attract new schools. 
i.  Concentrate commercial development in compact centers or districts, rather than letting it spread out in strips along roadways. 
j.  Encourage shopping centers and business parks to become all-purpose activity centers. 
k.  Minimize impact of auto-oriented land uses, and/or incorporate pedestrian linkages by clearly establishing pedestrian walkways and bikeways. Utilization of brick pavers can be used to delineate pedestrian pathways to and between typical auto oriented land uses. 
(2)  Transportation practices. 
a.  Design the street network with multiple connections and relatively direct routes. 
b.  Space through-streets no more than half a mile apart, or the equivalent route in a curvilinear network. 
c.  Keep speeds on local, residential streets to no more than 25 mph. 
d.  Keep speeds on arterials and collectors that are in residential areas to no more than 35 mph. 
e.  Use traffic calming measures in residential areas, such as speed humps with a 20-mph design speed. 
f.  Keep all streets as narrow as possible. 
g.  Align streets to give buildings energy-efficient orientation. 
h.  Avoid using traffic signals where possible and space signals for good traffic progression. 
i.  Provide networks for pedestrians and bicyclists as good as the network for motorists. 
j.  Provide pedestrians and bicyclists with shortcuts and alternatives to travel along high-volume streets. 
(3)  Environmental practices. 
a.  Encourage a systems approach to environmental planning. 
b.  Channel and guide development into areas that are already developed. 
c.  Preserve areas of high-quality habitat, as large and circular as possible, feathered at the edges and connected by wildlife and agricultural corridors. 
d.  Design around significant wetlands. 
e.  Establish upland buffers around all retained wetlands and natural water bodies. 
f.  Preserve significant uplands. 
g.  Restore and enhance ecological functions damaged by prior site activities. 
h.  Minimize runoff by clustering development and using efficient stormwater facilities, designed as amenities not eyesores surrounded by chain link fences. 
i.  Detain runoff with open, natural drainage systems. 
j.  Design man-made lakes and stormwater ponds for maximum environmental value. 
k.  Use reclaimed water on large developments with large landscaped areas. 
l.  Use and require use of xeriscape landscaping, where feasible. 
(4)  Housing practices. 
a.  Achieve an average net residential density of units per acre in accordance with the designated zoning district. 
b.  Use cost effective site development and construction practices. 
c.  Design in energy efficient features. 
d.  Supply affordable single-family homes for moderate-income families. 
e.  Supply affordable multifamily and accessory housing for low-income households. 
f.  Tap into government housing programs to broaden and deepen the housing/income mix, including the State Housing Initiatives Partnership (SHIP) program. 
(c)  Procedure for review and approval. 
(1)  In order to expedite the review of a subdivision preliminary plat, coordinate its local review in respect to the provisions of all applicable city ordinances, one or more pre-application conferences between the applicant and designated city staff or designated development consultant is required, the cost of which will be born by the applicant at a fee approved by the city council in a resolution. 
(2)  Submittal. The applicant shall submit 13 copies of the preliminary plat and the supplementary materials to the city clerk, along with payment of the appropriate development review fee as set forth in a resolution of the council. 
(3)  Technical review. The city clerk shall transmit all subdivision applications to the city's designated administrative staff and designated development consultant for review. The staff shall have 30 working days to determine the completeness of the application. 
Once an application is determined to be complete, the designated staff or development consultant shall have 30 days to issue a report to the applicant and city clerk, and the city clerk shall schedule the matter for the next available local planning agency meeting for review and recommendation on the project to the city council. 
(4)  Local planning agency review. Following technical review, the local planning agency shall review the preliminary plat, including the revisions and review comments by the city staff or designated development consultant, the applicant, and members of the general public, at an advertised public hearing. Property owners within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision shall be notified by mail, at least 20 days prior to the public hearing, of the date, time, location and purpose of the public hearing. In addition, no sooner than 15 days before the public hearing before the local planning agency, the applicant shall cause to have erected a sign at the site of the proposed subdivision, readable from the adjacent roadway travel lane, depicting the following information: 
a.  Name of subdivision; 
b.  Map of proposed subdivision layout; 
c.  Language that consideration of approval of the proposed subdivision layout is pending before the city; 
d.  The date, time and place of the public hearing before the local planning agency. 
(5)  City council review. Within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations of the local planning agency, the city council, at an advertised public hearing shall: 
a.  Approve the preliminary plat; 
b.  Approve the preliminary plat with conditions, the nature of which shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or attached to it in writing; 
c.  Disapprove the preliminary plat or any portion thereof, specifying, in writing, the reasons for disapproval; or 
d.  The city council may continue deliberation of the preliminary plat to a time certain with the consent of the applicant. 
In deciding whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for preliminary plat, the entity with authority to render such decision shall determine: 
(1)  Whether the applicable zoning standards and requirements have been met. 
(2)  Whether the applicable criteria of the land development regulations have been met. 
(3)  Whether adequate capacity is available as required in the concurrency management system. 
(4)  Whether the requirements of other applicable regulations or ordinances which impose specific requirements on preliminary plats and development have been met. 
(5)  Notification of action. The city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the city council's action within ten working days after such action. 
(6)  Expiration of approval. Every preliminary plat approval shall become invalid unless construction on the approved subdivision is commenced within 24 months after approval of the construction plans, or if the construction of the approved subdivision is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months after the construction is commenced. Approval may be extended, by request of the applicant and approval by the city council after review by the city staff or development consultant, for successive periods of time not to exceed 12 months each, provided the request for extension is made prior to the expiration of the prior approval period. After expiration, the applicant must resubmit the preliminary plat and follow the procedures required for approval of the preliminary plat. 
(b)  [d.] Specifications. 
(1)  Required materials for submission. The submittal for preliminary plat approval shall consist of copies of line prints on white background, and such other documents as may be determined necessary by the council. 
(2)  Name of subdivision. Every subdivision shall be given a name by which it shall be legally known. Such a name shall not be the same or in any way so similar to any name appearing on any recorded plat in the county so as to confuse the records or mislead the public as to identity of the subdivision, except where the subdivision is subdivided as an additional unit or section by the same applicant or his or her successors in title. Every subdivision name shall have legible lettering, including the words "section," "unit," "replat," "amended" or other explanatory terminology. 
(3)  Required information. The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and his or her engineer of record or land surveyor. 
c.  North arrow, graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing and space for revision dates. 
d.  Acres and numbers of lots. 
e.  Vicinity map and an infrared aerial of the site and sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the immediately surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches shall be drawn to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch to 2,000 feet. United States Geological Survey Maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
f.  Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the preliminary plat has been previously subdivided. 
g.  Boundary lines of the entire tract to be eventually subdivided indicated by a heavy line with ties to the nearest government corner or other recorded and well-established corner. 
h.  Contour lines at no greater than five-foot intervals based on United States Geological Survey Datum. 
i.  Existing natural and manmade features within the proposed subdivision and in an area within at least 100 feet beyond the boundary of the proposed subdivision which might affect subdivision design. These features include but are not limited to drainage channels, bodies of water, mean high-water lines and areas subject to flooding. 
j.  Right-of-way widths and names of existing platted streets, bridges, easements, and city and county lines within at least 100 feet beyond the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
k.  Preliminary layout, including lot lines with approximate dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street lines with proposed street names, right-of-way widths, pedestrian way locations and sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public or private uses. 
l.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the applicant. Changes in unit division or staging shall be permitted for final plat approval provided the units are recorded in numerical sequence. 
m.  Location and results of representative percolation tests and soil tests as may be required by appropriate agencies for an area to be subdivided which is not to be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system. 
n.  All section and quarter section lines occurring on the map or plat shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat, with appropriate words and figures. If the description is by metes and bounds, the point of beginning shall be indicated, together with all bearings and distances of the boundary lines. If the platted lands are in a land grant or are not included in the subdivision of government surveys, then the boundaries are to be defined by metes and bounds and courses. The initial point in the description shall be tied to the nearest government corner or other recorded and well-established corner. 
o.  All contiguous properties shall be identified by subdivision title, plat book and page or, if unplatted, land shall be so designated. 
p.  The proposed water supply, power supply and method of sewage disposal for each lot in the proposed subdivision. 
q.  A conceptual storm water management plan. 
r.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain or a setback line above the 100-year floodplain. 
s.  An analysis of the projected impact of the new development on public facilities, including the amount of traffic generated by the project, and amount of water and sewer required. 
t.  Identification of all protected trees on the site or in the right of way that may be disturbed by the project. Protected trees are identified in Chapter 54 Article XIV of the City of Monticello Land Development Code. 
u.  The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a written summary of the proposal giving information as to the overall development plan with preliminary data on approximate number of dwelling units, general types of business and industry so that the effects of the development can be determined to assure that the development is in accordance with this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
v.  General information on who will maintain the subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.05), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-597. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Procedure for review and approval. 
(1)  Preparation. Following approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit the necessary construction plans and specifications for roads, drainage and sidewalks and bikeways, where applicable, as specified in this article, prepared by a professional engineer registered to practice in the state. Deviations from these plans shall not be allowed unless written approval is secured from the engineer. In addition, the applicant shall submit general information on and location of electrical and other utilities and traffic control. The applicant may submit and secure approval of construction plans in phases so as to facilitate staged construction. The applicant shall not begin construction prior to approval of construction plans and issuance of all applicable permits for such construction, except for clearing and rough grading authorized by a storm water management permit covering the entire subdivision. 
(2)  Submission and review. The applicant shall submit six sets of prints of the completed construction plans to the city superintendent. Within 20 working days after receipt of the construction plans, the city superintendent shall notify the applicant of: 
a.  Construction plan approval; or 
b.  Disapproval of the construction plans or any portion thereof, stating wherein such disapproved plans or portions thereof fail to conform with the minimum specifications of the council in effect at the date of preliminary plat approval. 
(3)  Record drawings. Upon the completion of construction and prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city council and the posting of the maintenance bond by the applicant, a set of record drawings ("as built") shall be submitted to the city superintendent. As an alternative to record drawings, the applicant may submit the approved construction plans with field notes. A professional engineer shall provide record drawings or construction plans with field notes which substantially represent the constructed work, and a statement that such work conforms substantially to the construction plans and specifications, as approved. The city council may require certified record drawings or construction plans and tests of the type and quality of materials in place prepared by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(b)  Specifications. The applicant shall deliver to the city superintendent documents prepared by a professional engineer which meet or exceed minimum specifications of the council, and which shall include but may not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A topographic map of the subdivision as required by the engineer with a contour interval no greater than five feet based on the United States Geological Survey Datum and field survey shall be provided by the applicant. 
(2)  A storm water management plan. 
(3)  Construction plans and profiles for all proposed roads. Where proposed roads intersect existing roads, elevation and other pertinent details shall be shown on construction plans for existing roads for a minimum distance of 300 feet from point of intersection. 
(4)  Minimum design standards according to division 2 of this article and the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design. Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book). 
(5)  Other information on the construction plans as may be required by the council. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-598. - Final plat. 
(a)  Review procedure. 
(1)  Submittal. While the approval of the preliminary plat is in effect, the applicant may submit the final plat for approval to the appropriate officials in the following order: 
a.  The applicant shall submit the final plat to the city superintendent no less than 20 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the council at which it is to be considered. 
b.  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, and, at the option of the applicant, may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record at the time provided such portion conforms to this article. 
(2)  City council action. When a final plat has been submitted to the city council and is in conformance with an approved preliminary plat and the provisions of this article, the city council shall consider and take action on the plat. Approval by the city council shall not be shown on the final plat until all requirements of this article have been met and the city superintendent has certified that: 
a.  All improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval under this article have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or 
b.  A surety device has been provided by the applicant for that portion of the improvements which have not been constructed. The surety shall: 
1.  Be approved by the city; 
2.  Cover 100 percent of the cost of uncompleted dedicated road and drainage improvements as estimated by the engineer of record; 
3.  Be conditioned upon completion of construction of dedicated roads and drainage facilities as shown in the approved construction plans within 12 months; and 
4.  Be payable to and for the indemnification of the city council. 
c.  A surety device in the amount of ten percent of the total cost of all required improvements to cover defects in materials or workmanship for one year shall be posted as a condition of acceptance of responsibility for maintenance of public improvements by the council. 
(3)  Recording. Upon approval by the city council, the original of the approved plat shall be forwarded to the clerk of the circuit court for recording. 
(4)  Effect of approval. Approval of the plat by the city council shall be deemed its acceptance of the dedication of the streets and public land as shown upon said plat on behalf of the public. 
(b)  Form and contents. 
(1)  Conformity to state law; format. Every final plat of a subdivision shall conform to the provisions of F.S. ch. 177, and to the following: 
a.  The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches wide and 24 inches long, including a three-inch binding margin on the left and a one-half-inch margin all around. 
b.  Minimum scale will be one inch to 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the city superintendent. The scale shall be both stated and illustrated by a graphic scale drawn on every sheet showing any portion of the lands subdivided. A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet. 
c.  When the lot width required at the building setback line is at a distance greater than that required by the minimum front or rear yard setback restrictions, minimum front and rear yard building setback lines shall be specified on the lots on the final plat provided that no buildable lot area shall have a depth of less than 35 feet between the front and rear yard setback lines. Required minimum building lines shall also be specified on unusually shaped lots where there is no readily discernible lot frontage, such as banjo, flag, double frontage or stack lots. 
d.  The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements and public service utility rights-of-way and any areas to be reserved, donated or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential uses with notes stating their purpose and limitations and areas to be reserved by deed covenants for common use of all property owners shall be shown. 
e.  The 100-year floodplain or a setback line above the 100-year floodplain shall be delineated on the plat. 
(2)  Certificates. The certification on the plat shall bear the signature, registration number and the official impression seal of a registered land surveyor and shall be stated as follows: "I hereby certify that this survey was made under my responsible direction and supervision, is a correct representation of the land surveyed, that the permanent referenced monuments and permanent control points have been set and that the survey data and monumentation complies with F.S. ch. 177 and F.A.C. ch. 21HH-6." 
(3)  Dedication and adoption. Every plat of a subdivision with streets or other lands to be dedicated to the public and filed for record shall contain a dedication by the applicant and all persons having a record interest in the lands subdivided in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed. The dedication shall be as follows: 
STATE OF FLORIDA 
COUNTY OF JEFFERSON 
Know all men by these presents that ____________ (a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida), the owner(s) fee simple of the land shown hereon platted as ____________ (name of subdivision) and more particularly described as follows: _____
_____
_____
_____
(description) containing ____________ (number) of acres, have caused said lands to be divided and subdivided as shown hereon and do hereby dedicate to the perpetual use of the public all _____
_____
_____
_____
(itemize public roads, streets, alleys and other rights-of-way and all parks and recreation areas and all easements for utilities, drainage, and other purposes and all purposes incident thereto) as shown and depicted hereon. _____
_____
_____
(reversionary provision, if applicable.) This the ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Witness: ____________ 
Authorized Signature-Developer ____________ 
Witness: ____________ 
Authorized Signature-Mortgagee  
Reversionary provision: Reserving, however, the reversion or reversions thereof should the same be renounced, disclaimed, abandoned or the use thereof discontinued as prescribed by law by appropriate official action of the proper officials having charge or jurisdiction thereof. 
STATE OF FLORIDA 
COUNTY OF JEFFERSON 
Before me this day personally appeared ____________ (owners, mortgagees, etc., if applicable) and acknowledged that they executed the foregoing dedication freely and voluntarily for the uses and purposes therein stated on behalf of said (owners, mortgagees, etc., if applicable). 
____________ 
Notary Public (with seal)  
JOINDER IN DEDICATION: 
All persons having an interest in the property described hereon have joined in this dedication as follows: 
Name: 
Execution Date of Joinder: 
Official Record Book and Page of Joinder: 
This plat conforms to the preliminary plat approval provisions made by the this ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20 ____________ . 
Approved by the City Council of the City of Monticello, Florida, this ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20 ____________ . 
_____
Mayor _____
City Attorney _____
City Superintendent  
Accepted for files and recorded, this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ A.D., 20 ____________ , in Plat Book ____________ Page ____________ . 
____________ 
Clerk of Circuit Court 
Jefferson County, Florida  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.07), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-599. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Prerequisite to public dedication. No dedication of or attempt to dedicate any land or water in the city for any public purpose whatsoever, nor any conveyance or attempted conveyance of land or water for any public purposes whatsoever, shall be accepted for recording, nor shall the same be effective, unless and until the same is approved duly noted, recited or recorded in the official minutes of the city council. 
(b)  Required dedications. 
(1)  As a condition for the approval of any plat, the city council may require, in a policy adopted by the city council, the dedication to the public of such reasonable parts or portions of the lands to the public for road, street, drainage, park, recreation or utility purposes as shall be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare and the marking of all roads and streets shown and said plat. Where drainage improvements within the subdivision form a part of the city's primary drainage system, such drainage system shall be dedicated to the public unless otherwise determined by the city council. Where a subdivision contains property through which a road facility is identified in the Traffic Circulation Element of the comprehensive plan as it exists at the time of platting, the necessary right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public unless otherwise determined by the city council. 
(2)  As an alternative to requiring dedication of land for roads, street, drainage, park, recreation utility purposes, the city council may develop procedures, according to adopted policy, for acceptance of fees in lieu thereof. 
(c)  Flood hazard warning. If any lot in a subdivision which is a minor subdivision, is a platted subdivision, or is subject to the platting requirements of this article lies within the 100-year floodplain or a setback line above the 100-year floodplain, as delineated on the plat thereof, then any agreement or contact for the sale or transfer of a fee interest in the lot shall prominently display the following flood hazard warning: "According to the most current plat of this subdivision on file with the city, this (these) lot (lots), or a portion thereof, lies (lie) within the 100-year floodplain, or a setback line above the 100-year floodplain, as delineated thereon." 
(d)  Fees. The city council may adopt a fee schedule for the implementation of this article. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as required by law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  The city council, or any aggrieved person with a special injury different from that of the public at large, may seek an injunction against any violation of the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Responsibility for costs of design and construction. All facilities constructed pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be designed and constructed at the expense of the applicant. 
(g)  Retention of consultants. The city may, if in its opinion it is necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of preliminary plats, construction plans and final plats. The cost of retaining said consultants shall be borne by the applicants in the manner set forth within a resolution of the city council concerning applications and fees. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.09, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.09), 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 4(11.09.07), 1-4-2005) 
Sec. 54-600. - Model home permitting. 
(a)  Generally. This section applies to the construction of model homes in new single-family home subdivisions at any time between the approval of the preliminary plat and the recording of the final plat. A model home is defined as one residential unit, built to be representative of other residential units, to be used for display and/or as a sales office while other units are under construction. 
(b)  Procedure for review and approval. It is the policy of the city to allow the issuance of building permits for up to three model homes in new single-family home subdivisions, prior to the completion of all infrastructure, if: 
(1)  The preliminary plat for the subdivision has been approved and permits for the construction of the public infrastructure have been issued; 
(2)  The model homes will not be inhabited as dwellings and will only be used for display and sales purposes until after the final plat has been recorded; 
(3)  No permanent utility connections shall be made to the model homes until after the final plat has been approved by the city and recorded; 
(4)  The lots on which the model homes are located will not be sold until after the final plat is recorded; and 
(5)  The developer has entered into a "Model Home Construction Agreement" which specifies the conditions under which the model homes are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 6-6-2006) 
Secs. 54-601-54-620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-621. - Access. 
(a)  A subdivision and every lot within it shall have legal access to a publicly dedicated street. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be designed so as to provide access to adjoining parcels of land as required to promote efficient traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.01(A), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.01(A)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-622. - Easements. 
(a)  Off-road utility easements in subdivisions shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
(b)  Drainage easements shall conform substantially to the lines of watercourses and shall be of sufficient width for construction and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.01(B), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.01(B)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-623. - Lots. 
(a)  Buildable area. No lot in a subdivision shall have a buildable area of less than 35 feet between the front and rear yard setback lines. 
(b)  Double frontage. There shall be no double frontage except to provide separation of development from arterial streets or canopy roads or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation and property size. 
(c)  Corner monuments. Lot corners shall be marked with permanent monumentation by a land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.01(C), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.01(C)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-624. - Blocks. 
(a)  Length. Residential blocks in subdivision shall not be greater than 1,400 feet in length, or less than 400 feet in length. 
(b)  Designation. Blocks shall be designated by consecutive alphabetical letters. 
(c)  Thrublock pedestrian ways. Thrublock pedestrian ways not less than ten feet in width in blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length shall be required where necessary to provide access to schools, playgrounds and other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.01(D), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.01(D)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-625. - Shade trees. 
(a)  Shade trees are to be planted within street rights-of-way or easements that are within or abutting the subdivision, in accordance with city criteria. Total tree count, as required herein, shall be at a ratio of one tree for each 25 linear feet of lot frontage, or major portion thereof, with at least 50 percent of said trees being major shade trees. Shade trees shall be spaced so as to allow mature growth. 
(b)  At the time of planting, shade trees shall have a minimum height of five feet. 
(c)  Preservation of existing shade trees is encouraged, and existing shade trees may be utilized in order to meet the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.01(E), 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.01(E)), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-626. - General principles of street design. 
(a)  Conformance with comprehensive plan. The width and location of all streets shall conform to the Traffic Circulation Element of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Alignment. Where street alignments are not shown on the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of the streets in the subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing or approved planned streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan approved by the local planning agency. 
(c)  Street types. A subdivision roadway system shall be designed based on three main street types: arterial, collector, and local, as defined in the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, State of Florida (Green Book), and the Traffic Circulation Element of the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along: 
(1)  Arterial streets: Both sides; 
(2)  Collectors: One side; 
(3)  Local streets: One side. Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards and policies. 
(4)  Where new development is adjacent to existing development with sidewalks, the new development shall be required to provide a connecting sidewalk. 
(e)  Right-of-way performance standards. Public streets and utility easements shall be the width necessary to provide required driving surfaces, drainage facilities, utility placement, control of sight distances and safety requirements and shall comply with standard city street sections. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-627. - Minimum street design and construction standards. 
(a)  Arterial and collector streets. Arterial and collector streets: 
(1)  Shall be designed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, State of Florida (Green Book); and 
(2)  All materials and construction shall be in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, current edition, as may be amended by the city. Types of road construction other than specified therein but which are equivalent thereto may be allowed by the council after recommendation by the city superintendent. 
(b)  Minimum requirements for local streets. 
(1)  Right-of-way: 50 feet. 
(2)  Pavement width: 18 feet. 
(3)  Shoulder width: Six feet. 
(4)  Asphalt: 
a.  Specifications. All asphalt shall be of the types acceptable and shall be 11/2-inch minimum compacted thickness. Acceptable asphalt types include: 
1.  FDOT Type S-1: Minimum stability 1,000 lbs. 
2.  FDOT Type II: Minimum stability 1,000 lbs. 
3.  FDOT Type III: Minimum stability 1,000 lbs. 
b.  Testing. 
1.  Standard mix design for asphalt will be required for approval prior to acceptance to the project. 
2.  A minimum of three thickness cores will be required for any project. Large projects may, at the city superintendent's discretion, require more. 
(5)  Base and subgrade. 
a.  Base material. All base material shall be of the types acceptable and shall be six inches minimum compacted thickness. Minimum density shall apply to the type of base material used. Prime and armor coat will be required in order to protect the base from damage prior to paving. Acceptable base types include: 
1.  Soil cement with a minimum density of 98 percent of actual field proctor (AASHTO T-99). 
2.  Others that are not listed may be acceptable with the prior approval of the city superintendent. 
3.  Limerock with a minimum density of 98 percent (AASTO T-189). 
b.  Subgrade. The top 12 inches of subgrade shall be compacted to a minimum density of 100 percent (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) T-99) in both cut and fill areas. 
c.  Density tests. 
1.  Density tests for both subgrade and base shall be at the rate of one every 500 linear foot of roadway. Tests will run at random from side, center and side. 
2.  Density tests for shoulders shall be at the rate of one every 1,000 linear foot of shoulder, this will include testing shoulders on both sides of roadway. 
(6)  Swales. Swales shall be required on all roads unless the density and intensity of land use dictate the use of curbs, gutters and storm sewers. 
(7)  Grassing. All areas from the edge of pavement to the right-of-way line shall be fertilized, seeded and mulched with a seasonal grass. The grass will not be accepted until a growth is established what is at least 50 percent of any one square yard measured. Sod will be required around all headwalls, drain pipes or any area that may be susceptible to erosion during normal rains. 
(8)  Drains. All drain pipes shall be bituminous coated corrugated metal with basis requirements of AASHTO M-36 or reinforced concrete pipe conforming to American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) designation C-76-70 Class III. All pipes and ditches shall be sized to collect, control and dispose of the runoff from a 25-year storm. Headwalls shall be the mitered end type. 
(9)  Disposal of debris. No construction debris will be buried within the right-of-way. 
(10)  Signage and markings. Upon notification, after the project review, the developer may be required to provide traffic signs and pavement striping. 
(11)  Other requirements. All construction methods not specifically stated herein shall be in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation Manual for Standard Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition. At the direction of the city superintendent, any item that is needed but not specifically called for in these requirements will be provided at the expense of the developer. 
(c)  Pavement width and other traffic engineering features. Pavement widths, median strips, parking lanes and other traffic engineering features shall be constructed, unless otherwise herein specified, in accordance with adopted policies and guidelines of the city council. 
(d)  Angle of intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees. 
(e)  Street jogs. Street jogs with center line off-sets of less than 125 feet, center to center, shall not be permitted. 
(f)  Cul-de-sac streets. Culs-de-sac shall be designed so that the minimum length shall be 800 feet, including vehicular turnaround, as measured from the right-of-way line of the end of the vehicular turnaround, except where extenuating circumstances deem otherwise. 
(g)  Railroad rights-of-way and limited-access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited-access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  In residentially zoned districts, the lot depth adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway shall be 25 feet more than the minimum required by the zoning code. No structure shall be placed in the 25 feet of such lot adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or highway. 
(2)  No street which crosses a railroad at grade shall intersect another street within 150 feet of the railroad right-of-way. 
(3)  Signals shall be required at all railroad crossings of public roads. 
(h)  Access and safety. Direct access to residential subdivision lots from arterial streets shall be prohibited. Access to the arterial system shall be provided by local streets via collector streets, or by marginal-access roads. Driveways, on-street parking and other traffic conflicts shall be avoided where possible. Safe sight distances shall be provided at all corners, curves and intersections of streets or driveways. 
(i)  Stub-out streets. Any stub-out street that exceeds one lot in depth will require construction of a temporary turnaround. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-628. - Street names. 
(a)  Streets in subdivisions which are extensions of existing streets shall have the same name. 
(b)  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing or proposed streets. 
(c)  All street names shall be approved by the city superintendent prior to the approval of the preliminary plat by the city council. 
(d)  Any changes in names of streets must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-629. - Inspections. 
(a)  Each stage of subdivision road construction (such as clearing, grading, stabilization, base, surface and drainage facilities), and any other item as deemed appropriate by the city superintendent, shall receive specific inspection and approval from the developer's engineer with appropriate records to verify all such inspections and approval. All field notes must be made available to the city superintendent at any time prior to acceptance. 
(b)  It will be the responsibility of the developer or his or her professional engineer to authorize or to make the following tests during the construction period and furnish the city superintendent with a copy of each test made: 
(1)  Surface course material and density. 
(2)  Base material and density. 
(3)  Subgrade bearing value. 
(4)  Subgrade density. 
(5)  Stabilized roadway bearing value. 
(6)  Stabilized roadway density. 
(7)  Stabilized roadway thickness. 
(8)  Concrete strength, 28 days. 
(9)  Embankment density. 
(c)  In order to facilitate inspection of required improvements during construction, the developer shall notify the city superintendent at least two working days before proceeding to any stage of construction requiring county engineering approval, including: 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing. 
(2)  Rough grading completed. 
(3)  When excavations are ready for placing foundations and when pipe trenches are shaped and prepared for laying pipe. 
(4)  Once the stormwater management and other facilities are installed, but before back-filling occurs. 
(5)  Upon completion of subgrade compaction. 
(6)  Upon completion of base course. 
(7)  When placing surface pavements. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.05, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.05), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-630. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The applicant shall maintain all subdivision improvements until such improvements are dedicated to the public, accepted for maintenance by the council, or turned over to the maintaining entity. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.06, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.06), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-631. - Variances. 
(a)  The applicant may petition the council for a variance from the provisions of sections 54-622, 54-623, and 54-624 and section 54-627(d), (e), and (f) by submitting a variance request at any time prior to final plat approval or preliminary plat approval if the subdivision is unplatted. The city council shall grant the request if it determines the land contained within the area which is the subject of a proposed subdivision is of such a size, shape, topography, location or condition or subject to such title limitations as to render it impractical or impossible for the applicant to conform to the provisions of this article, or where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary or unique hardship, so long as such variance is in conformity with the general intent of this article. Following receipt of the application, the variance shall be placed on the agenda for consideration at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. At its meeting, the city council shall: 
(1)  Approve the variance request or any portion thereof; 
(2)  Approve the variance request subject to conditions; 
(3)  Disapprove the variance request, specifying the reasons therefor in writing; or 
(4)  Continue consideration of the variance to a time certain if agreed upon by the applicant and the city council. 
(b)  Upon application or on its initiative, the city council may determine that land contained within an area which is the subject of a proposed plat is of such size, shape, topography, location or condition or subject to such title limitations as to render it impractical or impossible for the owner or owners of such land to conform to any of the other provisions of this article; or where, owing to conditions peculiar to the proposed plat, it is of such size, shape, topography, location or condition or subject to such title limitations as to render it impractical or impossible for the owner or owners of such land to conform to any of the other provisions of this article; or where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, literal enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary or unique hardship, the city superintendent may recommend a variance of such other provisions of this article as is necessary or expedient so long as such variance is in conformity with the general intent of these regulations and can be granted without substantial adverse effect on the public health, safety and welfare. The city superintendent recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council, in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor. The city council shall act upon such recommendation at the next regular meeting which is more than 20 days after the receipt of the recommendation of the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 11.08.07, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(11.08.07), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-632-54-660. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONCURRENCY 

Sec. 54-661. - Generally. 
    No development may be approved unless it is found to be in conformance with the comprehensive plan and that certain public facilities will be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impacts of the development on those facilities. This latter requirement is known as "concurrency." 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 12.01, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(12.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-662. - Determination of conformance. 
    If a development proposal is found to meet all the requirements of this chapter, it shall be presumed to be in conformance with the comprehensive plan in all respects except for compliance with the concurrency requirement. Any aggrieved or adversely affected party may, however, question the consistency of a development proposal with the comprehensive plan. If a question of consistency is raised, the development administrator or any of the appointed boards, or the city council, depending on which is responsible for approving the development, shall make a determination of consistency or inconsistency and support that determination with written findings. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 12.02, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(12.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-663. - Development permits. 
(a)  A determination of project impact shall be made at two stages, leading to two separate concurrency determinations. The first concurrency determination shall occur prior to approval of a preliminary plat, rezoning, site plan or other type of development approval except a building permit, as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section. The first determination shall be a criterion for project approval but shall not bind the city in any manner whatsoever to reserve capacity for the approved project. 
(b)  The second concurrency determination shall be made in conjunction with each application for a building permit, as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. The second determination shall constitute a reservation of capacity of those public facilities required to serve the use for which a building permit is issued for the duration of the building permit. 
(c)  The impact of proposed development activity on available capacity shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  All development permits except building permits. Other types of development permits include, but are not limited to, approval of subdivisions, rezoning, special permits and site and development plan approval. These other types of development permits have less immediate impacts on public facilities and services than the issuance of a building permit. Therefore, such a permit may be approved if the developer shows that there will be capacity available, using the formula set out in section 54-664(a)(2) to meet the level of service standards set out in section 54-664(b) through (g). 
(2)  Building permits. The issuance of a building permit has more of an immediate impact on the level of service for public facilities than may be the case with the issuance of other types of development permits. Therefore, building permits shall be issued only when the necessary facilities and services are in place. The determination that existing facilities and services provide sufficient capacity to meet level of service requirements shall be made by the development administrator before issuing a building permit. 
(3)  Competing applications. In such cases where there are competing applications for public facility capacity, the following order of priority shall apply: 
a.  Issuance of a building permit based upon previously approved development permits permitting redevelopment; 
b.  Issuance of a building permit based upon previously approved development permits permitting new development; 
c.  Issuance of new development permits permitting redevelopment; 
d.  Issuance of new development permits permitting new development. 
(4)  Concurrency management system. The following conditions apply to the city's concurrency management system: 
a.  Amendments to the comprehensive plan can be made twice each year and as otherwise permitted as small scale developments. In addition, changes can be made to the Capital Improvements Element of the comprehensive plan by ordinance if the changes are limited to the technical matters listed in F.S. § 163.2511 et seq. 
b.  No development permit shall be issued which would require the city council to delay or suspend construction of any of the capital improvements on the five-year schedule of the Capital Improvements Element of the comprehensive plan. 
c.  If by issuance of a development permit a substitution of a comparable project on the five-year schedule is proposed, the applicant may request that the city council consider an amendment to the five-year schedule in one of the twice annual amendment reviews. 
d.  The result of any development not meeting adopted level of service standards for public facilities shall be cessation of the affected development or the reduction of the standard for level of service (which requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan). 
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 12.03, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(12.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-664. - Level of service standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Level of service must be maintained. 
a.  No development activity may be approved unless it meets the following requirements designed to insure that certain public services are available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impacts of development. 
b.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prescribed levels of service may be degraded during construction of the new facilities if upon completion of the new facilities the prescribed levels of service will be met. 
(2)  Determination of available capacity. For purposes of this chapter, the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by the following formula: 
Available Capacity = Existing Capacity + New Capacity of Facilities to be Completed - Existing Demand - New Demand from Approved Building Permits  
a.  Existing capacity is the total capacity of the existing facilities at the required level of service standard. 
b.  New capacity is the total capacity of new facilities that will become available concurrent with the impacts of development. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown: 
1.  Construction of the new facilities are under way at the time of application. 
2.  The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time the development permit is issued. 
3.  The new facilities have been included in the city's annual capital budget. 
4.  The new facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement which may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, or an agreement or development permit pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. Such facilities must be consistent with the Capital Improvements Element of the comprehensive plan and approved by the city council. 
5.  The developer has contributed funds to the city necessary to provide new facilities consistent with the Capital Improvements Element of the comprehensive plan. Commitment that the facilities will be built must be evidenced by an appropriate budget amendment and appropriation by the city or other governmental entity. 
c.  Existing demand is the demand for the service created by existing development. For example, traffic counts on the roadway system. 
d.  New demand is the new demand for the service that will be created by the anticipated completion of other presently approved building permits. 
(3)  Burden of showing compliance. The burden of showing compliance with these level of service requirements shall be upon the developer. In order to be approvable, applications for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards. 
(b)  Transportation system. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for transportation systems as established in the Traffic Circulation Element of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Collector roadways: Level of service "D" at peak hour. 
(2)  Arterial roadways: Level of service "D" at peak hour. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for sanitary sewer systems as established in the Sanitary Sewer Element of the comprehensive plan: 
Facility Type Level of Service Standard Community sanitary sewer system 155 gallons per capita per day  
(d)  Potable water. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for potable water systems as established in the Potable Water Element of the comprehensive plan: 
Facility Type Level of Service Standard Community sanitary water system 189 gallons per capita per day  
(e)  Drainage. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following level of service for drainage systems as established in the Drainage Element of the comprehensive plan: 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration, rainfall intensity curve-Zone 2, DOT Drainage Manual, 1979. 
(f)  Solid waste. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient levels of service for solid waste facilities as established in the Solid Waste Element of the comprehensive plan: 
Facility Type Level of Service Standard Solid waste landfill 4 pounds per capita per day  
(g)  Recreation. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the recreation facilities as established in the Recreation and Open Space Element of the comprehensive plan: 
Activity/Facility Level of Service Standard Tennis 1 tennis court per every 2,000 persons served Baseball/softball 1 ball field per 5,000 persons served Basketball 1 ball field per 5,000 persons served Volleyball 1 volleyball court per 6,000 persons served Multipurpose play (field) 1 multipurpose field per 3,750 persons served Multipurpose play (court) 1 multipurpose court per 3,500 persons served Tot lot/play area 1 play area and tot lot per 2,500 persons served Neighborhood park 1 neighborhood park per 5,000 persons served Community park 1 community park per 5,000 persons served  
(Ord. No. 90-13, § 12.04, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(12.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-665. - Transportation mitigation. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to ensure financial protection for the city by requiring large scale developments to pay their fair share for roadway improvements (i.e., Super WalMarts and/or large scale subdivisions). For purposes of this section, transportation mitigation means a contribution from the developer or owner of a development to the city which makes adequate financial provisions for the public transportation facilities needed to accommodate the impacts of the proposed development on roadway within the city. 
(2)  The mitigation improvement shall be deemed to make financial provisions for such facilities if it is equal to or greater than the sum of the costs of improvements attributable to the proposed development derived from the application of the formula below. 
(3)  The cost of the improvement attributable to the proposed development is based upon the sum of the cost of improving each significantly impacted county and local roadway which will operate at worse than the level of service standard in the city's comprehensive plan, at each project stage or project phase and at project buildout. 
(b)  Proportionate cost share formula. 
(1)  The proportionate share of the cost of improvements of each such roadway is calculated according to the following formula: 
Development Trips ____________ × Cost (Service Volume increase) 
a.  Development Trips = Cumulative number of the trips from the proposed development expected to reach the roadway during the peak hour from the complete buildout of a stage or phase being approved. 
b.  Service Volume (SV) increase = The change in peak hour maximum service volume of the roadway resulting from construction of the improvement necessary to maintain the adopted level of service. 
c.  Cost = Cost of construction at the time of developer payment, of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted level of service. Construction cost includes all improvement associated costs, including engineering design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering, inspection and other associated physical development costs directly required and associated with the construction of the improvement, as determined by the city. 
(2)  As used in this section: 
a.  Project phase means a discrete, five-year or lesser construction timeframe of development, including the city issuance of certificates of occupancy for the construction. 
b.  Roadway means an existing or planned road segment in its entirety or portion thereof, including intersections. 
c.  Stage means one in a series of approximately equal increments in the development or proposed development upon which are placed quantified limits for construction that are reasonably calculated to ensure that the roadway network affected by the proposed development will not be overburdened by development traffic. As used in this section, a stage is to be a subset of a particular project phase of development planned for a project by a developer. A stage of development includes both a specific type and amount of development and the associated approved buildout timeframe for that development. 
(c)  Determination of significant impact on local roadways. A local roadway shall be determined by the city to be significantly impacted by the proposed development if, at a minimum, the traffic projected to be generated at the end of any stage or phase of the proposed development, cumulatively with the previous stages or phases, will utilize five percent or more of the adopted peak hour level of service maximum service volume of the roadway and the roadway is projected to be operating below the adopted level of service standard at buildout of that stage or phase. 
(d)  Adequate provision for transportation facilities. A development order shall be determined by the city to make adequate provisions for transportation roadway facilities if at a minimum it contains one of the sets of conditions in subsection (d)(1)-(4) or (5) of this section. Scheduling of facility improvements shall be as follows: A schedule which specifically provides for the mitigation of impacts from the proposed development on each significantly impacted roadway which will operate below the adopted level of service standard at the end of each project phase's buildout, or alternatively, a subset stage of that phase. The schedule shall ensure that each and every roadway improvement which is necessary to achieve the adopted level of service standard for that project stage or phase shall be guaranteed to be in place and operating or under actual construction for the entire improvement at buildout of each project stage or phase that creates the significant impact. This guarantee shall be in the form of: 
(1)  A clearly identified, executed and recorded local development agreement, consistent with F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, that is attached as an exhibit to the development order and which ensures at a minimum that all needed roadway improvements will be available concurrent with the impacts of development consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(2)(c); 
(2)  A binding and enforceable commitment in the development order by the city to provide all needed roadway improvements concurrently with the development schedule approved in the development order; 
(3)  A commitment in the current year of the city's comprehensive plan Capital Improvement Element to provide all needed roadway improvements, or the city in the current three years of the CIE is to provide all needed roadway improvements; 
(4)  A binding and enforceable commitment in the development order by the developer to provide all needed roadway improvements concurrently with the development schedule approved in the development order: or 
(5)  Any combination of the guarantees in subsections (d)(1)(4) of this section that ensures that all needed roadway improvements will be provided concurrently with the development schedule approved in the development order. 
Example of Proportionate Cost Share 
(Development Trips @ 250) 
*250 trips generated × $50,000 traffic improvements 
10,000 service volume trips allowed (service volume for roadway) 
= $1,250.00 (proportionate cost share for proposed development) 
250 trips divided by 10,000 service volume = 0.025 (percent of impact on level of service standard) 
(e)  Prerequisites for commencing development. Development may proceed when all the following are met: 
(1)  The comprehensive plan is in compliance; 
(2)  The proposed development is consistent with the provisions of the future land use map; 
(3)  The comprehensive plan includes a financially feasible capital improvements element that provides for transportation facilities adequate to serve the development, and the local government has implemented that element; 
(4)  The means exist for the landowner to be assessed a fair share (proportionate cost share) of the costs of providing the transportation facilities needed to serve the proposed development; and 
(5)  The landowner has made a binding commitment to the local government to pay the fair share of these costs. 
(6)  Public facilities, including sanitary sewer, potable water, solid waste, and stormwater management facilities, shall be in place and available to serve new development no later than the issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy (or its functional equivalent). 
(f)  Land for expansion of public facilities. Application for development approval shall include a public facility provision indicating that adequate land exists for the expansion of public facilities to serve development. This shall include, but not be limited to, transportation right-of-way, and easements for water, sewer, drainage, and conservation areas. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(12.04.02), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-666-54-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ANNEXATION 

Sec. 54-691. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to guide the city in the implementation of its annexation policy. It is the policy of the city to consider lands for annexation that are contiguous to the city, further the intent of the comprehensive plan and promote compact urban development and infill. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(13.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-692. - Applicability. 
    This article shall only apply to lands that are to be considered for annexation into the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(13.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-693. - Annexation analysis. 
(a)  The applicant for lands to be considered for annexation into the city must provide to the city an analysis of the suitability of subject lands for urban development. The analysis provided to the city will be used as a guide in making a determination as to the appropriateness for annexation. The analysis may include the following, but the city may waive any or all of the criteria below at the discretion of the development administrator: 
(1)  Fiscal impact analysis-adequate public facilities analysis (see section 54-664). 
(2)  Natural resource analysis of the subject lands (See article VI of this chapter). 
(b)  Annexation criteria checklist: 
(1)  Are there appropriate land and water resources, fiscal abilities and service capacities to accommodate development? 
(2)  Is there access to public schools, health care facilities, and central water and sewer systems? 
(3)  Are natural resources identified, as required in article VI of this chapter? 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(13.03), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-694-54-720. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - HOUSING 

Sec. 54-721. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote new, safe and affordable housing opportunities for residents in the city. The intent is to provide basic incentives and encourage applicants, developers and landowners to utilize the county State Housing Initiatives Partnership (SHIP) program. The county grants office may be contacted at (850) 342-0175. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(14.01), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-722. - Incentives. 
    The following fees for services and utility connections may be reduced and/or waived by the city council, provided the criteria for the SHIP program are met and the applicant provides a minimum of two residential housing units: 
(1)  Sewer connection fees. 
(2)  Water connection fees. 
(3)  Permit fees. 
(4)  Other fees and costs deemed appropriate by development administrator and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(14.02), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-723. - State Housing Initiatives Partnership criteria. 
    Applicants under the State Housing Initiatives Partnership program shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Applicants for SHIP grants, in addition to meeting state SHIP requirements, must have been residents of the county for at least one year. Proof of residency must be established by: 
a.  Rent receipts. 
b.  Mortgage payments. 
c.  Attest by affidavit. 
(2)  If the property for which a SHIP grant has been given for purchase or renovation is sold within seven years of this transaction, the entire amount of the grant must be paid back to the county SHIP administration. There is no proration of this payback permissible. 
(3)  A lien, also known as a security agreement, shall be placed on the deed of all property purchased with SHIP grants, disclosing the total amount of the grant and the beginning and ending dates of the seven-year period. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(14.03), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-724. - Policy for establishing amount of home purchase and renovation grants. 
(a)  Applicants for SHIP grants must qualify according to state and county requirements, regarding income level, residency, etc. 
(b)  All grants will be given on need, rather than maximum, fixed amount, basis. 
(c)  Qualified applicants may be given grants equaling five percent of the mortgage, plus closing costs, with the exception that very low income applicants may be awarded additional funds totaling not more than ten percent of the mortgage plus closing costs, if deemed necessary by the lender in order to close the purchase. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(14.04), 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 54-725. - Housing renovation. 
    The SHIP initiative also includes a repairs and renovation program to assist with improving the existing housing stock. The following applies to the housing renovation initiative: 
(1)  The renovation and repairs program will assist homeowners with $7,500.00. 
(2)  A lien, or security agreement, will be placed on the deed of all property purchased or renovated with SHIP grants for seven years. 
(3)  Once applicants have been notified of income eligibility for the SHIP program, individuals must attend a mandatory credit counseling meeting in which rules for the SHIP program will be discussed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 2(14.05), 11-6-2001) 
Secs. 54-726-54-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TREE PROTECTION AND REMOVAL STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, adopted May 2, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XIV, §§ 54-726-54-736. In order to allow for expansion of the previous article, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XIV, §§ 54-751-54-761. 

Sec. 54-751. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this section to recognize that tree protection is crucial to enhancement of the environment and character of the city. Further, it is recognized that tree preservation is a preplanning activity which is best considered prior to development of engineering and/or architectural plans and prior to effecting alterations to trees and/or their growing environment. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section that its provisions apply to all public property and property within ten feet of public right of ways and property planned for development, including single-family dwellings constructed for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-752. - Definitions. 
    Critical protection zone means that area surrounding a tree within a circle described by a radius of one foot for each inch of the tree's diameter at breast height. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the trunk diameter of a tree measured four and one-half feet above the average ground level at the base of the tree. Provided, however, if the tree forks four and one-half feet above ground level, it is measured below the swell resulting from the double stem. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-753. - Violations; penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to penalty as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-754. - Defacing or mutilating trees on public property. 
    It shall be considered unlawful to affix signs, drive nails, debark or otherwise mutilate trees on public property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-755. - Incompatibility of street tree species to site. 
    Many problems associated with street trees can be attributed to incompatibility of species to the site conditions that prevail. No species other than those listed below shall be planted as street trees without approval of the city council. 
Small Trees 
Box Elder 
Crape Myrtle 
Dahoon Holly 
Dogwood 
Fringe Tree (Greybeard) 
Goldenrain Tree 
Japanese Magnolia 
Redbud 
Silverbell 
Styrax 
Tree Sparkleberry 
Wax Myrtle 
Wild Olive 
Large Trees 
Bald Cypress 
Black Gum 
Florida Maple 
Ginkgo (male only) 
Live Oak 
Red Maple 
Shumard Oak 
Sourwood 
Sugarberry (Hackberry) 
Swamp Chestnut Oak 
Tulip Poplar 
White Oak 
Willow Oak 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-756. - Variances. 
    Should the provisions of this article create an undue hardship, a request for variance shall describe in detail why a variance is sought and what alternative tree preservation measures will be employed. The city council shall render a decision on the request within 45 days of its submittal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-757. - Exemption for utility companies. 
    This section shall not apply to utility companies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-758. - Tree maintenance program. 
    Periodic inspection and maintenance of trees is fundamental to development of a comprehensive community tree care program. Moreover, a regular schedule of tree inspection, fertilization and trimming minimize the development of tree hazards while promoting their health and appearance. A comprehensive tree care plan will be developed by the city council, or its designee, and reviewed annually to ensure trees are maintained in a safe condition for the enjoyment of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-759. - Official shade tree. 
    The live oak (Quercus virginiana) shall be the official shade tree of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-760. - Protected trees. 
    The following trees are protected and shall not be removed, impacted or damaged without receiving an approved permit complying with the requirements of the chapter: 
(1)  Trees within ten feet of any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Prior to development, during development and post-development: 
a.  Any tree of 15 inches DBH or greater; 
b.  Any tree eight inches DBH or greater which is located in the lot perimeter zone of development site except for sites being developed for detached single-family dwellings and two family units. The lot perimeter zone is the building set back or 20 feet, whichever is less; 
c.  Any tree in a jurisdictional wetland, as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection; 
d.  Any tree planted to meet the replanting, reforestation, or landscaping requirements of this chapter; 
e.  Any exceptional specimen trees, identified by the city designee or county forester. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 54-760. - Tree removal and replacement standards. 
(a)  Applicability. The following requirements shall apply to all new development and redevelopment in the city except as specified in subsection (b) below. Information required by this section shall be provided as part of the site review application. 
(b)  Exemptions. Tree removal under one or more of the following circumstances shall not require a permit and replanting shall not be required: 
(1)  Nursery trees. The removal of any tree planted and grown in the ordinary course of business of a lawful plant or tree nursery; 
(2)  Emergency situation. The removal of any tree during or following an emergency or an act of nature, when the city designee determines that permitting requirements will hamper private or public work to restore order to the city; 
(3)  Existing single-family dwelling lots. The removal of trees up to 24 inches diameter at breast height more than ten feet from any public right-of-way located on existing developed single-family residential lots. 
(4)  Safety hazard. The removal of any tree which the city designee finds to be in such a dangerous condition or pose such an imminent hazard as to endanger the public health, welfare, or safety and therefore to require immediate removal; 
(5)  Diseased or pest-infested trees. The removal of a diseased or pest-infested tree for the purpose of preventing the spread of the disease or pests, when determined to be necessary by the city designee; 
(6)  Approved silvicultural activities. Tree removal, except for patriarch tree (live oak of 36" DBH or larger) necessary for a project which the city designee has determined is a bona fide agricultural use. 
(7)  Noxious invasive trees. Upon verification by the city designee or county forester. 
a.  Chinese Tallow. 
b.  Mimosa. 
c.  Tung Oil. 
d.  Chinese Umbrella Tree. 
e.  China Berry. 
(8)  Trees listed in the "nuisance trees list" by the department of environmental protection. 
(c)  Removal of protected trees . The preservation of protected trees shall be encouraged. An applicant shall be required to give priority to preserving the more enduring protected tree species, inclusive of current health, size and form. Protected trees may be removed only in accordance with the debit criteria set forth in this section. However, even if an applicant can demonstrate compliance with the debit criteria, final determination of whether a protected tree shall be permitted for removal shall be made by the city designee. The decision of the city designee shall be based on balancing the preservation of the more enduring tree species, inclusive of current health, size, and form and the ability to develop a site at the intensity or density permitted by the comprehensive plan and the implementing land development regulations. In cases where the applicant chooses to appeal the city designee's decision, the city council shall have the authority to conduct appeal hearings related to the decision of protected tree removal. 
(1)  Criteria for protected tree removal. The city designee shall approve a permit for removal of a protected tree if the applicant demonstrates the presence of one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Good forestry practices. Necessity to reduce competition between trees or to remove exotic or noxious, or invasive species and replace them with native species. 
b.  Reasonable and permissible use of property. Tree removal which is essential for reasonable and permissible use of property, or necessary for construction of essential improvements resulting from: 
1.  Need for access immediately around the proposed structure for essential construction equipment, limited to a maximum width of 20 feet from the structure. 
2.  Limited access to the building site essential for reasonable use of construction equipment. 
3.  Essential grade changes. Essential grade changes are those changes needed to implement safety standards common to standard engineering or architectural practices, and reference to a text that includes such standards shall be included in the permit application. 
4.  Location of driveways, buildings or other permanent improvements. Driveway aisles shall be consistent with other applicable standards. 
5.  Compliance with other ordinances or codes. Necessity for compliance with other city or county codes, such as building, zoning, subdivision regulations, health provisions, and other environmental ordinances. 
(d)  Reforestation requirements . All sites, except for individual lots being developed with one single-family, duplex, or triplex, shall provide, upon completion of development activities, a minimum number of trees equivalent to a ratio of 40 tree credits for each acre proposed for development; i.e., total tree preservation credits plus tree replanting credits shall be equal to or greater than 40 credits per acre proposed for development (see table inset below). If the total number of trees to be replanted exceeds that which may be reasonably planted on the development site, the applicant may enter into an agreement with the city, as approved by the city designee, to plant the excess trees on an approved public site or to provide the monetary equivalent to the city for use in public landscaping projects. This option can only be utilized if the minimum reforestation requirements cannot be met on site. 
(e)  Tree protection requirements . It is the intent of this subsection to preserve the community's existing native tree canopy and vegetative understory. In order to maintain the integrity of existing trees, it is necessary to protect the root systems of individual trees that are contained within the critical protection zone from impacts associated with development activity. It is also the intent of this subsection to give priority to preserving the more enduring tree species, inclusive of current health, size and form. The following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Critical protection zone preservation. The critical protection zone of every protected tree not permitted for removal shall be protected from activities that may injure the tree, including, but not limited to, cut and fill activities, building pad placements, road bed construction, construction material storage, driving or parking heavy equipment, or trenching. If impact to the critical protection zone occurs, the tree shall be considered removed and shall require compensation in accordance with subsections (i) below. 
(2)  Location of protected trees. All protected trees on-site and adjacent to the site, if the critical protection zone extends to within the project site, shall be physically located and depicted on the site plan submitted as part of the site review application. 
(3)  Tree protection barriers. Tree protection barriers shall be installed at the perimeter of the critical protection zone of each protected tree prior to the initiation of development activity. The barriers shall remain in place and intact until such time as approved landscape operations begin; however, barriers may be removed temporarily to accommodate construction needs, provided that the manner and purpose for such temporary removal will not harm the tree and is approved in advance by the director. The following are minimum requirements for barrier types: 
a.  Protective posts shall be placed so as to protect the critical protection zone for each tree not permitted for removal. 
b.  Posts shall be of nominal two inches by four inches or larger wooden post, two inches outer diameter or larger pipe, or other post material of equivalent size; shall be strung with at least one one-inch by four-inch (1" x 4") wooden stringer; and shall be clearly flagged. 
c.  Posts shall be implanted deep enough in the ground to be stable and to extend to a minimum height of four feet above ground. 
d.  Where the city designee determines that individual protective barriers are not needed in some areas for tree protection, such areas shall instead be clearly staked and flagged with readily visible markers. 
e.  Where development activity is permitted to occur within the critical protection zone of a protected tree, the city designee may allow the temporary removal of the perimeter tree protection barriers and shall require a protective girdling of at least the bottom four feet of the tree trunk base along with fencing or other approved techniques. Heavy mulch (which means a minimum of four inches) applied over the root zone within the critical protection zone shall be required. In heavy traffic areas, the critical protection zone shall be topped with plywood sheets (a minimum width of 1/2-inch) over the heavy mulch to distribute equipment weight. Additional mitigation measures as described in this section may be required. 
(f)  Tree protection techniques. . Tree protection techniques found in the "Trees and Development, A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees During Land Development," by Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark or equivalent techniques approved by the city designee, shall be used and shall be indicated in the environmental management permit application or site plan. 
(g)  Tree mitigation techniques . It is the intent of this subsection to preserve mature trees and to promote tree safety. As an incentive to preserve existing trees, when the following arboricultural mitigation techniques are employed in their entirety, the city designee may defer the tree replacement requirements. No credit will be given and no debits will be charged for successfully mitigated trees. Additional mitigation techniques not specified below may be approved when supported with scientific documentation. The information shall be reviewed and approved by the city designee. The mitigation plan shall be prepared and applied and/or supervised by a landscape architect or certified arborist. If the mitigation is deemed completed by the city designee, the deferred tree replacement requirements shall be waived. 
(h)  Credit for tree preservation . Credit may be given for the preservation of an existing tree provided that the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The critical protection zone of each preserved tree shall be protected during development activities and maintained during and after development in a natural state, in a vegetative landscape material covering; 
(2)  There shall be no impervious area or grade change within the critical protection zone of the tree. The critical protection zone is defined as that area surrounding a tree within a circle described by a radius of one foot for each inch of the tree's diameter at breast height; 
(3)  The tree shall not be damaged from skinning, de-barking, bumping and the like; 
(4)  There shall be no evidence of active disease or insect infestation potentially lethal to the tree; 
(5)  Hand-clearing shall be required when necessary to remove debris, noxious or invasive vegetation; 
(6)  Tree protection requirements of this chapter are fulfilled; 
(i)  Tree debits and tree credits . Tree debits and credits are used to represent the taking or the preservation of an eight-inch diameter at breast height tree or larger. Debit for removed trees and credit for preserved trees shall be tabulated as follows: 
Calculate the number of credits for trees preserved per acre. The size (DBH) shall correspond to the number of credits within the credit column, (see chart below). Tree trunk diameter measurements shall be rounded off to the nearest inch. (Note: trees listed by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council in the list of invasive species shall not be included in any tabulation of debits or credits.) 
Diameter of Tree Credits 2-3 1 4-6 2 7-12 4 13-18 6 19-24 8 25-30 10 31-36 16 37-42 20 43-48 24 49-60 28 60-70 40  
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 5-2-2006) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes, F.S. § 775.01 et seq.; criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13; obscene literature, F.S. § 847.011 et seq.; violations of certain commercial restrictions, F.S. § 865.02 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the limits of the city, any act which is recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. The commission of any such act in the city shall be considered a violation of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-38; Code 1982, § 16-1) 
Sec. 58-2. - Placing merchandise on street or sidewalk. 
(a)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed or allow to remain in front of his/her premises or place of business any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or articles of any description for sale or display, or any showcases, stands, boxes or containers for the display or sale of merchandise, on any sidewalk or street within the city, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section and section 74-2 of this Code. 
(b)  Receiving and delivering goods. Merchants and others may occupy with goods, wares and merchandise portions of the sidewalks and streets for the purpose of receiving and delivering same, for such reasonable time as may be necessary for so doing, and in such manner as not to obstruct or impede the course of travel thereon. 
(c)  Christmas season. During the period between December 15 and December 31 of each year, the city council shall have the authority to grant to licensed merchants and shopkeepers the privilege of occupying a space not more than two feet wide, extending across the front of their store buildings, for the sole purpose of displaying their goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13-4, 13-5, 13-7; Code 1982, §§ 16-2-16-4; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 10-4-2016) 
State Law reference- Offenses concerning public roads, F.S. § 861.01 et seq. 
Sec. 58-3. - Throwing stones or other missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw a ball, stone or other missile or cause same by any means to fly through the air on any public street or in the near proximity to any building. 
(Code 1957, § 13-12; Code 1982, § 16-5) 
State Law reference- Projecting missiles in certain locations, F.S. § 790.19. 
Sec. 58-4. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
    The carrying of a concealed weapon, other than a firearm, is hereby declared a breach of the peace and any officer authorized to make arrests under the ordinances of this city and the laws of this state is hereby authorized to make arrests without warrant of persons violating the provisions of F.S. § 790.01 when said officer has reasonable grounds or probable cause to believe that the offense of carrying a concealed weapon is being committed. 
(Code 1957, § 13-40; Code 1982, § 16-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 790.02. 
Sec. 58-5. - Discharge of air gun or slingshot. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun or slingshot in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-15; Code 1982, § 16-7; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 58-6. - Gambling apparatus. 
    If any of the implements, devices or apparatus commonly used in games of chance in gambling houses, or by gamblers, are found in any house, room, booth, shelter or other place, it shall be prima facie evidence that the said house, room, booth, shelter or other place where the same are found is kept for the purpose of gambling. 
(Code 1957, § 13-47; Code 1982, § 16-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 849.05. 
Sec. 58-7. - Lotteries. 
(a)  Violations by agents or employees. It shall be unlawful for any person acting as servant, clerk, agent or employee of any person to violate any of the provisions of F.S. § 849.09. 
(b)  Allowing use of premises for conducting lottery. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner or agent, knowingly to rent to another person a house, room, booth, tent, shelter or other place for the purpose of conducting a lottery as prohibited by F.S. § 849.09. 
(c)  Forfeiture of money and prizes. All sums of money and every other valuable thing drawn and won as a prize, or as a share of a prize, or as a share, percentage or profit of the principal promoter or operator, in any lottery, and all money, currency or property of any kind to be disposed of, or offered to be disposed of, by chance or device in any scheme or under any pretext by any person, and all sums of money or other thing of value received by any person by reason of his/her being the owner or holder of any ticket or share of a ticket in a lottery, or pretended lottery, or of a share or right in any such schemes of chance or device, and all sums of money and other thing of value used in the setting up, conducting or operation of a lottery, and all money or other thing of value at stake or used or displayed in or in connection with any illegal gambling or any illegal gambling device contrary to the laws of this state, shall be forfeited, and may be recovered by civil proceedings filed, or by action for money had and received, to be brought by the department of legal affairs or any state attorney, or other prosecuting officer, in the circuit courts in the name and on behalf of the state; the same to be applied when collected as all other penal forfeitures are disposed of. 
(d)  Seizure of apparatus. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or of any police officer of the city, when any of the implements, devices or apparatus commonly used for conducting a lottery prohibited by F.S. § 849.09 are found in any house, room, booth or other place used for the purpose of gaming, to seize the same for disposition as provided by F.S. ch. 849. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13-42, 13-43, 13-46, 13-48; Code 1982, §§ 16-9-16-12) 
State Law reference- Lotteries, F.S. § 849.09; forfeiture of money and prizes, F.S. § 849.12; seizure and forfeiture of property used in violation, F.S. § 849.36. 
Sec. 58-8. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense under this Code for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others specified by law, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Making of any threats of violence to or against any other person. 
(2)  Being noisy and disorderly in or upon any street or other public place in the city. 
(3)  The reckless and dangerous use of slingshots. 
(Code 1957, § 13-14; Code 1982, § 16-14) 
Sec. 58-9. - Parking in commercial or shopping center parking area at night. 
(a)  Parking of motor vehicles is prohibited in parking areas of privately owned shopping centers and other commercial areas between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except with the written permission of the owner or lessee. The city police department is empowered to issue a parking ticket and summons in the amount of $15.00 for each such violation. This section shall exclude delivery vehicles in the process of making deliveries, loading or unloading merchandise or stock to any such owner or tenant. The owner or the city police department is empowered to erect such signs as are appropriate to give notice of this section. Nothing herein shall prevent the owner or lessee from towing or removing improper vehicles, in a reasonable manner, at the expense of the violator. 
(b)  The parking of large commercial vehicles is hereby prohibited in parking areas of privately owned shopping centers and other commercial areas without prior written permission of the city police department or owner. Excluded shall be large commercial vehicles, as hereinafter defined, while loading, unloading or delivering stock or merchandise to the owner or lessee. Large commercial vehicles are defined as semi-tractor-trailers or any vehicle with an excess of four tires and commonly used as a commercial carrier. 
(Code 1982, § 16-15; Ord. No. 91-04, 5-7-1991) 
Sec. 58-10. - Loitering in commercial or shopping center parking area at night. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be present in groups of more than two, or in motor vehicles or on motorcycles, on any privately owned shopping center or other commercial area within the parking lot, from one-half hour after closing of the last commercial business or 10:30 p.m., whichever is later. 
(b)  Excluded are persons providing lawful functions, delivering merchandise, moving stock or engaging in a lawful commercial transaction with the owner or lessee, or persons with the written permission of the owner or lessee. 
(c)  The city police department is authorized to disband such groups and direct their removal from such private property, and to issue a summons as mentioned in section 58-9. 
(Code 1982, § 16-16; Ord. No. 91-05, 5-7-1991) 
Sec. 58-11. - Excessive noise from radio or similar sound-making device-Generally. 
(a)  Prohibited noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or amplify the sound produced by, a radio, tape or CD player, or other mechanical, electronic or other sound-making device or instrument from which the sound: 
(1)  Is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound; 
(2)  Causes serious annoyance to a neighboring resident and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of his/her property; or 
(3)  Is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the operation or amplification of sound produced by a radio, tape or CD player, or other mechanical, electronic or other sound making device or instrument which is used for political or business purposes, provided such businesses use sound making devices in the normal course of conducting their business, nor shall the provisions of this section apply to the operation or amplification of sound produced by such devices for religious or educational purposes, including but not limited to, outdoor worship services and high school sporting events, nor shall the provisions apply to parades, dances, and similar public events for which the appropriate authorization (where necessary) has been obtained. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 15-14, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 58-12. - Same-Between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a restaurant, bar, tavern or other licensed establishment, or any person occupying a motor vehicle on a street or highway, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., to operate or amplify the sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device from within such structure or vehicle, so that the sound is: 
(1)  Plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the vehicle or structure; or 
(2)  Louder than necessary for the convenient hearing by persons inside the vehicle or structure. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement or emergency vehicles equipped with communication devices. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles used for business or political purposes which, in the normal course of conducting such business, use soundmaking devices. However, this exception shall not be construed to prevent local authorities, with respect to streets and highways under their jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of police power, from regulating the time and manner in which such businesses may be operated. Additionally, the provisions of this section do not apply to the noise made by a horn or other warning device required or permitted by F.S. § 316.27. 
(c)  Enforcement; penalty. Any person found in violation of this section shall be given a written warning and notice to cease and desist. After such warning, and upon a first conviction, the violation shall be treated as a second degree misdemeanor and punishable pursuant to F.S. § 775.01 et seq. Upon the second conviction within 12 months of a previous conviction, the violation shall be treated as a first degree misdemeanor and punishable pursuant to F.S. § 775.01 et seq. The chief of police or any police officer of the city may effect the arrest of a violator by warrant or, if committed in the presence of such officer, without a warrant, as mandated in F.S. § 901.15. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, § 16-17, 9-5-1996) 
Sec. 58-13. - Garage sale regulations. 
(a)  Garage sale defined. The term "garage sale" as used in this section is hereby defined to mean any sale or offering for sale of personal property by a person or persons of a family or other household unit, said personal property having been acquired, possessed and used by the family or household for personal, as opposed to business or commercial use, when such sale is to be or is conducted at the residence of such family or household. "Garage sale" shall include a sale commonly referred to as a patio sale, driveway sale, yard sale and other such sales. 
(b)  No permit required. No permit shall be required by the City of Monticello for a garage sale conducted within the city pursuant to this article. No more than three garage sales may be conducted at any one residence or household during any calendar year. Garage sales shall be limited in duration to no more than the daylight hours of three consecutive days. 
(c)  Signs permitted. Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code of Ordinances, one sign of not more than four square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where a garage sale is being conducted pursuant to this article. In addition, no more than two directional signs may be placed in the city right-of-way; however, no such sign shall be displayed on the premises of the courthouse circle or any pedestrian islands therein. All signs shall be displayed only during daylight hours of the days of the sales. 
(d)  Enforcement; penalty. Any person found in violation of this section shall be given a written warning and notice to cease and desist. After such warning, and upon conviction, the violation shall be treated as a second degree misdemeanor and punishable by imprisonment of up to 60 days and a fine of $500.00. The chief of police or any police officer of the city may effect the arrest of a violator by warrant, or, if committed in the presence of such officer, without a warrant, as mandated in F.S. 901.15. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 58-14. - Operation of generators. 
(a)  Prohibited operation of a generator. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a generator for the purpose of producing electricity as a source of electrical power, except as provided herein. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Generators may be used to produce electricity in the case of emergency power outages caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, accidents, fallen trees, system failures and similar events, but only for the duration of such outage. Generators may also be operated to supply electricity for construction purposes, during daylight hours only, and for generator testing, maintenance and repair purposes. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor, punishable by fines or imprisonment as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 10-6-2009) 
Sec. 58-15. - Operation of radios or other sound-making devices in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Prohibited noise. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle to amplify the sound produced by a radio, or a tape, CD or MP3 player, or other mechanical or electronic sound-making device or instrument from which the sound: 
(1)  Is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from the motor vehicle; 
or 
(2)  Is louder than necessary for the convenient hearing by persons inside the vehicle in areas adjoining churches, schools, hospitals, residences or businesses. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of law enforcement duties or to any emergency vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of any emergency procedures. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to the noise made by a horn or other warning device required or permitted by F.S. § 316.271. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining whether a violation of this section is occurring, law enforcement personnel shall use the following standards: 
(1)  "Plainly audible" shall mean any sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical or electronic sound-making device, or instrument, from within the interior or exterior of a motor vehicle, including sound produced by a portable sound-making device, that can be clearly heard outside the vehicle by a person using his normal hearing faculties, at a distance of 25 feet or more from the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Any law enforcement personnel who hear a sound that is plainly audible, as defined herein shall be entitled to measure the sound according to the following standards: 
a.  The primary means of detection shall be by means of the officer's ordinary auditory senses, so long as the officer's hearing is not enhanced by any mechanical device, such as a microphone or hearing aid. 
b.  The officer must have a direct line of sight and hearing, to the motor vehicle producing the sound so that he can readily identify the offending motor vehicle and the distance involved. 
c.  The officer need not determine the particular words or phrases being produced or the name of any song or artist producing the sound. The detection of rhythmic bass reverberating type sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
(3)  The standards set forth in subsection (2) above shall also apply to the detection of sound that is louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of persons inside the motor vehicles in areas adjoining churches, schools, residences or businesses. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  Each occurrence of a violation constitutes a separate offense and may be punished separately. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Issuance of citation. Sworn law enforcement officers of the City of Monticello are responsible for the enforcement of this section and shall function as "code enforcement officers," pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, for such purposes. Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation to a person to appear in county court when the officer, upon personal investigation, has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this section. 
(2)  Notice of violation. Because a violation of this section presents a serious threat to the pubic health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City of Monticello, Florida, the law enforcement officer does not have to provide a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation. 
(3)  Form of citation. The form of the citation shall contain the following: 
a.  The date and time issued. 
b.  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
c.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
d.  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
e.  The number and section of the ordinance violated. 
f.  The name and authority of the law enforcement officer. 
g.  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
h.  The applicable civil penalty if a person elects to contest the citation. 
i.  The applicable civil penalty if a person elects not to contest the citation. 
j.  A conspicuous statement that if a person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he or she shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(4)  Filing a citation with county court. After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a law enforcement officer shall deposit the original and one copy of the citation with the county court. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a law enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. 
(5)  Schedule of civil penalties. 
a.  A person who receives a citation from a law enforcement officer for a violation of this section and who elects not to contest the citation shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For a first offense, by a fine of $100.00, plus court costs. 
2.  For a second offense, by a fine of $250.00, plus court costs. 
3.  For third, and all subsequent offenses, by a fine of $350.00, plus court costs. 
b.  If a person who receives a citation elects to contest the citation, he or she must do so in county court. 
(6)  Judgment upon failure to contest citation. Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty with the time period allowed, or who fails to appear in county court to contest the citation, shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to contest the citation, and judgment may be entered against the person an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(7)  Provisions supplemental. The provisions of this [article] are additional and supplemental means of enforcing this section. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing this section by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 6-4-2013) 
Chapter 62 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Peddling at camp meeting, F.S. § 871.03. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawker means all persons who shall sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail any goods, wares or merchandise from a stand, wagon, motor vehicle, or push cart or upon any street or upon any public or vacant ground within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Peddler means all persons who are not hawkers who travel from place to place or from house to house selling or offering to sell any goods, wares or merchandise within the corporate limits of the city, except in the regular line of merchandising by actual bona fide merchants having a regular and fixed place of business within the city. 
    Retailer means any person who sells to the consumer. 
    Temporary premises means any hotel, roominghouse, storeroom, tent, trailer, motor or other vehicle, or building or any part of any building or structure of any kind, vacant lot, freight station, railroad car or any public or quasi-public place, temporarily occupied or used by a transient retail merchant. 
    Transient retail merchant means every person acting for himself/herself or representing any other person, who brings into temporary premises, in this city, any goods, wares, notions or articles of merchandise or trade of any character, and who solicits, sells or offers to sell or exhibits for sale, any such goods, wares, notions or articles of merchandise or trade, at retail or at auction. Such definition shall continue to apply until such person shall be continuously engaged in such business in the city for a period of one year. 
    Wholesaler means any person who sells to a retailer. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-1(a)-(d), 14-9, 14-10; Code 1982, § 17-1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to scientific and literary lectures and entertainments, or to any regularly licensed auctioneer, or to any news dealer, or to a person using a motor vehicle owned by him/her, whether operated by him/her or his/her agent, for the transportation of produce produced by him/her on premises owned or rented by him/her when the entire course of such transportation extends not more than 70 miles from such premises; or to persons employed by any wholesale or retail business engaged in interstate commerce to solicit orders, on salary or commission. 
(Code 1957, § 14-6; Code 1982, § 17-2) 
Sec. 62-3. - Going in or upon private residences without invitation. 
(a)  Prohibited. The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden products so far as authorized by law. 
(Code 1957, § 14-2; Code 1982, §§ 17-3, 17-4) 
Sec. 62-4. - Refusal to leave premises. 
    No person conducting a business regulated by this chapter who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another shall refuse to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his/her agent, to leave the same. 
(Code 1982, § 17-5) 
Sec. 62-5. - Business hours. 
    No hawker or peddler shall sell or offer to sell any article within the city at any time except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1957, § 14-5; Code 1982, § 17-6) 
Sec. 62-6. - Obstructing traffic. 
    No peddler or hawker shall conduct his/her business in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the free use and passage of the streets, sidewalks and public ways. 
(Code 1957, § 14-5; Code 1982, § 17-7) 
Secs. 62-7-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 62-31. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or calling of a hawker or peddler within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license to do so. 
(Code 1957, § 14-3; Code 1982, § 17-19) 
Sec. 62-32. - Application. 
    Each peddler or hawker, before conducting any business, as in this chapter defined, within the corporate limits of the city, shall make application to the city clerk for a license, specifying in the application his/her name and residence, the number of days or the period of time he/she will be engaged in the city in the conduct of such business, the article or articles to be sold or offered for sale and the manner of conducting the business. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4; Code 1982, § 17-20) 
Sec. 62-33. - Payment of fee by transient merchants. 
    Every transient retail merchant shall pay to the city clerk, in advance, as a license fee, the amount prescribed in chapter 26, article II, for each week or fraction thereof he/she conducts such business in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 14-11; Code 1982, § 17-21) 
Sec. 62-34. - Display. 
    Every person conducting a business regulated by this chapter and having a license issued hereunder shall display his/her license upon the request of any person. 
(Code 1982, § 17-22) 
Sec. 62-35. - Expiration; transfer. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall expire at the end of the tax year and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4; Code 1982, § 17-23) 
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AGENCY 

Sec. 66-31. - Created. 
    In conformity with and in furtherance of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, a local planning agency is hereby created to establish and implement comprehensive planning programs to guide and control future development in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 19-16; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 1) 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-32. - Title. 
    The local planning agency shall be called the Monticello Planning Agency. 
(Code 1982, § 19-17; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 1) 
Sec. 66-33. - Composition. 
    The planning agency is to consist of five regular members, including, in addition, one ex officio nonvoting member of the city council and, in addition, one ex officio nonvoting member appointed by the school board, in accordance with F.S. § 163.3174. 
(Code 1982, § 19-18; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 2) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-34. - Appointment of regular members. 
    The regular members of the planning agency shall be selected and appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 19-19; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 4) 
Sec. 66-35. - Designation of ex officio member. 
    The member of the city council serving as an ex officio member of the planning agency shall be designated by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 19-20; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 3) 
Sec. 66-36. - Officers. 
(a)  Generally. The planning agency shall select one of its regular members as chairperson, and one of its members, either regular or ex officio, as secretary. 
(b)  Interim chairperson. Should the chairperson of the planning agency be unable to attend a meeting, the members shall select an interim chairperson. 
(c)  Election. Only regular members of the planning agency shall be entitled to vote when selecting a full-time or interim chairperson, but all members shall be entitled to vote when selecting a secretary. 
(Code 1982, §§ 19-21-19-23; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 5) 
Sec. 66-37. - Funding; establishment of schedule of fees. 
(a)  The city shall provide funds for salaries, fees and expenses necessary in the conduct of the work of the planning agency and shall establish a schedule of fees to be charged by the agency. 
(b)  A resolution shall be adopted by the city council showing where the funds shall be appropriated by the city for the planning agency. 
(Code 1982, §§ 19-24, 19-25; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 15) 
State Law reference- Financial support for staffing and work of agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-38. - Acceptance of fees, gifts and loans. 
    The planning agency shall have the authority to accept fees, gifts, state or federal grants, state or federal loans and funds, etc., from other sources; provided, acceptance of loans must be approved by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 19-26; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 15) 
Sec. 66-39. - Financial statements. 
    The planning agency shall prepare monthly financial statements to the city of all expenditures made by the planning agency. 
(Code 1982, § 19-27; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 16) 
Sec. 66-40. - Meetings and records to be public. 
    All meetings of the planning agency shall be public, and all planning agency records shall be public records. 
(Code 1982, § 19-28; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 7) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, F.S. § 163.3174(5). 
Sec. 66-41. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
    The planning agency shall meet on the second Wednesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. in the city hall or such other time as may be scheduled by the city council on proper notice. 
(Code 1982, § 19-29; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 6) 
Sec. 66-42. - Rules of order. 
    All meetings of the planning agency shall be governed procedurally by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised unless other rules are adopted by the planning agency. 
(Code 1982, § 19-30; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 13) 
Sec. 66-43. - Authority of ex officio members. 
    Ex officio members of the planning agency shall have no voting privileges and shall have no right to present motions before it, but shall have the opportunity to participate in discussion and evaluation of proposals, and arguments in favor of and in opposition thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 19-31; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 3) 
Sec. 66-44. - Public participation in planning process. 
(a)  Implementation. The city council and the planning agency are charged with establishing public participation in the planning process. 
(b)  Methods. Public participation in the planning process shall be encouraged by the following methods, but not limited thereto: 
(1)  Advance notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where any meeting of the planning agency will be held. 
(2)  A regular member of the planning agency shall be appointed as a public relations representative, who is responsible for giving information to all other news media. Said member shall assist the planning agency as required of the agency under section 8 of the Local Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
(Code 1982, §§ 19-32, 19-33; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 14) 
State Law reference- Public participation in the comprehensive planning process, F.S. § 163.3181. 
Sec. 66-45. - Hearings. 
    The planning agency shall have the authority to hold public hearings. 
(Code 1982, § 19-34; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 11) 
Sec. 66-46. - Conduct of comprehensive planning program; preparation of comprehensive plan. 
    The city assigns to the planning agency the general responsibility for the conduct of the comprehensive planning program and the preparation of the comprehensive plan, or elements or portions thereof, as defined and outlined in the Local Government Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 19-35; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 8) 
State Law reference- Preparation of comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-47. - Comprehensive plan to be based on appropriate data. 
    It is the responsibility of the planning agency to base the comprehensive plan upon data appropriate to the element involved. 
(Code 1982, § 19-36; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 19) 
State Law reference- Required and optional elements of comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3177. 
Sec. 66-48. - Responsibility for recommending adoption of comprehensive plan. 
    The city council, in cooperation with the planning agency, may designate any agency, committee, department or person to prepare the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, but the responsibility for final recommendation of the adoption of such plan to the city council shall be the responsibility of the planning agency. 
(Code 1982, § 19-37; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-49. - Monitoring of comprehensive plan; recommendation of changes to plan. 
    The planning agency shall monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan and recommend to the city council such changes in the comprehensive plan as may from time to time be required. 
(Code 1982, § 19-38; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 66-50. - Review of zoning provisions. 
    The planning agency shall initiate a review of the provisions of zoning regulations and ordinances. 
(Code 1982, § 19-39; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 12) 
Sec. 66-51. - Attendance at meetings; removal of members. 
    Any regular member or ex officio member of the planning agency who fails to attend two consecutive meetings may be removed by the city council. No regular member or ex officio member shall be removed unless for good cause or as provided in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 19-40; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 17) 
Sec. 66-52. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the office of a regular member, or the council member serving as an ex officio member, of the planning agency may be filled by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 19-41; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 4) 
Sec. 66-53. - Term of regular members. 
    Regular members shall serve on the planning agency for three years. 
(Code 1982, § 19-42; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 4) 
Sec. 66-54. - Term of ex officio member. 
    The term of an ex officio member of the planning agency from the city council shall be two years. 
(Code 1982, § 19-43; Ord. of 7-6-1976, § 3) 
Secs. 66-55-66-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDSCAPING OF OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 66-81. - Violations; penalties; injunctive relief. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor of the second degree. Alternatively, the city may enforce compliance with this article by injunctive relief in the circuit court of the county, in which event attorney's fees and costs shall be assessed against the person or corporation found to be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 19-55; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § VII) 
Sec. 66-82. - Objectives. 
    The objective of this article is to establish requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscape elements in off-street parking areas. The justification for such an article is three-fold: 
(1)  To aid in regulating and controlling vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(2)  To enhance the community's ecological or environmental and aesthetic qualities; and 
(3)  To protect and conserve the value of property. 
(Code 1982, § 19-56; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § I) 
Sec. 66-83. - Applicability. 
    The requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of landscape elements and site improvements as set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking areas within the city having more than six parking spaces. 
(Code 1982, § 19-57; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § II) 
Sec. 66-84. - Maintenance. 
    The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas which shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(Code 1982, § 19-58; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § II) 
Sec. 66-85. - Use of artificial plant materials. 
    Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers or vines shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 19-59; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § II) 
Sec. 66-86. - Required interior landscaping. 
    Interior landscape development for off-street parking areas shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of five percent of the total developed area, less building area, of any parcel of property which comes within the provisions of this article shall be devoted to landscape development. 
(2)  Trees shall be placed within interior planting areas such that the total number of trees provided in the interior planting areas, along the perimeter, and adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be equal to one tree for every 5,000 square feet of paved area. 
(Code 1982, § 19-60; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § III) 
Sec. 66-87. - Plan approval. 
(a)  Appropriate plans showing proposed landscape development shall be submitted to the city council for site plan approval where such approval is required in chapter 54 (the land development regulations). 
(b)  Provided, however, that no plan shall be approved as submitted until it is determined by the building inspector that such plans have been prepared by a licensed landscape architect in accordance with F.S. § 481.303(6). Any plan rejected for failure to comply with the above statute may be resubmitted at such time as the landscape elements are prepared and submitted by a licensed landscape architect. 
(Code 1982, § 19-61; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § IV; Ord. No. 89-08, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-1989) 
Sec. 66-88. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The application and enforcement of this article shall be construed as an exercise of the police power to regulate, control and restrict the use of buildings, structures and land. 
(b)  The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article and require adherence to the requirements of installation and maintenance of landscape material herein specified. 
(Code 1982, § 19-62; Ord. of 2-7-1978, § V) 
Secs. 66-89-66-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-04, §§ 1, 2 adopted May 2, 2006, deleted Art. IV, §§ 66-111-66-121, which pertained to tree preservation, and codified similar provisions as Ch. 54, Art. XIV of this Code. Former Art. IV derived from Code 1982, §§ 19-71-19-81 and Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 1-11, adopted Jan. 6, 1987. 

Secs. 66-111-66-121. - Reserved. 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, adopted June 3, 2010, amended Ch. 70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 70, §§ 70-1-70-7, 70-31-70-37, 70-61-70-66, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1957; Ord. of 7-2-1974; Ord. of 2-6-1979; Ord. of 3-4-1980; Ord. of 11-18-1980; Code 1982; Ord. of 12-7-1982; Ord. No. 92-08, 9-1-1992; Ord. No. 2000-08, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2000-10, 11-7-2000; Ord. No. 2003-08, 10-7-2003. 
State Law reference- Florida Resource Recovery and Management Act, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Users of municipal collection and disposal system. 
    All persons owning or occupying, as owner, tenant or otherwise, any residence, apartment or place of business, residential or commercial, inhabited or used within the city shall be entitled to the removal by the city of garbage and trash from such premises. They shall be and are hereby declared and required to be a user of the garbage collection and disposal system and shall pay such fees, rates and charges therefore as are hereby established, or as are hereafter modified or changed by the city council. All charges that remain unpaid for a period of ten days after they shall become due and payable shall constitute a lien against the property from which the garbage and/or trash is collected to enforce payment of delinquent charges. Such delinquent sums may be recovered by the city as provided by law or by the discontinuance of the public utility service herein established until delinquent charges for service are paid. The city shall have the right to discontinue public utility water service unless garbage collection and disposal charges are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-2. - Records of municipal collection system; duties of city clerk. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep an accurate record of all persons using the services and facilities of the municipal garbage collection and disposal system of the city, and to make charges in accordance with the rates and charges established in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-3. - Collection of hazardous waste prohibited. 
    The collection and disposal of special solid waste, including hazardous waste, biohazardous waste and construction waste shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or occupant of the property upon which the waste is generated or located. Any collection and disposal of such waste shall be in strict compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-4. - Residential receptacles required; standards. 
(a)  Receptacles required. Each single-family residence within the corporate limits of the city shall provide at least one garbage can or receptacle of the specifications provided in this section, and each multiple-family residence or apartment building shall be equipped with one garbage can or receptacle for each family residing in such residence or apartment building, which garbage can or receptacle shall be of the specifications provided in this section. Each store, hotel, restaurant or other place of business located within the corporate limits of the city shall be equipped with such garbage can or receptacle as may from time to time be specified by the city. 
(b)  Capacity; materials; cover. Each garbage can or receptacle shall have a capacity of not less than ten gallons and not more than 40 gallons, be of metal or plastic, free from holes or leaks and shall be provided with an appropriate cover sufficient to prevent the entrance of rain water and insects. 
(c)  Cans to be kept covered; location. Each garbage can or receptacle shall be kept securely covered at all times except when being filled or emptied, and shall be located at such place on the premises as will make it easily accessible to the collectors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-5. - Emptying of receptacles and disposal of contents. 
(a)  Residences. Each garbage can or receptacle located at any place of residence shall be emptied at least twice each week and the contents thereof disposed of as directed by the city. 
(b)  Business establishments. Each garbage can or receptacle located at a place of business shall be emptied and the contents disposed of as may from time to time be required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-6. - Cleaning of weeds and refuse from lots. 
(a)  Duty of owner; applicability. It is declared to be the duty and responsibility of the owner of each and every lot, piece and parcel of land located within the city to keep each such lot, piece or parcel of land as lies within 500 feet of any residence, mercantile or other business building, church building or school building reasonably free and clear of weeds, grass, garbage, waste and trash therefrom as often as may be reasonably necessary; provided, however, that the requirements of this section shall not apply to swamp and overflowed lands. 
(b)  Cleaning by city authorized. Where any owner of any lot, piece or parcel of land as is referred to in subsection (a) of this section has failed to keep such lot, piece or parcel of land reasonably free and clean from weeds, grass, garbage, waste and trash, it shall be the duty of the city to cause the weeds and grass on any such lot, piece or parcel of land to be cut and the garbage, waste and trash to be removed therefrom at the expense of the owner thereof. 
(c)  Procedure for notification. Upon determination by the city manager that any parcel, lot or portion thereof referred to in subsection (a) of this section is overgrown with weeds or trash, the city clerk shall give 15 days notice in writing demanding the owner, in care of the person in whose name the real property taxes are billed, to immediately improve such property by cutting, burning or hauling away such trash and mowing weeds or undergrowth from said property. Upon certification by the city manager to the city clerk of noncompliance, the city council shall have the authority to determine and declare the existence of a public nuisance as outlined in Chapter 38 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-7. - Depositing shrubbery trimmings on street, sidewalk or gutter. 
    It shall be unlawful under any pretense whatever for any person to deposit any trash or trimmings of shrubbery on any of the sidewalks or water gutters or streets of the city unless permission is obtained to do so from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-8. - Burning or burying garbage. 
    No garbage, trash or yard waste shall be burned or buried within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-9. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, place or deposit any garbage, trash, rubbish, weeds or filth of any kind on any sidewalk, street or alley or upon any vacant lot or into or upon the premises of any other person or into any waters or upon the banks thereof within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-10. - Placement and screening of refuse and recycling mechanical, dumpster, compaction, and roll-off containers. 
(a)  Screening required. All permanently located refuse or recycling mechanical, dumpster, compaction, or roll-off containers in use within the city limits shall be screened from view of any public right-of-way by September 1, 2010, as follows: 
(1)  Screening shall be on at least three sides and shall consist of wood, vinyl-coated chain-link fence with slats, brick, stone, concrete or similar material approved by the city manager. Screening shall encompass the full height, length, and width of the container, and each enclosure shall provide a minimum of 24 inches of clear space between each side of the dumpster, including lifting flanges and the adjacent wall surface of that enclosure or any other dumpsters within that same enclosure. All screening structures shall be reasonably accessible for collection service vehicles and shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street or alleyway. All screenings shall be maintained for function, safety, and appearance. Newly-constructed screening enclosures located within the Historic District of the City of Monticello must be subject to the standard procedures for review and approval of new construction within the historic district as outlined in Chapter 54, Article VII. 
(2)  Gates intended for service access shall provide an opening width of at least ten feet for each mechanical container and shall be designed to remain open during collection service. Gates shall be required when the service entrance of the screening enclosure faces a public right-of-way, or is visible from a residential zoning district. Gates that swing out from the container shall be set back from the property line at least a distance equal to the width of the gate. Gate hinge assemblies shall be strong and durable so that access and servicing gates function properly and do not sag. 
(3)  Where a gate in the screening structure faces a public right-of-way, or is visible from a residential district, the gate shall be closed except when collection service is provided. The service provider may close any gate left open in violation of this subsection. A service fee of $5.00 for each such closure service provided by the service provider shall be assessed against the owner or occupant of the property and shall be supplemental to any other penalties provided for and collected in the manner provided by section 70-66. 
(4)  All screening enclosures applicable under this section shall be placed on poured concrete, solid or perforated interlocking concrete block paving, or any existing hardened paving system. 
(b)  Waiver of location requirements. When existing site conditions do not lend themselves to a location that conforms with the requirements of this section, the city manager is authorized to grant waivers from the required number of required parking spaces, minimum pervious area requirements, or landscaping, buffering, and/or setback requirements of the Land Development Code in order to accommodate the location of an existing refuse or recycling mechanical, dumpster, compaction, or roll-off container in conformance with this section. In considering which, if any, waivers to grant, the city manager shall consider the number, extent and relative importance of existing and resulting non-conformities to proper site functioning and compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(c)  Waiver of screening requirements. The city manager may grant exceptions to the container screening enclosure requirements of this section, and allow the container service to remain, where specific lot conditions make compliance impractical, the visibility of the container from a roadway is minimal, or the safety of the collection vehicle or the public in general would be compromised by the construction of the screening enclosure. 
(d)  Temporary mechanical, dumpster, compaction or roll-off containers used for the collection of refuse or recycling during special events for a period of less than seven days are exempt from the container screening requirements contained in this section. 
(e)  Refuse or recycling mechanical or dumpster containers on wheels which are stored out of the public view, except during collections, are exempt from the screening requirement of this section. 
(f)  Temporary mechanical, dumpster, compaction or roll-off containers used for the collection of refuse or recycling during construction activities are exempt from the container screening requirements contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Secs. 70-11-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 70-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be entitled "Commercial Establishments-Garbage and Refuse Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-32. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article, a commercial establishment is defined as any individual, firm, partnership or corporation that owns, operates, leases or otherwise occupies a business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-33. - Disposal of wet garbage. 
    No commercial establishment shall dispose of "wet" garbage, including vegetables, poultry, meats, fish or fruit, unless prior to said disposal and placement in garbage receptacles, such garbage is specially placed in a separate container, either plastic bag-type or other leakproof, sealable container, so as to effectively seal and prevent said garbage from emitting odors or leaking fluids or other materials into any common garbage receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-34. - Disposal of crates, boxes or shipping containers. 
    All commercial establishments shall not dispose of any crates, boxes, cartons or shipping containers of any kind in any city container, receptacle or dumpster without first breaking up same in sections or pieces no larger in measurement than two feet by two feet by three inches, approximately. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Secs. 70-35-70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES 

Sec. 70-61. - Applicability. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use the city garbage disposal or dumping area without paying the tax, rate or charges levied in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-62. - Residential rates. 
    There is hereby established the following minimum uniform schedule of rates and charges for garbage collection and disposal services: 
(1)  For each single-family or duplex dwelling unit inside the limits of the city, the sum of $15.00 per unit per month. 
(2)  For each single-family or duplex dwelling unit outside the limits of the city, the sum of $18.75 per unit per month. 
(3)  For each apartment unit as part of an apartment complex inside the city which is served by common garbage dumpsters, the sum of $14.50 per month. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 70-63. - Base rates for commercial establishments. 
    The rate categories and monthly base rates for city garbage collection services for commercial establishments is as follows: 
(1) Office: Small $14.06 Medium 17.00 Large I 24.60 Large II 41.69 (2) Retail: Small 14.06 Medium 17.00 Large I 29.33 Large II 41.69 Large III 94.16 (3) Vehicle repair shops 24.70 (4) Bed and breakfasts 17.00 (5) Manufacturing/distribution/service: a. Medical facilities: Small 17.00 Large 47.86 b. Day care facilities 24.70 c. Beauty salon/barber 17.00 d. Laundry and dry cleaning/laundromat 29.33 e. Utility companies 55.58 f. Nursing homes 69.48 g. Grocery stores: Small 24.70 Medium 47.86 Large 219.21 h. Restaurants: Small 47.86 Medium 94.16 i. Convenience stores: Medium 47.86 Large 94.16 j. Automobile service stations 29.33 k. Schools: JCHS Vocational Building 29.33 JCHS 29.33 Media Center 17.00 Adult School 24.70 Care Charter School of Excellence 29.33 l. Miscellaneous: Small 14.06 Medium 17.00 Large 29.33  
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-64. - Determination of rates for special circumstances. 
    If, in the judgment of the city manager special circumstances render the established rates for commercial garbage collection inequitable, he may authorize special rates as the circumstances dictate. Persons aggrieved by such a decision of the city manager made hereunder have the right to appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-65. - Exclusions from regular garbage collection; special charges. 
(a)  Exclusions for regular garbage collection. Excluded from regular garbage collection shall be tires, appliances, mattresses, furniture, metal, construction debris, or other items which, either whole or disassembled, will not fit into a 40-gallon garbage can. Pickup by city crews of these items shall be by special charge, based on size and weight, set by the city manager, payable in advance. 
(b)  Vegetative yard waste. The basic fee for residential garbage collection and disposal service shall include a reasonable amount up to four clamp buckets full per month of small vegetative yard waste and/or tree stumps and logs measuring less than 24 inches long and ten inches in diameter. The charge for removal of felled trees, stumps and logs greater than a diameter of ten inches or the pickup of excessive (more than four clamp buckets full) of additional yard waste shall be at the following pre-paid special rate: 
One-quarter truck load ..... $50.00 
One-half truck load ..... $100.00 
Three-quarter truck load ..... $150.00 
Full truck load ..... $200.00 
    Vegetative waste must be separated from other trash and debris. Rolloff containers should be used when possible. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-66. - Billing; failure to pay charges; discontinuance of water service. 
    The rates and charges set forth in this article shall be added to and included in the regular monthly bills or statements rendered to the consumers of water and/or sewer of the city. Persons using the services and facilities of the municipal garbage collection and disposal system who are not consumers of water shall be rendered monthly bills or statements for the use of the services and facilities of said system, which said bills or statements shall be rendered and shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties and discontinuance of service of said system as in the case of a failure of a consumer of water of the city to pay the rates and charges imposed under the terms of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local municipal improvements, F.S. ch. 170; gas tax used for street construction, F.S. § 206.625; minimum standards for streets, sidewalks, etc., F.S. § 336.045; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Authority of council to order laying of sidewalks. 
    The city council shall have the power to order the laying of sidewalks along all public streets of the city, and to prescribe the width thereof, and the material to be used in their construction, after 30 days' notice to the abutting property owner, and upon failure of such property owner within such time to lay any such sidewalk so ordered, shall have the power to cause such sidewalk to be laid, and to assess the cost and expense of the same against such abutting property, which shall be and become a lien on any such abutting property, and may be enforced as other liens in a court of equity. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 9026(1921), § 22) 
Sec. 74-2. - Obstructions and encroachments on streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Obstructions and encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to close, obstruct or encroach upon, under any pretense, any of the squares, streets, sidewalks or public rights-of-way within the city, except for those permitted temporary use(s) authorized in this section. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to prevent merchants from receiving and delivering their goods and wares, or prevent the erection of scaffolds and ladders or storing materials for the purpose of building and repairing, provided a valid building permit has been issued. 
(b)  Permitted temporary uses. Sidewalk retail displays and restaurant tables and seating in B-1 business district: retail merchandise and decorative displays and restaurant seating on the public sidewalks of the City of Monticello are authorized only in the downtown B-1 business zoning district. Such activities are limited to commercial establishments, including restaurants, in buildings abutting public sidewalks and only directly in front of the buildings where the business is located, and only when the owner or lessee of such commercial establishment is the holder of a valid temporary use permit issued by the city. 
(1)  Temporary use permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to install or place any merchandise for display or sale, decorative displays, or restaurant tables and seating, on any sidewalk within the city, without a temporary use permit issued as provided in this section. Such permit shall be a license by the city to use the sidewalk, and shall not grant, nor shall it be construed or considered to grant, any person, corporation, and/or other entity any property right or interest in the public sidewalk, nor shall it be construed to constitute a vacation or abandonment of such public sidewalk by the city, or any other governmental entity owning a sidewalk within the city. 
a.  Applications for temporary use permits. An application for a temporary use permit shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by a site plan, a current city business tax receipt, an application fee established by the city, an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, and evidence of liability insurance in an amount determined by the city. 
1.  The site plan must include a narrative describing of the size or dimension, the style, type, materials and construction of the proposed retail displays or the proposed restaurant tables and seating, a diagram of the layout or positioning of the proposed retail displays or restaurant tables and seating, and showing the American with Disabilities Act ("ADA") required accessibility areas. The ADA accessibility areas must remain clear of all merchandise, retail displays or restaurant tables and seating at all times. 
2.  The indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall provide that the holder of the temporary use permit agrees to indemnify, defend, save and hold harmless the city and any other governmental entity owning public sidewalks in the B-1 business zoning district, their officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims, demands, liability, lawsuits, damages and all causes of action arising from, or as a result of, the permit holder's placement of anything on the public sidewalk. 
3.  The application fee will be due at the time of submission of an application for any temporary use permit under this section. The fee will be established by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Duration of temporary use permits. A temporary use permit may be issued by the city for a period of up to 12 months, after the permit application and site plan have been approved by the city manager, the execution of the hold harmless agreement and payment of the permit fee. 
(c)  Standards for permitted retail displays and restaurant tables and seating. The city shall set standards for retail merchandise displays, restaurant seating, other items permitted for use on sidewalks and public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Retail merchandise displays. Merchandise and/or decorative displays may be placed on the city sidewalk parallel to the abutting building front entrance in an area measuring no more than 60 percent of the building sidewalk frontage directly abutting the building, and only on the frontage containing the main entrance to the business. Such displays shall allow an efficient, direct and unimpeded pedestrian path along the sidewalk that is directly parallel to the display area and directly into the building front entrance. The pedestrian path must be at least 42 inches wide, or meet minimum ADA requirements, whichever is greater. No display may be less than 24 inches tall or exceed five feet in height. Placement of the display must adhere to the requirements of the ADA and all other applicable standards and not obstruct the storefront entrance or corner sight visibility. Only merchandise and goods offered for sale within a store may be displayed in front of the exterior storefront. Such merchandise and goods may be located on sturdy support structures and shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner. Merchandise and support structures shall be removed from the right-of-way or secured when the business is closed. Advertising signage in outdoor display areas must be displayed in a secure manner and shall not exceed four square feet. 
(2)  Benches, tables, seats and floral decorations. Benches, tables and seats may be provided, from time to time, by the city on and along the sidewalks in appropriate areas and, if provided, will be available for the general public's use. Businesses in buildings abutting the sidewalks may place approved benches against the abutting wall in front of the business, and may place floral decorations and flower containers on the sidewalk in front of the business. Such permitted benches, floral decorations and flower containers may not interfere with ADA access requirements for the sidewalk or for the main entrance to the restaurant or business. Benches may not have any signage or advertising. Any permitted items placed on the sidewalk in this section must be properly maintained and not permitted to become an eyesore. 
(3)  Restaurant tables and seating. Restaurant tables and seating approved in the application may be placed on sidewalks within the city, parallel to and abutting the building owned or leased by the permit holder where the restaurant is located in, an area measuring not more than 80 percent of the buildings sidewalk frontage. All restaurant tables, seating and other objects shall allow an efficient, direct and unimpeded pedestrian path along the sidewalk that is directly parallel to the sidewalk restaurant seating area and directly into the restaurant main entrance. The pedestrian path must be at least 42 inches wide, or meet minimum ADA requirements, whichever is greater. Restaurant tables and seating must is limited to those described in the permit application, and shall be limited to the number and areas depicted on the applicant's approved site plan. Placement of all restaurant seating must adhere to the requirements of the ADA, and all other applicable standards in statutes, ordinances and rules, and must not obstruct the building entrance or corner site visibility. Restaurant tables and seating must be of an appropriate style or design, similar to cafe/bistro tables and chairs, as approved by the city manager or as designated, from time to time, by the city council. 
(4)  Advertising. No advertising or other signage is allowed to be affixed to any city-owned benches or seats on a sidewalk or in the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Removal. The city and/or other public agency owning the right-of-way may require the removal of outdoor merchandise, decorative displays and outdoor restaurant seating from the public right-of-ways during street, sidewalk or utility repairs, during emergency situations, or when heavy pedestrian traffic is expected due to a permitted festival or parade. 
(d)  Enforcement. If a city code enforcement officer determines that any decorative display, merchandise, goods or restaurant tables and seating, benches or floral decorations is/are in a state of disrepair, unclean, unsafe, unsightly or not in compliance with the permit site plan or with the standards contained in this section, or if such code enforcement agent has determined that the holder of the permit or owner of the real estate for which the permit is issued is in violation of any other municipal ordinance or regulation or state statute, the code enforcement officer shall give written notice to the permit holder of the unsatisfactory condition of the facility and/or violation. Thereafter, the provisions of this section shall be enforced pursuant to section 1-13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 16-4; Code 1982, § 23-1; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 2, 10-4-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-01, § 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2016, changed the title of § 74-2 from "Obstructions and encroachments on streets" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Obstructing highway, F.S. §§ 861.01, 861.011. 
Sec. 74-3. - Spitting on sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the sidewalks within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-37; Code 1982, § 23-8) 
Secs. 74-4-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 74-31. - Permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any construction or repair work involving the tearing up and re-laying of any street or any part of a street or to obstruct, dig up or into or in any way disturb any street or any part of a street, including removal of earth from ditches, in the city without first procuring from the city council a written permit therefor. The permit provided for in this section shall be issued under such conditions as may be prescribed by the city council, shall accurately describe the portion of the street to be affected, shall make provision for the replacement of that part of the street which is to be replaced in the same condition as when disturbed, and shall state a definite time within which the permit shall be operative. 
(Code 1957, § 16-1; Code 1982, § 23-5) 
Sec. 74-32. - Barricades and lights. 
    Any person carrying on or doing any construction, excavation or repair work in any street or any part of a street in the city pursuant to a permit from the city council, as provided in section 74-31, shall erect and maintain proper, safe and sufficient barricades, and during that period of time between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall maintain sufficient lights or flares around such barricades, work or excavations to warn persons of the presence of such excavations and work and to prevent injury to persons and property. 
(Code 1957, § 16-2; Code 1982, § 23-6) 
Sec. 74-33. - Replacement of street. 
    Upon the expiration of any permit granted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of section 74-31, the permit holder shall replace that street or that part of a street upon which such construction, excavation or repair work has been performed in the same condition as the street or part of street existed prior to the construction, excavation or repair work. 
(Code 1957, § 16-3; Code 1982, § 23-7) 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE 

Sec. 78-31. - Tax on property insurance premiums. 
(a)  Levied. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which said tax shall be in the amount of 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Due date. The license or excise tax levied in subsection (a) of this section shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1982, §§ 24-17, 24-18; Ord. of 11-2-1976, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, 1-3-1989) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, due date, F.S. § 175.101. 
Sec. 78-32. - Tax on casualty insurance premiums. 
(a)  Levied. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which said tax shall be in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Due date. The license or excise tax levied in subsection (a) of this section shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1982, §§ 24-19, 24-20; Ord. of 5-5-1976, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 89-01, § 1, 1-3-1989) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, due date, F.S. § 185.08. 
Secs. 78-33-78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 

Sec. 78-61. - Tax on electricity, metered or bottled gas, and fuel oil. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax upon each and every purchase of electricity, metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either metered or bottled, manufactured gas either metered or bottled, and all other services competitive with those enumerated herein within the corporate limits of the city in the amount of ten percent of each payment received by the seller for such utility service or commodity, which tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller for the use of such city at the time of paying the charge therefor, but not less often than monthly. The ten percent tax herein levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such monthly period; provided the amount of tax collectible shall be calculated to the nearest whole cent. This section shall become effective and applicable to bills for service rendered on and after August 17, 1986. 
(b)  In addition to the tax imposed on purchases of electricity, metered or bottled gas, there shall be assessed and imposed by the city a tax of $0.04 per gallon on fuel oil, either kerosene or diesel fuel, on every purchase of such fuel oil which shall be used for heating or cooling purposes, which shall be effective and applied to billings for such fuel oil rendered on or after March 10, 1987. 
(Code 1982, § 24-36; Ord. No. 86-08, § 1, 5-6-1986; Ord. No. 87-01, 2-3-1987) 
Sec. 78-62. - Tax on communications services. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax on such services and at the rate as provided by F.S. § 202.19. For the purpose of compensating the telecommunication company for recordkeeping, collection and remittance, the company is allowed to deduct one percent of the total amount collected and due to the city. This section shall become effective and applicable for bills for service rendered on and after August 17, 1986, unless the effective date thereof shall be otherwise later or sooner mandated by law. 
(Code 1982, § 24-37; Ord. No. 86-08, § 2, 5-6-1986) 
Sec. 78-63. - Duty of seller to collect tax. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller of services mentioned in sections 78-61 and 78-62 within the corporate limits of the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of such city the tax hereby levied at the time of collecting the selling price thereof charged for such services and to report and pay over, on or before the last day of each calendar month, unto such city all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect for any such service without at the time collecting the tax hereby levied, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting for any such service, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the city attorney shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If the purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay for any such service, including the tax hereby imposed, the seller shall have, and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill is paid in full. 
(Code 1982, § 24-38; Ord. No. 86-08, § 3, 5-6-1986; Ord. No. 87-01, 2-3-1987) 
Sec. 78-64. - Records of sales. 
    Each and every seller of the services mentioned in sections 78-61 and 78-62 shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof and the day of payment, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days. 
(Code 1982, § 24-39; Ord. No. 86-08, § 4, 5-6-1986; Ord. No. 87-01, 2-3-1987) 
Sec. 78-65. - Exemptions. 
    All federal, state, county and municipal governments and their commissions and agencies, and all public schools and church property used exclusively for church purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of taxes hereby imposed and levied. Any dispute relative to exemptions from the payment of taxes will be resolved by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-40; Ord. No. 86-08, § 5, 5-6-1986) 
Sec. 78-66. - Disposition of revenue. 
    All revenues received, collected and derived from the tax imposed by this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-41; Ord. No. 86-08, § 6, 5-6-1986) 
Sec. 78-67. - Penalty. 
    Any purchaser willfully violating or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller willfully violating the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and punished as provided in F.S. 775.15(2)(d). Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, subject to prosecution by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-42; Ord. No. 86-08, § 7, 5-6-1986) 
Secs. 78-68-78-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE TAXES ON WHOLESALE DELIVERY VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-91. - Authorized. 
    The city is hereby authorized and empowered to levy and impose license taxes, by ordinance of the city council, on every person engaged in the business of trading, buying, bartering, serving, or selling tangible personal property as owner, agent, broker, or otherwise, and such persons, wholesalers and others, using vehicles for the sale and delivery of tangible personal property at wholesale, within the limits of the city. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 19986(1939), § 1) 
Sec. 78-92. - Vehicles deemed separate places of business. 
    Such vehicles used for the sale and delivery of tangible personal property at wholesale, or the operator thereof (as salesman or otherwise) shall be construed as being separate places of business, and subject to such license taxes, regardless of whether or not a state and county license tax has been paid. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 19986(1939), § 2) 
Sec. 78-93. - Amount of tax. 
    The amount of such license taxes shall be fixed by city ordinance and shall not be dependent upon the general state revenue law. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 19986(1939), § 3) 
Sec. 78-94. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article are cumulative and are in addition to the other provisions of the law for the levying and imposing of license taxes. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 19986(1939), § 4) 
Chapter 82 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SITING OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 82-31. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the city's authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. The city finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the city and its inhabitants. The city also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the city and of significant benefit to the city and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the city's land use policies, the city is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The intent of this article is to minimize the negative impact of wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-32. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting Ordinance for the City of Monticello." 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 2, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-33. - Severability. 
(a)  If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this article, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  Any special use permit issued under this article shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 3, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-34. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
    Accessory facility or structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
    Antenna means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services (PCS), microwave telecommunications and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the city's siting, building and permitting authority. 
    Applicant means any wireless service provider submitting an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Application means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Collocation means the use of a tower or structure to support antennas for the provision of wireless services without increasing the height of the tower or structure. 
    Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable." 
    Completed application means an application that contains all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application. 
    Council means the city council of the City of Monticello, Florida. 
    EAF means environmental assessment form. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
    Modification or modify means the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernible components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, radios, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually discernible components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or changeout of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a telecommunications tower or telecommunications site is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding, removing or changing anything. 
    NIER means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
    Personal wireless facility. See definition for "wireless telecommunications facilities." 
    Personal wireless services, PWS, personal telecommunications service or PCS shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
    Special use permit means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by the city. 
    State means the State of Florida. 
    Stealth or stealth technology means minimizing adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
    Telecommunications site. See definition for "wireless telecommunications facilities." 
    Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
    Telecommunications structure means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of "wireless telecommunications facilities." 
    Temporary means temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this article, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities means and includes a "telecommunications tower" and "tower" and "telecommunications site" and "personal wireless facility" and means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures that employ camouflage technology, including but not limited to structures such as a multistory building, church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other structures that can be used to mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such, including all related facilities such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911, personal telecommunications services, commercial satellite services, microwave services and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the city's siting, building and permitting authority, excluding those used exclusively for the city's fire, police or exclusively for private, noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar noncommercial telecommunications where the height of the facility is below the height limits set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 4, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-35. - General policy and goals relating to special use permits. 
    In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities protects the city's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this article, the city hereby adopts an overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
(1)  Implementing an application process for persons seeking a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(2)  Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent. 
(3)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers. 
(4)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 5, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-36. - Special use permit application and plan requirements. 
(a)  Generally; permitting agency. All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this article. The city council is the officially designated agency or body of the city to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying, or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The city may at its discretion delegate or designate other official agencies of the city to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the city council with respect to the granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  Signing of application; false or misleading statements. An application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the city, any false or misleading statement in the application may subject the applicant to denial of the application without further consideration or opportunity for correction. 
(c)  Incomplete applications. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein, or which are otherwise incomplete, may be rejected by the city. 
(d)  Statement of compliance. The applicant shall include a statement in writing: 
(1)  That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the city in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable city, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; 
(2)  That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible, including but not limited to the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state. 
(e)  Permit required. No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by the city, and the special use permit has been issued. 
(f)  Application information. All applications for the construction or installation of new wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. Where a certification is called for in this article, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the city. Such documentation shall include propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites; 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report; 
(3)  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner, operator, and applicant, to include the legal form of the applicant; 
(4)  The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(5)  The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(6)  Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines; 
(7)  The location of nearest residential structure; 
(8)  The location, size and height of all structures on the property which is the subject of the application; 
(9)  The location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and all appurtenant structures; 
(10)  The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping and fencing; 
(11)  The number, type and design of the towers and antennas proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users; 
(12)  The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna; 
(13)  A description of the proposed tower and antenna and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above preexisting grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(14)  The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment; 
(15)  The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective radiated power of the antenna; 
(16)  Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the antenna; 
(17)  Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC; 
(18)  Certification that the proposed antenna will not cause interference with other telecommunications devices; 
(19)  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(20)  Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and analysis has been conducted, and that taking into account the subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, that the site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities on the proposed site. 
(g)  Documentation of requests for shared use. In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing towers or the use of alternative buildings or other structures within the city. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the city in the application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
(h)  Certification of compliance with structural requirements. The applicant shall certify that the telecommunications facility, foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, city, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. 
(i)  Certification of grounding. The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunications facilities will be effectively grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and property and installed with appropriate surge protectors. 
(j)  Environmental and visual assessment required. An applicant shall submit a long form EAF and a completed visual addendum. Based on the results of the analysis, including the visual addendum, the city may require submission of a more detailed visual analysis. The scope of the required environmental and visual assessment will be reviewed at the preapplication meeting. 
(k)  Contents of visual impact assessment. The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include: 
(1)  A "zone of visibility map" which shall be provided in order to determine locations from which the tower may be seen. 
(2)  Pictorial representations of "before and after" views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the city as may be appropriate, including but not limited to state highways and other major roads, state and local parks, other public lands, historic districts, and preserves and historic sites normally open to the public, and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key sites at a preapplication meeting. 
(3)  An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening. 
(l)  Screening plan. The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related facilities and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(m)  Applicant's representations deemed part of application. Any and all representations made by the applicant to the city on the record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the city. 
(n)  Installation of utilities. All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(o)  Visual intrusion to be minimized. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a demonstration that the facility will be sited so as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably possible and thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and on the residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(p)  Building colors and textures. Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be required by the city. 
(q)  Access road, turn-around space and parking area. At a telecommunications site, an access road, turn-around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. 
(r)  Compliance with technical codes. A person who holds a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, provide for removal of, modify or restore the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the city, state, or United States, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the more stringent shall apply. 
(s)  Other permits and licenses. A holder of a special use permit granted under this article shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the city or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(t)  Environmental review. With respect to this application process, the city intends to be the lead agency, pursuant to applicable law and the rules of the state department of environmental protection. The council shall conduct an environmental review of the proposed project in combination with its review of the application under this law. 
(u)  Submittal of application; notice to adjacent municipalities. An applicant shall submit to the city the number of completed applications determined to be needed at the preapplication meeting. Written notification of the application shall be provided to the legislative body of all adjacent municipalities. 
(v)  Accommodation of future shared usage. The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed tower to accommodate future demand for at least five additional commercial applications, for example, future collocations. The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least five additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon: 
(1)  The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area; 
(2)  The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed; 
(3)  The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless telecommunications facilities spaces/sites; 
(4)  Available space on existing and approved towers. 
(w)  Negotiation for shared usage. The owner of the proposed new tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall: 
(1)  Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use applicant; 
(2)  Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers; 
(3)  Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. 
Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the special use permit for the tower. 
(x)  Preapplication meeting. There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address issues which will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A preapplication meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site. Costs of the city's consultants to prepare for and attend the preapplication meeting will be borne by the applicant. 
(y)  Modification of facility. The holder of a special use permit shall notify the city of any intended modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and shall apply to the city to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(z)  Balloon test. In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new telecommunications tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on the application, hold a "balloon test." The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a three feet in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date), times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the city. The applicant shall inform the city, in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary date may be on a weekday. 
(aa)  Lighting. The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities requires lighting under Federal Aviation Administration Regulations part 77. This requirement shall be for any new tower or for an existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines that the FAA must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 6, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-37. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and six being the lowest priority: 
(1)  On existing towers or other structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure; 
(2)  On city-owned properties; 
(3)  On properties in areas zoned for heavy industrial use; 
(4)  On properties in areas zoned for commercial use; 
(5)  On properties in areas zoned for agricultural use; 
(6)  On properties in areas zoned for residential use. 
(b)  If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site. 
(c)  An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the city why co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, the city may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the city finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority, demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the application. 
(f)  Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the city may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
(2)  Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or historical district; 
(3)  The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
(4)  The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the city, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5)  Conflicts with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 7, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-38. - Shared use of towers and other structures. 
(a)  Locating on existing towers or others structures without increasing the height shall be preferred by the city, as opposed to the construction of a new tower. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other suitable structures within four miles of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure can not be used. 
(b)  An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant. 
(c)  Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 8, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-39. - Height of tower. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefor. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(b)  No tower constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including allowing for all attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit operation without required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with municipal, city, state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law, city ordinance, code, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 9, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-40. - Visibility of facilities. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required by law. 
(b)  Towers shall be galvanized and painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 10, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-41. - Security of facilities. 
    All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically: 
(1)  All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(2)  Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 11, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-42. - Signage. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain the name of the owner and operator of the antenna as well as emergency phone number. The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless lighting is required by applicable law, rule or regulation. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 12, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-43. - Lot size and setbacks. 
    All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications facility structure plus ten percent of the height of the tower or structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 13, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-44. - Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant. 
(a)  The city may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the city in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for recertification. 
(b)  An applicant shall deposit with the city funds sufficient to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the city in connection with the review of any application including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500.00. The placement of the $8,500.00 with the city shall precede the preapplication meeting. The city will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The city's consultants/experts shall invoice the city for its services in reviewing the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the city is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant. 
(c)  The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (b) of this section may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 14, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-45. - Special use permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of, wireless telecommunications facilities as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without having first obtained a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit shall be required for those noncommercial exceptions noted in the definition of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided, however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless telecommunications facility must comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 15, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-46. - Public hearing and notification requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, a public hearing shall be held by the city, notice of which shall be published in the official newspaper of the city no less than ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the city may notify nearby landowners, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all landowners whose property is located within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located. 
(b)  There shall be no public hearing required for an application to collocate on an existing tower or other structure, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height of the tower or structure, including attachments thereto. 
(c)  The city shall schedule the public hearing referred to in subsection (a) of this section once it finds the application is complete. The city, at any stage prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-47. - Action on application for a special use permit. 
(a)  The city will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this article in a timely fashion, and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution. 
(b)  The city may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory or other committee for a nonbinding recommendation. 
(c)  After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the applicant. 
(d)  If the city approves the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten calendar days of the city's action, and the special use permit shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent certificates of compliance, once a special use permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the city, such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the city for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by the special use permit. 
(e)  If the city denies the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten calendar days of the city's action. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 17, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-48. - Recertification of a special use permit. 
(a)  Between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year anniversary date after the effective date of the special use permit and all subsequent five-year anniversaries of the effective date of the original special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, the holder of a special use permit for such wireless telecommunication facilities shall submit a signed written request to the city for recertification. In the written request for recertification, the holder of such special use permit shall note the following: 
(1)  The name of the holder of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(2)  If applicable, the number or title of the special use permit; 
(3)  The date of the original granting of the special use permit; 
(4)  Whether the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved, relocated, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified since the issuance of the special use permit and if so, in what manner; 
(5)  If the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved, relocated, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified, then whether the city approved such action, and under what terms and conditions, and whether those terms and conditions were complied with; 
(6)  That the wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance with the special use permit and compliance with all applicable codes, laws, rules and regulations; 
(7)  Recertification that the tower and attachments both are designed and constructed and continue to meet all local, city, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. Such recertification shall be by a professional engineer licensed in the state, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant. 
(b)  If, after such review, the city determines that the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance with the special use permit and all applicable statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, then the city may issue a recertification of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities, which may include any new provisions or conditions that are mutually agreed upon, or that are required by applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations. If, after such review, it is determined that the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities are not in compliance with the special use permit and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, then the city may refuse to issue a recertification special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities, and in such event, such wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be used after the date that the applicant receives written notice of the decision by the city until such time as the facility is brought into compliance. Any decision requiring the cessation of use of the facility or imposing a penalty shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record and shall be promptly provided to the owner of the facility. 
(c)  If the applicant has submitted all of the information requested and required by this article, and if the review is not completed, as noted in subsection (b) of this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of the special use permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, then the applicant for the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities shall receive an extension of the special use permit for up to six months, in order for the completion of the review. 
(d)  If the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities does not submit a request for recertification of such special use permit within the time frame noted in subsection (a) of this section, then such special use permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting of the special use permit, or subsequent five year anniversaries, unless the holder of the special use permit adequately demonstrates that extenuating circumstances prevented a timely recertification request. If the city agrees that there were legitimately extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the special use permit may submit a late recertification request or application for a new special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 18, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-49. - Extent and parameters of special use permit. 
    The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such special use permit shall be nonexclusive. 
(2)  Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the city. 
(3)  Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material violation of this article after prior written notice to the holder of the special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 19, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-50. - Fees. 
(a)  At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $5,000.00 to the city. If the application is for a special use permit for col-locating on an existing tower or other suitable structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the nonrefundable fee shall be $2,500.00. 
(b)  No application fee is required in order to recertify a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a visible modification of the wireless telecommunications facility since the date of the issuance of the existing special use permit for which the conditions of the special use permit have not previously been modified. In the case of any modification, the fees provided in subsection (a) of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-51. - Performance security. 
    The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the city a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the city as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the city to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this article and conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this article. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-52. - Inspection of facilities. 
    In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the city may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 22, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-53. - Annual NIER certification. 
    The holder of the special use permit shall, annually, certify to the city that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 23, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-54. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage; $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; 
(2)  Automobile coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; 
(3)  Workers' compensation and disability: Statutory amounts. 
(b)  The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the city and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named insureds. 
(c)  The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best's rating of at least "A." 
(d)  The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the city with at least 30 days' prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(e)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the city at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(f)  Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of the special use permit, the holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the city a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 24, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-55. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is proposed for city property, pursuant to this article, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the city, and its officers, councils, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the city, or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (a) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the city itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 25, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-56. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  In the event of a violation of this article or any special use permit issued pursuant to this article, the city may impose and collect, and the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the city, fines or penalties as set forth below. 
(b)  The failure of the holder of a special use permit to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the applicant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this Code and F.S. § 166.0415. In addition, violation of this article may be punishable as provided in F.S. § 162.22. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties to evade or avoid compliance with this article or any section of this article. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The city may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this article, without limiting other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 26, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-57. - Notice of violation. 
    If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this article or of the special use permit, then the city shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such violation. Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation or noncompliance and shall be in accordance with the procedure outlined in F.S. § 162.06. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 27, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-58. - Removal of facilities. 
(a)  Under the following circumstances, the city may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the city warrant and require the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities: 
(1)  Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case repair or removal shall commence within 90 days; 
(2)  Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
(3)  Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required special use permit, or any other necessary authorization. 
(b)  If the city makes such a determination as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the city shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed, the city may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(c)  The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. However, if the owner of the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the city. 
(d)  If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the city may order officials or representatives of the city to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder. 
(e)  If, the city removes, or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the city may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the city may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or relocation of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the city, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the city. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the city may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 28, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-59. - Request for relief, waiver or exemption. 
    Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this article may request such at the preapplication meeting, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden of providing the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs of the city in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the city, its residents and other service providers. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 29, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-60. - Periodic regulatory review by the city; amendment or repeal of article. 
(a)  The city may at any time conduct a review and examination of this article. 
(b)  If, after such a periodic review and examination of this article, the city determines that one or more provisions of this article should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the city may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable Law in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the city, the city may repeal this article at any time. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city may at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal, state, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 30, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-61. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
(a)  To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(b)  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security, are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 31, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-62. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where this article differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the city, state or federal government, this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 32, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-63. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the state and federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 33, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 82-64-82-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BROADBAND WIRELESS INTERNET SERVICE 

Sec. 82-91. - Authorization. 
    The city is authorized to provide broadband wireless internet service to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 5-3-2005) 
Sec. 82-92. - Rates and charges. 
    Rates and charges for such broadband wireless internet service shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 5-3-2005) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions in this chapter are enacted under the authority of F.S. § 316.008. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, F.S. ch. 316 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a right-of-way, usually narrow, passing between the rear of buildings or lots. 
(Code 1982, § 14-2) 
Sec. 86-2. - Authority of chief of police. 
    The chief of police, except as otherwise directed by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city council, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to make and enforce all rules and regulations governing traffic and the use of the streets of the city by vehicles and pedestrians, and the chief of police is given full power to designate through, stop, one-way and play streets, directions of traffic, time limits and locations for parking, reservation of parking places, and maximum and minimum speeds insofar as same shall not conflict with the laws of the state, to establish truck routes and stop crossings, and to install such street signs, traffic control devices and indicators and markings as shall be necessary or advisable for the operation and enforcement of such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1957, § 18-2; Code 1982, § 14-3) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, F.S. § 316.008(1)(b). 
Sec. 86-3. - Compliance with directions of police officer. 
    No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1957, § 18-4; Code 1982, § 14-4) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, F.S. § 316.008(1)(b). 
Sec. 86-4. - Applicability of traffic regulations to persons propelling push carts or riding bicycles. 
    Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1957, § 18-5; Code 1982, § 14-6) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate operation of bicycles, F.S. § 316.008(1)(h); power of city to restrict use of streets, F.S. § 316.008(1)(g). 
Sec. 86-5. - Operation of coasters, roller skates, etc., on roadway. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by ordinance of this city. 
(Code 1957, § 18-10; Code 1982, § 14-7) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, F.S. § 316.008(1)(p), (s). 
Sec. 86-6. - Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any portion of any vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1957, § 18-8; Code 1982, § 14-8) 
Sec. 86-7. - Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1957, § 18-7; Code 1982, § 14-9) 
Sec. 86-8. - Boarding or clinging to train in motion. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to board, enter or leave any railway car or locomotive while the same is in motion, or cling to or remain on any bar, railing, platform or any outside fixture of or attachment to, any railway car or locomotive while the train is in motion; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons whose employment requires them to be on such car or locomotive. 
(Code 1957, § 13-32; Code 1982, § 14-10) 
Secs. 86-9-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles generally, F.S. § 316.081 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-31. - State driver's license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle in the city unless such person has a valid driver's license under the provisions of F.S. § 322.03. 
(Code 1957, § 18-13; Code 1982, § 14-41) 
Sec. 86-32. - Persons not authorized to drive. 
    No vehicle shall be operated within the city limits by a driver who is under 16 years of age or whose physical condition or disabilities shall be such as to affect or impair the proper control of the vehicle, with exception to those who have restricted operator's licenses. 
(Code 1957, § 18-14; Code 1982, § 14-42) 
State Law reference- Driving under influence of alcoholic beverages, model glue or controlled substances, F.S. § 316.193; persons not to be licensed, F.S. § 322.05. 
Sec. 86-33. - Speed limits generally. 
    Where no special hazard exists, the following speeds (or other posted speed) shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of said limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful: 
(1)  Fifteen miles per hour in any business district. 
(2)  Twenty-five miles per hour in any residence district. 
(3)  Twenty miles per hour in school zones. 
(Code 1957, 18-15; Code 1982, § 14-43) 
State Law reference- Establishment of municipal speed zones, F.S. § 316.189. 
Sec. 86-34. - Speed restrictions near congested residential areas. 
    The chief of police shall be empowered to designate speed restrictions in any area adjacent to a congested residential area as long as said speeds conform with state speed laws. 
(Code 1957, § 18-15; Code 1982, § 14-44) 
State Law reference- Speed regulations, F.S. § 316.183 et seq. 
Sec. 86-35. - Information to be specified in charge of speed limit violation. 
    In every charge of violation of sections 86-33 and 86-34, the complaint and the summons or notice to appear shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the prima facie speed applicable within the district or at the location. 
(Code 1957, § 18-15; Code 1982, § 14-45) 
Sec. 86-36. - Slow-moving vehicles. 
    All vehicles moving slowly along the street shall keep as close as possible to the curb line so as to allow fast-moving vehicles free passage on the left-hand side. 
(Code 1957, § 18-30; Code 1982, § 14-46) 
State Law reference- Emblem for slowly moving vehicles, F.S. § 316.2225. 
Sec. 86-37. - Play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any said street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 18-41; Code 1982, § 14-47) 
State Law reference- Power of city to designate and regulate traffic on play streets, F.S. § 316.008(1)(p). 
Sec. 86-38. - Dragging vehicle or load upon street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person driving any vehicle or contrivance to allow such vehicle or contrivance or any part of same, or any load or portion of load carried thereon, to drag upon any streets in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 18-12; Code 1982, § 14-48) 
Secs. 86-39-86-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES 

Sec. 86-61. - Violations. 
    All parades or processions within the city, except as approved under this division, are hereby declared to be unlawful; persons participating therein shall be guilty of an offense under this Code, and such activities are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 18-31; Code 1982, § 14-61) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisance by injunction, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06. 
Sec. 86-62. - Permit required. 
    Written permission for all parades or processions, either of pedestrians or of motor vehicles, must be obtained from the mayor (except for such as are sponsored by or involve the military forces of the state or of the United States of America), who shall designate the day, time and the route of such parade or procession. 
(Code 1957, § 18-31; Code 1982, § 14-62) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate processions or assemblages on streets, F.S. § 316.008(1)(c). 
Sec. 86-63. - Issuance of permit. 
    The mayor, when satisfied that a parade or procession is for lawful purposes and that the holding thereof at the time and along routes requested will not unnecessarily endanger human life or property or unreasonably obstruct or interfere with the efficient and orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, whether such traffic is along the streets or sidewalks of the city or from such streets or sidewalks into public or private property, shall issue a written permit for such parade or procession, stating thereon the day and time for which such permit is valid, the route approved and designated for such parade or procession and any other necessary or desirable information. A written copy of such permit will be furnished to the chief of police, who, under the supervision of the mayor, shall be responsible that this division is fairly and strictly enforced. 
(Code 1957, § 18-31; Code 1982, § 14-63) 
Sec. 86-64. - Driving in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1957, § 18-34; Code 1982, § 14-64) 
Sec. 86-65. - Unlawful assemblages. 
    All demonstrations, public addresses, public meetings or congregating of persons upon the streets or sidewalks of the city or upon public property within the city which tend to obstruct or disrupt the lawful, orderly and efficient flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, whether such traffic is along the streets or sidewalks of the city or from such streets or sidewalks into public or private property, and similar activities wherein persons acting jointly or in concert and by noisy disturbances, boisterous conduct or obscene or loud, or threatening language or gestures while obstructing the streets or sidewalks of the city to lawful and orderly traffic thereon, are hereby declared unlawful; persons participating therein shall be guilty of an offense under this Code, and such activities are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 18-31; Code 1982, § 14-65) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisance by injunction, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06. 
Secs. 86-66-86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices, F.S. § 316.074 et seq.; power of city to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices, F.S. § 316.008(1)(b). 

Sec. 86-101. - Effect of traffic control devices. 
    The existence of signs, signals and markings, duly installed by the chief of police or under his/her authority, shall be sufficient proof of the existence of the regulations made under this chapter by the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 18-2; Code 1982, § 14-26) 
Sec. 86-102. - Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turns are permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign, and when authorized marks, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1957, § 18-56; Code 1982, § 14-27) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate or prohibit the turning of vehicles, F.S. § 316.008(1)(i). 
Sec. 86-103. - One-way streets. 
    Vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1957, § 18-52; Code 1982, § 14-28) 
State Law reference- Power of city to designate one-way streets, F.S. § 316.008(1)(d). 
Secs. 86-104-86-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, F.S. § 316.194 et seq. 

Sec. 86-141. - Parking for purpose of sale or repair of vehicle. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1957, § 18-61; Code 1982, § 14-76) 
State Law reference- Power of city to restrict use of streets, F.S. § 316.008(1)(g). 
Sec. 86-142. - Parking with left side of vehicle to curb. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, with the left side of the vehicle to the curb. 
(Code 1957, § 18-62; Code 1982, § 14-77) 
Sec. 86-143. - Angle parking. 
    Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or sign. 
(Code 1957, § 18-60; Code 1982, § 14-78) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, F.S. § 316.195. 
Sec. 86-144. - Manner of parking in loading zones. 
    In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him/her such privilege, and such permit shall be either in the possession of the driver or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load. It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such special permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18-60; Code 1982, § 14-79) 
State Law reference- Authority for special permits, F.S. § 316.550. 
Sec. 86-145. - Use of loading zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 18-64; Code 1982, § 14-80) 
Sec. 86-146. - Use of passenger zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such passenger zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 18-64; Code 1982, § 14-81) 
Sec. 86-147. - Moving car from parked position. 
    Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall proceed in the direction in which they are most nearly headed. 
(Code 1957, § 18-68; Code 1982, § 14-82) 
Sec. 86-148. - Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. 
    The chief of police or any police officer of the city is hereby authorized to take up or cause to be taken up or removed to a place designated by the mayor, any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of the parking ordinances, and is authorized and empowered to keep same in such place so designated by the mayor until all fines and charges assessed for moving and storage against the owner and the car have been paid or satisfactory bond arranged. 
(Code 1957, § 18-69; Code 1982, § 14-83) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate or prohibit parking, F.S. § 316.008. 
Sec. 86-149. - Violation tickets. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the police officers of the city, acting in accordance with the instructions issued by the city council, to deposit with the city clerk the stub of every violation ticket. Such stub shall contain: 
(1)  The number of the parking meter adjacent to the vehicle which was parked in violation of this article. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  The day and hour at which such vehicle is parked in violation of the article. 
(4)  Any other facts which the officer deems necessary to properly understand the circumstances of the violation. 
(b)  Every such police officer shall also place on such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this article and instructing such owner to report to such authority as may be designated by law in regard to such violation. 
(Code 1957, § 18-84; Code 1982, § 14-84) 
State Law reference- Judicial power of state, Fla. Const. art. V. 
Sec. 86-150. - Improper parking; overtime parking. 
    No owner or operator of any vehicle shall cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of the legal parking time nor may he/she cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked in any manner contrary to the manner prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 18-79; Code 1982, § 14-85) 
Sec. 86-151. - Parking on courthouse circle. 
(a)  There shall be a limit of one hour for all vehicle parking, on all days except Sunday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. in the following described area: the northeast quadrant of the courthouse circle running easterly from North Jefferson Street to the north boundary of U.S. Highway 19. 
(b)  This area shall be considered a restricted parking area, and no motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, or any motorized conveyance of any kind shall be permitted to park in the described area in excess of one continuous hour each day. All violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of $5.00 imposed and collected by the police department and payable to the city. 
(c)  Appropriate visible signs shall be placed in the above-described area with a generalized notice of the one-hour parking limitation. 
(d)  There is excepted from the provisions of this section any law enforcement vehicle on official business at the county courthouse either transporting or delivering prisoners or engaged in other official law enforcement duties. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, §§ 1-4, 1-5-1993) 
Sec. 86-152. - Parking meters. 
    The city council may from time to time designate locations for the installation of parking meters where such meters will best serve the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 14-86) 
Sec. 86-153. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The duties of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the mayor, acting through the chief of police and the police department. 
(Code 1957, § 18-83; Code 1982, § 14-87) 
Secs. 86-154-86-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycle regulations, F.S. § 316.2065 et seq. 

Sec. 86-181. - Applicability. 
    The regulations applicable to bicycles in this article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2; Code 1982, § 14-101) 
Sec. 86-182. - Riding on sidewalk. 
    No person shall use any sidewalk in the business districts of the city for riding thereon with bicycles. On those sidewalks or paths of the city where riding bicycles thereon is permitted, the rider of the bicycle shall yield the right-of-way at all times to pedestrians on such sidewalks and paths. 
(Code 1957, § 5-10; Code 1982, § 14-104) 
State Law reference- Driving upon sidewalk, F.S. § 316.1995. 
Secs. 86-183-86-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrian control signals, F.S. § 316.0755; actions of pedestrians on approach of authorized emergency vehicle, § 316.126. 

Sec. 86-211. - Hitchhiking; selling to motorists. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hitchhike or to solicit rides from the occupants of automobiles, trucks or other vehicles of conveyance within the corporate limits of the city, or to stand upon or loiter on any of the sidewalks, corners or streets within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of hitchhiking or soliciting rides from the driver of any private vehicle, nor for the purpose of selling any merchandise or agricultural products, or in any manner to annoy motorists or others passing by, with signals, or by waving at, calling or otherwise attempting to obtain transportation gratuitously. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13-8, 18-9; Code 1982, § 14-116) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, F.S. § 316.008(1)(u); similar provisions, F.S. § 316.130. 
Secs. 86-212-86-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GOLF CARTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as art. VII, §§ 86-112-86-117. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. VII, §§ 86-221-86-226. 

Sec. 86-221. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following definitions will apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Golf cart means a vehicle with four wheels originally designed for use on a golf course, and powered by a battery or internal combustion motor. 
    Drivers license means a valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued within the United States. 
    Liability insurance means liability insurance not less than required by Florida law to operate a motor vehicle on public roads. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 86-222. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks or on public rights-of-way designated as bicycle trails. 
(b)  Golf carts shall not be operated on the following public roads: U.S. Highway 19, also known as North Jefferson Street and South Jefferson Street within the city limits; and U.S. Highway 90 (State Road 10), also known as East Washington Street and West Washington Street in the city limits; except for crossing at certain designated locations as indicated in this Article; or except when those streets are closed for authorized events. 
(c)  Golf carts not equipped with headlights, brake lights, lighted turn signals and windshields may be operated during daylight hours only. 
(d)  Golf carts may be operated only upon a city street that has been designated by the city for use by golf carts. The city shall post appropriate signage on the designated streets to indicate operation of golf carts is allowed on those streets. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 86-223. - Designated locations for crossing state highways. 
(a)  Golf carts shall be authorized to cross state highways only at locations to be determined by the Police Chief of the City of Monticello and approved by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(b)  The city shall post appropriate signage on the city streets as an indication where crossing state highways is allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 86-224. - Equipment and standards for operation. 
    In addition to the requirements of F.S. § 316.212, which are applicable to the operation of golf carts on roads and streets within the city, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  All golf carts operated within the city shall meet the minimum equipment standards established by Florida State Statutes and have no increased power, wheel base or tire modifications from a standard manufactured gas or electric golf cart. Speed-modified golf carts or "hybrid" golf carts are not authorized for use on the city streets. 
(2)  All golf carts permitted under this section to travel on designated public streets and roads within the city shall have a maximum attainable speed of 20 miles per hour. 
(3)  All golf cart operators within the city must be a minimum of 16 years of age and hold a valid driver's license, which must be in the operator's possession at all times while operating a golf cart on public roads. 
(4)  The number of occupants in any golf cart being operated within the city shall be restricted to the number of seats on the golf cart. No occupants of a golf cart shall stand at any time while the golf cart is in motion. 
(5)  All golf carts must be equipped with efficient brakes, reliable steering, safe tires, a rearview mirror, and red reflectorized warning devices in both the front and rear at all times while operated on designated roads and streets within the city. 
(6)  Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all traffic regulations, and their operation must not obstruct nor interfere with normal traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 86-225. - Registration, insurance, and hold harmless agreement required. 
(a)  Golf carts that may operate on designated city roads and streets shall be registered with the city on an annual basis. The registration process shall include payment of an annual registration fee, which shall be set by Resolution of the city council. Decals reflecting a valid registration must be visibly affixed to each registered golf cart in accordance with requirements of the city. 
(b)  Before golf carts may be operated on designated city roads and streets, the owners thereof must purchase and maintain liability insurance, insuring against personal injury and damage to property of any nature relative to the operations of golf carts on designated city roads and streets. Proof of insurance must be presented during the process of registering the golf cart with the city, and documentation of insurance must be available on the golf cart at all times. 
(c)  Hold harmless agreement required. Any person operating a golf cart on any designated street does so at his/her own risk and must operate such vehicle with due regard for the safety and convenience of other motor vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. The city in designating certain city streets for the operation of golf carts extends such operating privileges on the express condition that the operators of any golf carts under this article undertakes such operation at their own risk and assume sole liability for operating the vehicle on the designated streets and by such operation agree to defend, release, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials and employees for and regarding any and all claims, demands, or damages of any nature whatsoever arising from such operation by any person. Furthermore, in consideration of and in return for the privilege of operating said golf cart on the designated streets, the owner shall sign a defense release, indemnity and hold harmless agreement as part of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 86-226. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this section shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.212(8) and F.S. ch. 318, as applicable. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, violations of traffic infractions shall also be punishable by any other method as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, adopted June 3, 2010, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 90-1-90-8, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1957; Ord. of 4-5-1977; Code 1982; Ord. of 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 89-07, 10-3-1989. 

Sec. 90-1. - Making sewer or water connection across property of another. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to require or entitle any person to cross the private property of another to make any sewer or water connection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-2. - Unlawful connection to city line. 
    No person shall be allowed to connect into any water line or sewer line owned by the city without the written consent of the city, and then the connection with such line shall be made only under the direction and supervision of the city manager. Any property owner or plumber who shall make any connection without such consent of the city manager shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-3. - Connecting old plumbing to city line. 
    Whenever it is desirable to connect old plumbing with the city sewer main and/or water line, the owner or plumber contemplating doing such work shall notify the city manager, who will inspect said old plumbing and notify the owner or plumber what alterations will be necessary to place said old plumbing in an acceptable condition for such connection. Any owner or plumber who shall make any connection without the approval of the city manager shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-4. - Maintenance of pipes and connections. 
    The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping clean the water and sewer pipes leading to and connection from the plumbing system to the city distribution lines and main sewers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-5. - Free service prohibited. 
    No water or sewage disposal service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person, firm or corporation whatsoever; and the representative and each and every agency, department or instrumentality which uses either or both such services shall pay therefore at the rates fixed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-6. - Installation and ownership of water and sewer lines outside city limits. 
(a)  In the event of an application for the city to provide water and/or sewer utility services to a location outside the city limits, a condition prerequisite to the provision of such utility service shall be that the owner of the property to be served by the utility: 
(1)  Properly execute at the time of application for utility service, a nonrevocable, recordable petition to annex into the city at such time as the property becomes eligible for annexation under the laws of Florida. 
(2)  If the property is contiguous to city limits, pay to the city at the time of such application the prevailing fees charged by the city relating to annexation which shall include, without limitation, fees to amend the future land use and zoning maps. The city clerk shall have the petition to annex duly recorded in the public records of Jefferson County, Florida, whereupon the petition shall constitute public notice of the matters reflected therein. Property owners of a location outside the city limits receiving city utility services as of the date of this ordinance are exempt from these provisions. 
(3)  Applicants seeking such service shall pay the cost of construction from the existing lines, either inside or outside the city limits, to the premises to be served in those areas where no line or lines exists. When construction is necessary, the same shall not be commenced until a written agreement is approved by the city council addressing ownership and maintenance of the system, payment of construction costs, tap fees, systems charges and provisions for approval of construction plans by the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of 100 percent grant-funded water and sewer main extension projects, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The property for which city water and/or sewer service is sought must be immediately adjacent to the right of way where the water and/or sewer main extensions are constructed; and 
(2)  Not later than forty-five (45) days after substantial completion of the grant-funded water and/ or sewer main extension project, the owner of the property must apply for immediate connection to such water and/or sewer main extension. "Substantial completion" of the project shall be as defined in the construction contract documents for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 3-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Water connections outside city, F.S. § 180.19. 
Sec. 90-7. - Rate contracts. 
    The city council shall, notwithstanding the enumerated rates for water and sewage established in this chapter, be authorized to contract with owners of multiple family, multiple occupant or multiple consumer apartments, houses or trailer parks for a specified monthly sum as and for water and/or sewage usage; provided, however, that such contract utility billing and monthly rate shall be based upon the current rates then in existence for all users, giving proper credit for the collection of same to the owner or owners. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-8. - No temporary suspension of water or sewer billing. 
    The city will not suspend water or sewer billing to accommodate temporarily absent owners or seasonal residents. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Secs. 90-9-90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-04, § 5, adopted June 3, 2010, provides that this ordinance shall become effective the beginning of August, 2010. 
State Law reference- Pollution of waters, F.S. ch. 387; sewage disposal, F.S. § 403.085 et seq.; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-31. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, for each such offense, be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-4 of this Code. Any failure or refusal by an owner to connect to the city sewer system after notification so to do, as provided in this article, or any failure or refusal to pay the charges or rates provided in this article shall be construed to be a violation of this article and a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(Code 1982, § 21-13; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 18; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-32. - Connection with public sewer required. 
    The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city, upon which lot or parcel of land any building, or trailer used as a dwelling is now situated or shall hereafter be situated, for either residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect or cause such building or buildings or trailer or trailers to be connected with the public sewer facilities of the municipal sewer system of the city and use such facilities within three months following notification so to do by the city manager. All such connections shall be made in accordance with rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city council of said city, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in such reasonable amount as such council may fix and determine. No connection or connections shall be required where said sewer system or line is more than 200 feet from such lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1982, § 21-2; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 2; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-33. - Right of city to make connection. 
(a)  If any such owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city shall fail and refuse to connect with and use the facilities of the sewer system of the city after notification by the city manager, as provided herein, then the city manager shall be authorized to make such connections, entering on or upon any such lot or parcel of land for the purpose of making such connection. The city shall thereupon be entitled to recover the cost of making such connection, together with reasonable penalties and interest and attorney's fees, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  In addition and as an alternative means of collecting such costs of making such connections, the city shall have a lien on such lot or parcel of land for such cost, which lien shall be of equal dignity with the lien of state and county and city taxes. Such lien may be foreclosed by the city in the same manner provided by the laws of the state for the foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate. 
(Code 1982, § 21-4; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 4; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-34. - Sewage disposal facilities required. 
    No person, group of persons, firm or corporation shall build or remodel or cause to be built or remodeled any structure used for human habitation or occupancy within the city which is within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer line, unless it is provided with water-carried sewerage facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 21-6; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 7; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-35. - Sanitary facilities required. 
    Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate shall be required to have a sanitary method of disposing of human excrement, namely either a sanitary water closet that is connected with the city sewer system, or an approved type of septic tank. A septic tank will be used only if the property is more than 200 feet from the sewer line. 
(Code 1982, § 21-8; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 9; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-36. - Unlawful disposal of sewage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation owning or leasing any premises in the city to permit the disposal of any human excrement on any property, leased or rented by any such person, firm or corporation or the agency of any such person, firm or corporation, except in a sanitary water closet where sewage lines are available as defined above. 
(Code 1982, § 21-9; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 10; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-37. - Septic tanks. 
    No septic tank other than those approved by the state health department shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city. No septic tank shall be constructed within 200 feet of the sewer line. 
(Code 1982, § 21-10; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 11; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-38. - Failure to maintain plumbing system. 
(a)  Failure to keep the sewer pipe, i.e., the pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main, clean and maintained in a proper manner will give the city the right to cut off the water connection, which shall not be reconnected until the sewer pipe is cleaned and maintained properly. 
(b)  Clean out valves are required at the connection to the city main and located every 75 feet along the private property sewer line for all newly-constructed sewer connections. Clean out valves are required to be set within a covered utility box. 
(c)  In those instances where the owner has his/her own private water supply, the city shall have the right to cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall have no right to reconnect his/her own private water supply until the sewer pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main has been maintained and cleaned and in proper condition. Any violation of this provision by reconnecting his/her private water supply or the connection from the city water line, until such sewer pipes are cleaned and maintained properly, shall be considered a violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 21-12; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § 15; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-39. - Tapping permit and fee. 
(a)  Inside city limits. 
(1)  The city will furnish sewer taps of all sizes up to and including four-inch sewer taps upon application and payment of the costs and fees, which fees shall be promulgated by the city council from time to time and posted at city hall. The fees and costs shall be payable in advance for each new tap, and such fees and costs shall apply to each separate tap for single- and multiple-family dwellings or businesses. The city reserves the right, under certain circumstances, to negotiate prior to issuance of a permit on multiple-family residences for greater or lesser amounts, depending on the extent of the city's labor and services required. 
(2)  In addition to the above, there shall be a charge not to exceed the actual cost of removing and replacing concrete or asphalt driveways, sidewalks or pathways. Such costs shall be paid in full before sewer service shall commence. 
(3)  Should any existing tap be inoperable through nonuse, damage or failure to be serviceable, the city shall make such repairs, renovations or rehabilitation as shall be necessary prior to the connection of the system; and the property owner shall pay the actual cost thereof prior to the issuance of a building or occupancy permit. 
(b)  Outside the city limits. 
(1)  There shall be a tap-in fee charged for installation of city sewer service provided to residents outside the existing city limits, which fee shall be promulgated by the city council from time to time and posted at city hall. Additionally, the property owner shall be required to pay the actual costs of all required materials. The fee shall be payable in advance and at the time of the application for such tap. Sewer service outside the city shall not be provided except under the provisions of article I, section 90-6 and section 90-41. 
(2)  In addition to the above, the property owner shall be responsible for removing and replacing concrete or asphalt driveways, sidewalks or pathways. 
(Code 1982, § 21-14; Ord. No. 88-06, 10-4-1988) 
Sec. 90-40. - Deposit required for sewer service. 
    For all applications for sewer service, the applicant will be required to post with the city a deposit as outlined in article III, section 90-129. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-41. - Providing sewer-only service outside the city. 
    Effective June 1, 2010, no premises located outside the city limits shall be connected to the city sewer system without corresponding city water service except under the following conditions: 
(a)  The property owner complies with provisions of article I, section 90-6. 
(b)  An appropriate water meter or sewer mater is installed on the property, and the account owner executes an agreement consenting to provisions in subsection 90-61(i) below. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Secs. 90-42-90-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, adopted June 3, 2010, repealed former §§ 90-61-90-63, and added new § 90-61 as set out herein. Additionally, § 5 of Ord. No. 2010-04 provides that this ordinance shall become effective the beginning of the August, 2010 billing cycle.   Former §§ 90-61-90-63 pertained to sewer rates and charges and derived from Code 1982; Ord. of 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 90-11, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 92-07, 9-1-1992; Ord. No. 94-01, 2-1-1994; Ord. No. 95-06, 10-8-1995; Ord. No. 2005-11, 10-4-2005; Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07, 6-12-2007. 

Sec. 90-61. - Schedule of sewer rates and charges. 
(a)  Accounts with water meter: 
Premises Located 
Inside City Limits Premises Located 
Outside City Limits Base Rate: $18.36 $22.95 Additional Charge (computed as 85 percent of water usage): $4.62 per 100 cu. ft. or fraction thereof, with maximum per unit residential charge of $96.90 $5.77 per 100 cu. ft or fraction thereof, with maximum per unit residential charge of $121.04  
(b)  Accounts with sewer meter or usage measurable by lift station run times: 
Premises Located 
Inside City Limits Premises Located 
Outside City Limits Base Rate: $18.36 $22.95 Additional Charge: $4.62 per 100 cu. ft. or fraction thereof $5.77 per 100 cu. ft. or fraction thereof  
  
(c)  Unmetered residential sewer-Only accounts (only allowable to service locations with no readable water or sewer meter in existence as of May 31, 2010). Unmetered residential service locations which are served by city sewer service shall be assessed sewer discharge of 425 cubic feet per month. 
(d)  Unmetered nursing homes sewer-Only accounts (only allowable to service locations with no readable water or sewer meter in existence as of May 31, 2010). Unmetered nursing home sewer service locations which are served by city sewer service shall be assessed sewer discharge of 110 cubic feet times bed capacity per month. 
(e)  Unmetered church/school sewer-Only accounts (only allowable to service locations with no readable water or sewer meter in existence as of May 31, 2010). Unmetered church/school facility locations which are served by city sewer service shall be assessed sewer discharge of 30 cubic feet times student capacity unit per month. 
(f)  Unmetered unclassified sewer-Only accounts. Other unmetered sewer service locations will be assessed by estimation of usage by the city manager. 
(g)  Contracts with large users. The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with large users of water and/or sewer service for the purpose of setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such services, which monthly rate or charge may be computed upon a different basis than set forth in the immediately proceeding paragraphs. Such contracts shall be entered into by means of a resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
(h)  Septic treatment. The city will only accept waste delivered to the city wastewater treatment facility via tank truck from a Jefferson County residential or commercial address. Payment of septic disposal fees must be made in advance at the city hall utility office, and proof of payment must be presented to the treatment facility attendant at the time of disposal. 
    Treatment facility attendants reserve the right to establish operational rules for hours available for disposal, types of waste accepted, and screening methods required. The city reserves the right to refuse acceptance of waste when not in the best interest of the city. 
    The charge for disposal of septic tank waste into the city's wastewater treatment facility will be set by resolution of the council. 
(i)  Collection of charges where owner has private water supply. Where sewage disposal fees are not paid in accordance with provisions outlined above, in those instances where the owner has his/her own private water supply, the city shall have a right to cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall have no right to connect his/her own private water supply until the sewage disposal fees shall have been paid in full. Any violation of this provision by reconnecting his/her private water supply, until such sewage disposal fees are paid in full, shall be considered a violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(j)  Miscellaneous charges and billing provisions. Sewer accounts are subject to provisions for billing; payment of charges; discontinuance of service for nonpayment or returned checks found in article III, section 90-163. 
(k)  Provision for limited sewer billing adjustment for extenuating circumstances. 
(1)  In the event of a significant spike in a customer's water usage which causes an increase in the corresponding sewer charge for a billing cycle, an account holder may apply for a sewer bill adjustment, which adjustment would be in the form of a recalculation of the account's sewer charge to equal the sewer charge based on an average of water used for the previous six billing cycles. Sewer billing adjustments are subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Only sewer charges applied and billed in accordance with the sewer rates in effect since the July, 2010 billing are eligible for adjustment. 
(b)  Water usage for the billing cycle applicable to adjustment must equal two times the average of the customer's previous six months' water usage. For accounts with fewer than six months of billing history, the water usage for the adjustment cycle applied for must equal two times the average of the available months' measured usage. 
(c)  An account which, during any of the prior six billing cycles, had a usage measurement of zero due to blocked access to a meter or due to meter tampering is not eligible for a sewer charge adjustment based on a sudden spike in measured water usage. 
(d)  A request for sewer charge adjustment must be approved by the city manager. 
(e)  No more than one sewer billing adjustment per account is allowed within a consecutive 12-month period. 
(2)  The city manager reserves the right to authorize a one-time annual adjustment per account to a single cycle's sewage charge based on verified information that a portion or all of measured water usage during that cycle was not disposed of in the sewer system. Additional adjustments to the same account during a 12-month period may not be authorized except by vote of the city council. 
(3)  In the event of an extreme weather situation or other unforeseen occurrence which may cause an anticipated increase in outdoor water use, the city council may elect, by resolution or by ordinance, to adjust the percentage of water usage allocated to a corresponding sewer charge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 8-6-2013; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 90-62. - Sewer system development charge. 
(a)  There is hereby established a sewer system development charge, the proceeds of which shall be deposited in a sewer system charge fund for the purpose of long and short-range planning, construction of additions to system plants and lines, payment of principal and interest when due on bonds sold to finance such improvements, and the construction of extensions and expansion of the sewer system of the city. The revenues from such sewer system development charges shall be used exclusively for the city sewer system and shall be used to defray the capital costs of construction and other directly related expenses and costs required solely due to growth and expansion of the system. The sewer system charge fund shall be maintained in a separate account and in a manner to ensure that the funds therein are used only for the lawful purposes described. No later than at the time a building permit is issued, the person requesting such building permit shall pay to the city, in addition to the tapping charge heretofore provided for, the sewer system development charge as set forth in full in this section; except that any person exempt from obtaining a building permit shall pay such sewer system development charge at the time the tap fee is paid. 
(b)  The sewer system development charge shall be based upon residential equivalents and set by resolution. 
(c)  The city council shall conduct a review of the sewer system development charge rate on a periodic basis, but at least once every five years. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, adopted June 3, 2010, renumbered former § 90-64 as § 90-62, as set out herein. 
Secs. 90-63-90-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, adopted June 3, 2010, amended former Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Section 3 of said ordinance provides that Div. 3, §§ 90-191-90-195, is readopted without change. Additionally, § 6 of Ord. No. 2010-05 provides that this ordinance shall become effective the beginning of the August, 2010 billing cycle.   Former Art. III, Divs. 1 and 2, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1957; Ord. of 2-7-1978; Ord. of 2-6-1979; Ord. of 11-18-1980; Ord. of 11-3-1981; Code 1982; Ord. of 7-6-1982; Ord. of 12-7-1982; Ord. of 1-3-1984; Ord. of 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 86-10, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 88-07, 10-4-1988; Ord. No. 89-05, 8-1-1989; Ord. No. 90-12, 9-4-1990; Ord. No. 92-06, 9-1-1992; Ord. No. 92-09, 10-6-1992; Ord. No. 95-06, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 2005-05, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 2005-10, 10-4-2005; Ord. No. 2006-09, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 2007-08, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 2008-02, 2-5-2008. 
State Law reference- Municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-121. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any member of the water department, fire department or other legally authorized person from repairing, servicing or otherwise handling any of the property of the water department whenever it may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-122. - Service authorized. 
    The water department is hereby authorized to supply water service to the citizens of the city and surrounding territory in accordance with the rates, rules and regulations provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-123. - Use of city property. 
    No material or apparatus of any nature whatsoever which is the property of the city shall be installed upon the premises of any person other than the premises of the city or the public areas thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-124. - Obstructing water department. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any way, hinder or obstruct the water department in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-125. - Unauthorized use of water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain, draw or otherwise use water from any public or private hydrant, tap or spigot without first obtaining permission from a lawful source and paying the charges required for the use of the water; or to turn any service cock or cocks for the purpose of obtaining water without such authority or to in any manner obtain water from any water pipe connected to the municipal water system of the city without first complying with the rules and regulations of the water department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-126. - Transporting water to other premises. 
    All water vended under the terms of the rules in this article shall be direct to the consumer only, and all applicants and customers of the water department by the acceptance of such water service agree that they will not under any circumstance or condition run any pipe or other conduit of any nature along, across, over or under any of the streets, roads, lanes or other highways or byways of the city for the purpose of transporting water on or onto any premises whatsoever other than the premises specifically and completely occupied by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-127. - Records; duties of city clerk. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep an accurate record of all persons using water supplied by the city and to apply minimum charges in accordance with the rates and charges established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-128. - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
    It is specifically understood and agreed that the applicant shall be responsible for all charges incurred by the applicant for water, regardless of the location of the service, and that the charges may, at the option of the city, be transferred to any active account of the applicant and, upon being so transferred, shall become a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-129. - Deposit required. 
(a)  Before rendering service of water or sewer, the city shall require a deposit as follows: 
(1)  Water and sewer. An initial deposit of $145.00. 
(2)  Water only. An initial deposit of $75.00 
(3)  Irrigation only. An initial deposit of $25.00. 
(4)  Sewer only. An initial deposit of $110.00. 
(5)  Unmetered non-residential sewer only accounts. An initial deposit of $225.00. 
    Deposits are not transferrable between persons without written permission of the deposit-holder. 
(b)  Refund; unclaimed deposits. The deposit shall be held by the city until final settlement of the consumer's account, including any outstanding garbage fees, and shall be applied to any unpaid balances for city services. Any unused balance of the deposit shall be refunded to the customer at his or her last known address contained in the city's records. Undeliverable refund deposits or deposit refunds returned by the post office shall be assessed an administrative fee of $7.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 90-130. - Connections generally. 
    Where the same shall be available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city limits may connect, or cause the plumbing of any building or buildings thereon to be connected, with the available municipal waterworks system of the city, and use the facilities of such system. All such connections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city council, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in such reasonable amount as the council may fix and determine. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-131. - Tapping permit and fee. 
(a)  The city will furnish taps of all sizes up to and including three-quarter-inch and the water mains upon application and granting of fee, together with the payment of the tap fee as per the schedule of fees promulgated by the city council from time to time. There shall be required a separate permit and tap fee for each residence or business, and all multiple taps or buildings connected in a line shall be only with the permission of the city council. In addition to the tap fee as above stated, there shall also be a charge not to exceed the actual cost of removing and replacing concrete or asphalt driveways, sidewalks or pathways. Such fees shall be paid in full before water service shall commence. 
(b)  All property owners connecting to the city water service will be required to have a cut-off valve located on the property owner's side of the meter. Properties not equipped with such cut-off valves will be charged a service fee for temporary turn-off for repairs or emergencies as outlined in subsection 90-162(g)(4). 
(c)  Connections outside city limits. 
(1)  Water service outside the city shall not be provided except under the provisions of article I, section 90-6. 
(2)  There shall be a tap-in fee charged for the installation of city water service provided to residents outside the existing city limits of the city, which fee shall be promulgated by the city council from time to time and posted at city hall. Additionally, residents outside the city limits shall be charged for the cost of the meter and meter box and any other additional required material. 
(3)  Such tap-in fee shall be payable in advance and at the time of applying to the clerk and city council for such service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-132. - Meters-Requirements; exceptions. 
(a)  Payment of costs. The water department shall, without cost, furnish and install meters of up to and including five-eighths by three-quarter inch on services within the city limits, but when a larger meter is required it must be paid for by the applicant or owner of the property served. 
(b)  Separate meter required for each owner, tenant and occupant. Effective June 1, 2010, no newly constructed premises or no existing premises intended to be subdivided into separate ownership or tenant units will be served through one meter, but each separate unit must be served through an individual meter and individual account for each and every owner, tenant or occupant. 
(c)  Exceptions; premises where single meter permitted. Premises where either furnished or unfurnished rooms are rented or leased may be supplied through one meter as may also hotels and boardinghouses and multi-building businesses where all such buildings are served under the direct control and use of the applicant. 
(d)  Waivers. The city manager may grant waivers for requirement of separate meters only after written petition by the property owner or owners affirming that re-plumbing of such premises is either impossible due to existing configuration of walls, buildings or plumbing facilities, or inaccessible service lines. Such waiver may only be issued upon written executed agreement, suitable for recording in the public records, indicating the property owner accepting ownership of the service line and agreeing to act as the single responsible party for the billing of the water usage and accompanying billing of sewer discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-133. - Refusal of service. 
    The city reserves the right to refuse water service to any applicant or to discontinue service to any applicant on whose premises a violation of the rules in this article is found to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-134. - Resale of water. 
    The city will not furnish water to any applicant for resale to others except where such resale is made after the water is removed from any piping or conduit connected to or under pressure from the water mains of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Secs. 90-135-90-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 90-161. - Reserved. 
Sec. 90-162. - Schedule of rates and charges. 
(a)  There is hereby levied the following minimum uniform schedule of rates and charges upon the customers or users of water supplied by the city: 
Premises Located 
Inside City Limits Premises Located 
Outside City Limits Base Rate: $7.65 $9.56 Additional Charge: $1.53 per 100 cu. ft. or 
fraction thereof $1.91 per 100 cu. ft. or 
fraction thereof  
(b)  Accounts with nonworking, blocked access or unreadable meters, or in emergency situations in which the city is unable to take actual meter readings, shall be billed according to estimated usage. 
(c)  Irrigation accounts secondary to residential accounts. Inside city irrigation accounts which are secondary to a residential plumbed structure on the same parcel will be billed a monthly rate of $4.50 plus $1.53 for every 100 cubic feet of water used. Outside city irrigation accounts which are secondary to a residential plumbed structure on the same parcel will be charged $5.62 plus $1.91 for every 100 cubic feet of water used. 
(d)  Wholesale water sales. Wholesale water customers will be charged a flat fee for each tank filling of $6.00 for up to 400 cubic feet. Payment shall be made at the time water is pumped, unless prior payment arrangements are made and agreed to by the city. 
(e)  Contract users. The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with large users of water service for setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such water service, which monthly rate or charge may be computed upon a different basis than set forth in the immediately proceeding paragraphs. Such contracts shall be entered into by means of resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
(f)  Reclaimed water customers. The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with purchasers of reclaimed water for setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such water. Such contracts shall be entered into by means of resolution duly adopted by the city council and with consultation by the Suwannee River Water Management District. 
(g)  The following are miscellaneous utility service charges: 
(1)  $25.00 for all service calls when city utility facilities are not at fault. 
(2)  $10.00 for transfer of utility account owner to a new location. 
(3)  $30.00 for temporary turn-on of water and/or sewer service for up to seven calendar days. No more than two units of temporary use at the same location will be allowed in a 30-day period. 
(4)  $10.00 for temporary turn-off and reconnect due to a repair or emergency at the request of the customer. 
(5)  $25.00 for illegal water turn-on, and a charge for parts and labor will be made for damage recovery to any components of the meter, meter box or city plumbing. 
(6)  $25.00 for dishonored checks or automatic electronic debit entries amounting to less than $100.00, and $35.00 for returned checks amounting to more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 2-4, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 90-163. - Billing; payment of charges; discontinuance of service for nonpayment or dishonored check. 
    Bills for water and/or sewer service shall be payable on the first day of each month; and if such monthly bill remains unpaid after the tenth day of such month, a standard late penalty of ten percent shall be imposed and added to said bill. If the tenth day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the late penalty will be applied after the next full business day. The city is not responsible for postal service delivery; therefore, late fees will not be waived for non-delivery of utility bills. Past due amounts not paid before the next billing will be included in the following month's billing, and standard late penalties, when applicable, will be applied to both current and past-due amounts. On the 20th day of the month, customers who have outstanding balances from combined current and prior billing exceeding $25.00 will have their water service discontinued without further notice. 
    Accounts paid by dishonored checks returned to the city by a financial institution will be charged in accordance with subsection 90-162(g)(6). Returned checks will render the account delinquent and subject to immediate disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-164. - Reconnection of service to delinquent user. 
    Should any water or sewer customer be disconnected and his/her water service terminated, the city shall not reconnect or restore the furnishing of water services to the delinquent user until such time as all delinquent accounts have been paid in full at the city hall, together with a reconnect fee of $20.00. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-3-2010) 
Sec. 90-165. - Water system development charge. 
(a)  There is hereby established a water systems charge fund for the purpose of long- and short-range planning, construction of additions to system plants and lines, payment of principal and interest when due on bonds sold to finance such improvements, and the making of extensions and expansion of the water systems of the city. The revenues received from such water systems charges shall be used exclusively for the city water system and shall be used to defray the capital costs of construction and other directly-related expenses and costs required solely due to growth and expansion of the system. Such funds shall be maintained in a separate account and in a manner to ensure that the funds are used only for the lawful purposes described. No later than at the time a building permit is issued, the person requesting such building permit shall pay to the city, in addition to the tapping charge heretofore provided for, the water system charge as set forth in full in this section; except that any person exempt from obtaining a building permit shall pay such water system charge at the time the tap fee is paid. 
(b)  The water impact fees charged pursuant to subsection (a), hereof, shall not apply to a second connection to the potable water distribution system when the second connection is solely for irrigation purposes. However, such installation shall be required to pay the water tap charge set forth in section 90-131. 
(c)  The water system development charge shall be based upon residential equivalents and set by resolution. 
(d)  The city council shall conduct a review of the water systems charge rate on a periodic basis, but at least once every five years. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, 6-3-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, adopted June 3, 2010, renumbered former § 90-167 as § 90-165, as set out herein. 
Secs. 90-166-90-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 90-191. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this division are to: 
(1)  Protect the public water main against actual or potential cross-connections, backflow and back-siphonage by isolating within the premises or private property contamination or pollution that has occurred or may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises or private property. 
(2)  Protect the water supply system within the premises or private property against actual or potential cross-connections, backflow and back-siphonage by requiring such air gaps, vacuum breakers, backflow preventers and special devices as required by this division or other applicable regulations. 
(3)  Eliminate cross-connections, backflow and back-siphonage on any other source of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever which may jeopardize the safety of the water supply or which may endanger the health and welfare of the general public. 
(4)  Establish a cross-connection, backflow and back-siphonage control program. 
(Code 1982, § 25-35; Ord. No. 88-05, art. I, § 1, 10-4-1988) 
Sec. 90-192. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel and, in no case, less than one inch. When an air gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air gap system, and an approved reduced pressure-principle device shall be installed in the bypass system. 
    Approved means accepted by the city superintendent or his/her designee as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this division or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources, such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than its intended source. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    City superintendent means the city superintendent or his/her designee in charge of the water department of the city invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of the cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Cross-connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water service connection between a public potable water distribution system and a customer's water distribution system which is cross-connected to a contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system or with a potentially contaminated supply or auxiliary water system constitutes one type of cross-connection. Other types of cross-connections include connectors, such as swing connections; removable sections; four-way valves; spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices; sliding multiport tube; solid connections; etc. 
    Cross-connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross-connection. 
    Cross-connection, controlled, means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Double check valve means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline maintenance and testing. 
    Hazard, degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health, means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or, in the judgment of the city superintendent or his/her designee, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system. 
    Hazard, plumbing, means a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system which would constitute an actual or potential threat to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
    Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two independently operating, approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
    Water, potable, means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
    Water purveyor means the owner or operator of the public potable water system supplying an approved water supply to the public. As used herein, the terms "water purveyor" and "city water department" may be used synonymously. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. "Service connection" shall also include the water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
    Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Code 1982, § 25-37; Ord. No. 88-05, art. I, § 3, 10-4-1988) 
Sec. 90-193. - System components. 
(a)  Water system. The water system shall be considered to be made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system. 
(b)  Utility system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
(c)  Source. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of the water to the distribution system. 
(d)  Distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(e)  Customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Code 1982, § 25-38; Ord. No. 88-05, art. I, § 4, 10-4-1988) 
Sec. 90-194. - General requirements; inspections. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this division. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this division is not installed, tested and maintained; or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed; or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(b)  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. Water service may be discontinued after reasonable notice to the consumer if a violation of this division exists on the premises, and such other precautionary measures may be taken as are deemed necessary to eliminate any danger to the potable water. Water service shall not be restored until the danger has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  An approved backflow prevention device shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the superintendent or his/her designee, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(d)  The type of protection device required under subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (c)(1) of this section, and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure-principal backflow prevention device. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure-principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure-principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete inplant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle back-flow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
(e)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the city superintendent or his/her designee. The term "approved backflow prevention device" shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Waterworks Association entitled: AWWA C506-69 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double-Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices; as well as the standards set forth by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by Specifications of Backflow Devices, #69-2, dated March 1969, or the most current issue. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances when the city superintendent or his/her designee deems the hazard to be great enough, he/she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative or by a certified tester approved by the city superintendent or his/her designee. It shall be the duty of the city superintendent or his/her designee to see that these timely tests are made. The customer-user shall notify the city superintendent or his/her designee in advance when the tests are to be undertaken, so that he/she or his/her representative may witness the tests if it is so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer user whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and copies sent to the water department office of the city clerk. 
(g)  All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection (f) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules, so long as the city superintendent is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more then minimum maintenance, or when the city superintendent or his/her designee finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Nothing herein shall relieve the consumer of the responsibility for conducting, or causing to be conducted, periodic surveys of water use practices on his/her premises to determine where there are actual or potential cross-connections in the consumer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants could flow back into a public water system or potable consumer's water system. 
(Code 1982, § 25-39; Ord. No. 88-05, art. I, § 5, 10-4-1989) 
Sec. 90-195. - Notice to install backflow prevention device. 
(a)  The city superintendent or his/her designee shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said city superintendent or his/her designee, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety of the water system, the city superintendent or his/her designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his/her own expense; and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device or devices immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. 
(b)  Backflow preventers as specified by the city shall be required on the following types of facilities: 
(1)  Beverage bottling plants; 
(2)  Carwashes; 
(3)  Chemical plants; 
(4)  High-rise buildings; 
(5)  Canneries, packinghouses and reduction plants; 
(6)  Dairies; 
(7)  Film and other laboratories; 
(8)  Commercial laundries and dyeworks (excluding coin laundries); 
(9)  Wastewater facilities; 
(10)  Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants; 
(11)  Oil and gas production, storage and transmission facilities; 
(12)  Plating plants and facilities; 
(13)  Radioactive materials, research, production and utilization plants; 
(14)  Restricted, classified and other facilities closed to inspection; 
(15)  Steam-generating facilities; 
(16)  Schools and colleges with laboratories; 
(17)  Sand and gravel plants; 
(18)  Hospitals, medical buildings, doctors' offices, veterinarians' offices, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes and clinics; 
(19)  Meat-packing plants or related facilities; 
(20)  Firefighting systems, including reservoirs which are subject to contamination with antifreeze solutions, foamite or other chemicals or compounds used in fighting fires; 
(21)  Auxiliary water systems; 
(22)  Irrigation systems. 
Backflow preventers may be required by the city superintendent or his/her designee for other facilities not listed, if deemed necessary, to protect the water system from possible contamination. 
(Code 1982, § 25-36; Ord. No. 88-05, art. I, § 2, 10-4-1988) 
DIVISION 4. - YEAR-ROUND WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES AND WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-196. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this division to protect the water resources of the City of Monticello from inefficient use at all times and overutilization during periods of water shortage by assisting the Suwannee River Water Management District in the implementation of its Year-round Water Conservation Measures and Water Shortage Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-197. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    District is the Suwannee River Water Management District. 
    Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial water courses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage condition is when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
    Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under subsection 40B-21.621, Florida Administrative Code, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply, or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-198. - Application of provisions of this division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons using the water resource for lawn irrigation, landscape irrigation, and related outdoor water uses such as car washing within the geographical areas determined by the district, whether from public or privately-owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This division shall not apply to persons using saltwater. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-199. - Amendments to year-round water conservation measures water shortage plan. 
    All portions of chapter 40D-21B, Florida Administrative Code dealing with lawn irrigation, landscape irrigation, and related outdoor water use, as each may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference as a part of the Code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-200. - Applicability of year-round water conservation measures. 
    In the absence of a declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district, all lawn irrigation, landscape irrigation and related outdoor water conservation measures adopted by the district applicable to the city, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this division. Any violation of the provisions of chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-201. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
    Upon declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district, all lawn irrigation, landscape irrigation and related outdoor water shortage restrictions adopted by the district applicable to the city, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this division. Any violation of the provisions of chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-202. - Enforcement. 
    Every police officer or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area governed by this division shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this division to agencies and departments of the city, in accordance with state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-203. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
First violation Verbal warning Second violation Formal warning Third violation $25.00 Fine Fourth violation $50.00 Fine Fifth and subsequent violations Fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days  
    Each day in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. When a water shortage declaration is not in effect, and during the initial stages of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one written warning. The city, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained herein, may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 90-204. - Water users to accept provisions of division. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this division. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 11-2-2015) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1957 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1957 Code, as updated through July 2, 1975, which are included herein. Sections of the 1957 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, see the table immediately following this table. 
1957 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-2, 1-3 1-2, 1-3 1-4, 1-5 1-8, 1-9 1-6 1-5 2-7 6-2 2-8 6-1 3-1 10-1 3-7, 3-8 10-4, 10-5 3-12 14-33 3-13 14-31 3-14 10-3 3-15 10-2 4-2-4-5 18-4 4-6 18-1 4-7-4-9 18-2 4-15-4-17 18-3 4-18 18-32 4-19 18-4 18-33 5-2 86-181 5-10 86-182 6-3 22-3 6-4 22-32 6-7 22-2 6-18 42-1 7-1 30-1 7-2 30-4 7-4 30-51 7-5.1 30-52 7-6 30-53 7-10 30-5 7-12 30-3 7-13 30-2 8-1-8-3 26-101 8-4 26-161 8-5 26-165 8-6 26-167 8-9 26-162 8-10 26-103 8-11 26-131-26-134 8-12 26-102 9-2 34-3 9-4 34-2 9-8, 9-9 34-6, 34-7 9-10 34-1 10-1, 10-2 70-2 10-2, 10-3 70-3 10-4 70-2 10-5 70-6 10-6, 10-7 70-4 10-8 70-7 10-9 70-5 10-10 70-66 10-11, 10-12 70-62 10-12 70-63 10-13 70-65, 70-66 10-14 70-1 10-15 70-61 11-4.1 46-51, 46-52 11-4.2 46-53 11-5 38-36 11-6, 11-7 38-39, 38-40 11-8 38-38 11-9 38-35 11-10-11-12 38-37 11-13 38-31 38-34 11-14, 11-15 38-32, 38-33 11-17(1)-(4) 22-31 11-18-11-21 22-33 11-22 22-34 12-1 26-31 12-3 26-39 12-4 26-32 12-4, 12-5 26-41 12-6 26-38 12-7 26-37 12-8 26-40 12-9 26-33, 26-34 12-10 26-35 12-11 26-164 12-12 26-163 12-19-12-21 26-36 12-23 26-36 12-24 26-221 12-25 26-226 12-26 26-225 12-27 26-224 12-28 26-228 12-29 26-227 12-30 26-229 12-31 26-223 12-32 26-228 12-33 26-42 26-222 12-34 26-44 13-4, 13-5 58-2 13-7 58-2 13-8 86-211 13-12 58-3 13-14 58-8 13-15 58-5 13-21 26-191, 26-192 13-22 26-193 13-23, 13-24 14-34, 14-35 13-26 14-36 13-27 14-32 13-32 86-8 13-37 74-3 13-38 58-1 13-40 58-4 13-42, 13-43 58-7 13-46 58-7 13-47, 13-48 58-6, 58-7 14-1(a)-(d) 62-1 14-2 62-3 14-3, 14-4 62-31, 62-32 14-4 62-35 14-5 62-5, 62-6 14-6 62-2 14-9, 14-10 62-1 14-11 62-33 14-12 26-71 14-13 26-73 14-14 26-72 14-15, 14-16 26-74, 26-75 15-1 2-81 15-2 2-88 15-3 2-82 15-4 2-87 15-5 2-86 15-6 2-85 15-7, 15-8 2-83, 2-84 15-18, 15-19 2-51, 2-52 15-19 2-53 16-1-16-3 74-31-74-33 16-4 74-2 18-1 1-2 18-2 86-2 86-101 18-4, 18-5 86-3, 86-4 18-7 86-7 18-8 86-6 18-9 86-211 18-10 86-5 18-12 86-38 18-13-18-15 86-31-86-33 18-15 86-34, 86-35 18-30 86-36 18-31 86-61-86-63 86-65 18-34 86-64 18-41 86-37 18-52 86-103 18-56 86-102 18-60 86-143, 86-144 18-61, 18-62 86-141, 86-142 18-64 86-145, 86-146 18-68, 18-69 86-147, 86-148 18-79 86-150 18-83 86-153 18-84 86-149 19-1 90-124 19-3 90-121 19-4 90-125 19-5 90-122 19-6, 19-7 90-132, 90-133 19-9 90-7 19-10 90-163, 90-164 19-11 90-165 19-12 90-162 19-12.1 90-127 19-13 90-128 19-14 90-161 19-15 90-130 19-16 90-129 19-17 90-166 19-18 90-126 19-19 90-134-90-137 19-20 90-123  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through May 7, 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 1-7-1-11 1-8-1-12 3-3 6-1 3-6, 3-7 6-2, 6-3 3-8 6-3 4-1 10-1 4-6 10-2 4-9-4-11 10-3 4-12 10-4 4-14-4-16 10-5 4-19 10-6 5-1, 5-2 18-32, 18-33 5-3 18-1 5-4-5-6 18-2 5-7-5-9 18-3 5-21-5-25 18-4 5-41 18-61 5-42(a) 18-5 
18-62 5-42(b), (c) 18-5 5-42(e)-(h) 18-62 5-43, 5-44 18-63, 18-64 5-45-5-47 18-64-18-66 5-48 18-94 5-49 18-67 5-61 18-91 5-62 18-93 5-63 18-92 6-1 22-3 6-17, 6-18 22-1, 22-2 6-31, 6-32 22-31, 22-32 6-33-6-36 22-33 6-37 22-34 7-1-7-3 30-1-30-3 7-5, 7-6 30-4, 30-5 7-28 30-51 7-31, 7-32 30-52, 30-53 8-1 34-1 8-3 34-2 8-6-8-8 34-3-34-5 8-10, 8-11 34-6, 34-7 9-1 42-1 9-16-9-18 42-81-42-83 9-23 42-84 9-25 42-85 9-29 42-86 9-41-9-43 42-51 9-44-9-50 42-52-42-58 10-3-10-5 46-51-46-53 11-16-11-23 22-61-22-68 11-31-11-40 50-31-50-40 12-1-12-5 26-31-26-35 12-6-12-9 26-36 12-10, 12-11 26-37, 26-38 12-12-12-14 26-39 12-15, 12-16 26-40, 26-41 12-31 26-42 12-32 26-44 12-46-12-53 26-221-26-228 12-54, 12-55 26-228, 26-229 12-71-12-73 26-191-26-193 12-86-12-90 26-71-26-75 12-101-12-103 26-101-26-103 12-111-12-114 26-131-26-134 12-126-12-130 26-161-26-165 12-132 26-167 14-2-14-4 86-1-86-3 14-6-14-10 86-4-86-8 14-26-14-28 86-101-86-103 14-41-14-48 86-31-86-38 14-61-14-65 86-61-86-65 14-76-14-85 86-141-86-150 14-86, 14-87 86-152, 86-153 14-101 86-181 14-104 86-182 14-116 86-211 15-1-15-6 38-31-38-36 15-7-15-9 38-37 15-10, 15-11 38-38 15-12, 15-13 38-39, 38-40 16-1 58-1 16-2-16-4 58-2 16-5-16-8 58-3-58-6 16-9-16-12 58-7 16-14-16-16 58-8-58-10 17-1-17-3 62-1-62-3 17-4-17-7 62-3-62-6 17-19-17-23 62-31-62-35 18-16-18-20 2-51-2-55 18-31-18-33 2-81-2-83 18-35-18-38 2-85-2-88 19-16-19-20 66-31-66-35 19-21-19-23 66-36 19-24, 19-25 66-37 19-26-19-32 66-38-66-44 19-33-19-43 66-44-66-54 19-55-19-62 66-81-66-88 19-71-19-80 66-112-66-121 19-81 66-111 20-1-20-4 14-31-14-34 20-6, 20-7 14-35, 14-36 21-1 90-131 21-2 90-32 21-3 90-1 21-4 90-33 21-5 90-2 21-6 90-34 21-7 90-3 21-8-21-10 90-35-90-37 21-11 90-4 21-12 90-38 21-13 90-31 21-14 90-39 21-21-21-23 90-61-90-63 21-24, 21-25 90-5, 90-6 22-1 70-1 22-2-22-5 70-2 22-6, 22-7 70-3 22-8-22-11 70-4 22-12-22-14 70-5-70-7 22-26-22-28 70-31-70-33 22-29-22-33 70-34 22-34-22-36 70-35-70-37 22-51-22-56 70-61-70-66 23-1 74-2 23-5-23-7 74-31-74-33 23-8 74-3 24-17, 24-18 78-31 24-19, 24-20 78-32 24-36-24-42 78-61-78-67 25-1-25-7 90-121-90-127 25-8 90-7 25-9-25-11 90-128-90-130 25-12, 25-13 90-132, 90-133 25-15-25-17 90-134 25-18-25-20 90-135-90-137 25-21, 25-22 90-161, 90-162 25-23, 25-24 90-8 25-25-25-28 90-163-90-166 25-35 90-191 25-36 90-195 25-37-25-39 90-192-90-194  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through May 7, 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede May 7, 1991, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since May 7, 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  7- 2-1974(Ord.) 1 70-62, 70-63  5- 5-1976(Ord.) 1, 2 78-32  7- 6-1976(Ord.) 1 66-31, 66-32 2 66-33 3 66-35 66-43 66-54 4 66-34 66-52, 66-53 5 66-36 6 66-41 7 66-40 8 66-46 9, 10 66-48, 66-49 11 66-45 12 66-50 13 66-42 14 66-44 15 66-37, 66-38 16 66-39 17 66-51 19 66-47 11- 2-1976(Ord.) 1, 2 78-31 12- 7-1976(Ord.) 70-4  4- 5-1977(Ord.) 1 90-8  2- 7-1978(Ord.) 22-62-22-68 90-164 I, II 66-82, 66-83 II 66-84, 66-85 III-V 66-86-66-88 VII 66-81  2- 6-1979(Ord.) 1 70-62, 70-63 3 90-162  8-21-1979(Ord.) 26-42  3- 4-1980(Ord.) 70-31-70-37  5- 6-1980(Ord.) 10-5 11- 4-1980(Ord.) 1, 2 42-81, 42-82 3 42-51, 42-52 4-7 42-53-42-56 7 42-57 12 42-58 13 42-54 14 42-83 15 42-86 16 42-84 20 42-85 11-18-1980(Ord.) 1 70-62-70-64 3 90-162 11- 3-1981(Ord.) 1 90-132  7- 6-1982(Ord.) 90-132 12- 7-1982(Ord.) 70-62 90-162  1- 3-1984(Ord.) 90-130  1- 2-1985(Ord.) 1-10 50-31-50-40  1- 8-1985(Ord.) 1 1-12  8- 6-1985(Ord.) 1 90-131 2 90-32 3 90-1 4 90-33 5A 90-162 5B 90-61 5C 90-61 6 90-2 7 90-34 8 90-3 9-11 90-35-90-37 12 90-4 13, 14 90-62, 90-63 15 90-38 16, 17 90-5, 90-6 18 90-31 12-18-1985(Ord.) 2 50-31  1- 7-1986(Ord.) 1 18-61 2 18-5 18-62 3-5 18-64-18-66 6 18-91 7, 8 18-93, 18-94 9 18-67 14, 15 18-63, 18-64 16 18-92 86-08  5- 6-1986 1-7 78-61-78-67 86-10  7- 1-1986 90-130 86-11  8- 5-1986 1 10-6 86-12  1- 6-1987 1-10 66-112-66-121 11 66-111 87-01  2- 3-1987 78-61 78-63, 78-64 87-02  4- 7-1987 10-5 88-02  3- 1-1988 1-3 2-54 88-04  3- 1-1988 10-5 88-03  4- 5-1988 1-3 2-55 88-05 10- 4-1988 art. I, § 1 90-191 art. I, § 2 90-195 art. I, § 3, 90-192, 90-193 art. I, § 4 88-06 10- 4-1988 90-39 88-07 10- 4-1988 90-132 89-01  1- 3-1989 1 78-32 89-02  1- 3-1989 1 78-31 89-05  8- 1-1989 90-162 89-07 10- 3-1989 90-7 88-05 10- 4-1989 art. I, § 5 90-194 89-08 11- 7-1989 1, 2 66-87 90-06  4- 3-1990 34-4 90-10  6- 5-1990 22-101-22-110 90-11  8- 7-1990 90-61, 90-62 90-13  8- 7-1990 2.01 54-4 2.03 54-8 3.08 54-4 01.01-01.03 54-1-54-3 02.02 54-7 02.04 54-9 02.05.01, 02.05.02 54-31, 54-32 02.05.03-02.05.10 54-34-54-41 03.01-03.04 54-121-54-124 03.05 54-151 03.05.01-03.05.07 54-152-54-158 03.05.08, 03.05.09 54-160, 54-161 03.06 54-127 03.07.01, 03.07.02 54-126 03.07.03(A) 54-125 04.01-04.13 54-191-54-203 05.01 54-71 05.02-05.08 54-73-54-79 06.01-06.10 54-241-54-250 07.01 54-301-54-305 07.02.01-07.02.06 54-332-54-337 07.02.07 54-331 07.03.01, 07.03.02 54-362, 54-363 07.03.03 54-361 07.04.01-07.04.04 54-392-54-395 07.04.05 54-391 08.01 54-423 08.02.01-08.02.08 54-451-54-458 08.04-08.06 54-424-54-426 08.07, 08.08 54-428, 54-429 08.09 54-422 09.01-09.12 54-491-54-502 10.01-10.04 54-553-54-556 10.05 54-552 10.06-10.10 54-557-54-561 10.11 54-551 11.01 54-591 11.02-11.07 54-593-54-598 11.08.02- 
11.08.07 54-626-54-631 11.08.01(A)- 
11.08.01(E) 54-621-54-625 11.09 54-599 11.10 54-592 12.01-12.04 54-661-54-664 90-12  9- 4-1990 90-130 90-15  9-18-1990 1 50-31 50-33-50-36 91-04  5- 7-1991 58-9 91-05  5- 7-1991 58-10 92-06  9- 1-1992 90-162 90-165 92-07  9- 1-1992 90-61, 90-62 92-08  9- 1-1992 70-62 92-09 10- 6-1992 90-130 93-01  1- 5-1993 1-4 86-151 93-04  5- 4-1993 6-61 22-4 93-05  7- 6-1993 2-4 30-31-30-33 93-09 12- 7-1993 38-40 94-01  2- 1-1994 90-61 94-03  8- 2-1994 34-4 94-05 12- 6-1994 54-158 95-02  2- 7-1995 54-156 95-03  4- 4-1995 1 2-3 95-04  6- 6-1995 art. 1-art. 4 54-301-54-304 art. 5 54-305 95-06 10- 8-1995 90-61 95-7 10- 9-1995 54-152 95-06 10- 9-1995 90-162 96-01  2- 4-1996 54-454 96-02  2- 4-1996 54-153 96-05  6- 4-1996 54-454 96-06  9- 5-1996 16-17 58-12 97-1  1- 7-1997 54-124 97-2  1- 7-1997 54-158 98-02  7- 7-1998 1, 2 54-153, 54-154 98-05  7- 7-1998 26-44 98-06  7- 7-1998 2-53 98-07  7- 7-1998 5-10 18-31 5-26 18-68 99-02  7- 6-1999 34-4 34-6, 34-7 8-8 34-5 99-03 12- 7-1999 15-14-15-20 38-71-38-77 2000-03  3- 7-2000 2-55 2000-04  8- 1-2000 1-13 2000-06  8- 1-2000 15-14 58-11 2000-07  9- 5-2000 1 54-152 2000-08  9- 5-2000 1 70-62 2000-10 11- 7-2000 70-63 2001-03  7- 3-2001 54-159 2001-06 11- 6-2001 2(01.01)- 
2(01.03) 54-1-54-3 2(02.01) 54-4 2(02.02)-2(02.04) 54-7-54-9 2(02.05.01) 54-31 2(02.05.02) 54-32 2(02.05.02(A)- 
(H)) 54-33 2(02.05.03)- 
2(02.05.10) 54-34-54-41 2(03.01)- 
2(03.04) 54-121-54-124 2(03.05) 54-151 2(03.05.01)- 
2(03.05.10) 54-152-54-161 2(03.06) 54-127 2(03.07.01), 
2(03.07.02) 54-126 2(03.07.03(A)) 54-125 2(03.08) 54-4 2(04.01)- 
2(04.13) 54-191-54-203 2(05.01(A)) 54-72 2(05.01) 54-71 2(05.02)- 
2(05.08) 54-73-54-79 2(06.01)- 
2(06.10) 54-241-54-250 2(07.02.01)- 
2(07.02.06) 54-332-54-337 2(07.02.07) 54-331 2(07.03.01), 
2(07.03.02) 54-362, 54-363 2(07.03.03) 54-361 2(07.04.01)- 
2(07.04.04) 54-392-54-395 2(07.04.06) 54-391 2(08.01) 54-423 2(08.02.01)- 
2(08.02.08) 54-451-54-458 2(08.04)- 
2(08.09) 54-424-54-429 2(08.10) 54-422 2(08.11) 54-421 2(09.01)- 
2(09.12) 54-491-54-502 2(09.13) 54-521 2(09.13.01), 
2(09.13.02) 54-522, 54-523 2(10.01)-2(10.04) 54-553-54-556 2(10.05) 54-552 2(10.06)- 
2(10.10) 54-557-54-561 2(10.11) 54-551 2(11.01) 54-591 2(11.02)- 
2(11.07) 54-593-54-598 2(11.08.01(A))- 
2(11.08.01(E)) 54-621-54-625 2(11.08.02)- 
2(11.08.07) 54-626-54-631 2(11.09) 54-599 2(11.10) 54-592 2(12.01)- 
2(12.04) 54-661-54-664 2(12.04.02) 54-665 2(13.01)- 
2(13.03) 54-691-54-693 2(14.01)- 
2(14.05) 54-721-54-725 2(15.01), 
2(15.02) 54-5, 54-6 2002-01  7- 2-2002 1 54-156 2002-02 10- 1-2002 1, 2 26-251, 26-252 3, 4 26-255, 26-256 5 26-254 7 26-253 2003-04  5- 6-2003 1 54-154 2003-05  6- 3-2003 1-33 82-31-82-63 2003-06 10- 7-2003 1 10-4 2003-08 10- 7-2003 1 70-62, 70-63 2004-03  5- 4-2004 1 2-54 2004-04  9- 7-2004 1(12-4) 26-32 2004-05  9- 7-2004 1(07.01.10) 54-303 2004-06  9- 7-2004 1(12-17) 26-43 2004-07 11- 2-2004 1(03.05) 54-156 2005-02  1- 4-2005 1(02.05.11) 54-42 2(05.06) 54-77 3(06.11) 54-251 4(11.09.07) 54-599 2005-04  5- 3-2005 1, 2 82-91, 82-92 2005-05  6- 7-2005 1 90-162 2005-07 10- 4-2005 1       Added 54-155(c)(1) 2005-11 10- 4-2005 1 90-61 2005-14 11- 1-2005 adopt. ord. 2005-10 10- 4-2005 1 90-138 2006-03  5- 2-2006 90-167 2006-04  5- 2-2006 1       Rpld 66-111-66-121 2       Added 54-751-54-761 2006-07  6- 6-2006 1 54-600 2006-09 10- 3-2006 1       Rpld 90-161 2 90-162 2006-10 10- 3-2006 1 90-61 2006-12 10- 3-2006 1 54-421 54-424(3), (4)g. 54-426(a) 2006-13 11-20-2006 1       Added 90-164 2007-03  6-12-2007 1 54-71-54-80 2007-04  6-12-2007 1 54-596 2007-06  6- 5-2007 1 54-156(c) 2007-07  6-12-2007 1 90-61 2007-08  6-12-2007 1 90-162 2008-01  1- 8-2008 1       Added 58-13 2008-02  2- 5-2008 1       Added 90-40 2 90-130 2008-03  4- 1-2008 1 54-502(7) 2008-05 12- 2-2008 1       Added 86-221-86-226 2009-01  3- 3-2009 1 54-155(e) 2 54-160 2009-03 10- 6-2009 1       Added 58-14 2009-04 11- 3-2009 1       Added 54-252 2009-06 12- 1-2009 1 38-31-38-38       Added 38-51-38-59 2       Rnbd Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 2       as Ch. 38, Art. III 2009-07 12- 1-2009 1 26-31-26-42 2 26-73, 26-74 3 26-103 4 26-161-26-167 26-161-26-167 5 26-222-26-229 2010-03  6- 3-2010 1       Rpld 90-1-90-8       Added 90-1-90-8 2010-04  6- 3-2010 1 90-31-90-40       Added 90-41       Rpld 90-61-90-63       Added 90-61 2       Rnbd 90-64       as 90-62 2010-05  6- 3-2010 1       Rpld 90-121-90-137, 90-162-90-167       Added 90-121-90-134, 90-162-90-164 2       Rnbd 90-167       as 90-165 2010-06  6- 3-2010 1       Rpld 70-1-70-7, 70-31-70-37, 70-61-70-66       Added 70-1-70-10, 70-31-70-34, 70-61-70-66 2010-08 10- 5-2010 1       Added 90-61(k) 2010-09 10- 5-2010 1       Added 90-165(b) 2       Rnbd 90-165(b)-(d)       as 90-165(c)-(e) 2010-10 10- 5-2010 1 54-458(d)(1)-(9) 2010-11 10- 5-2010 1 54-42 2010-12 11- 1-2010 1 54-78(a)-(c) 2010-13 12- 7-2010 1 54-126 2011-04  9- 6-2011 1 58-5(tit.) 2012-03  7- 3-2012 1 54-126 2012-05 10- 2-2012 1 54-559(b)(1) 2013-01  2- 5-2013 1 54-202 2013-02  2- 5-2013 1       Rpld 54-198(a)(6)       Rnbd 54-198(a)(7)       as 54-198(a)(6) 2013-04  6- 4-2013 1       Added 58-15 2013-05  8- 6-2013 1 10-5 2013-06  8- 6-2013 1 90-61(h) 2013-09  9- 3-2013 1 70-62 2013-10  9- 3-2013 1 90-62(b), (c) 2013-11  9- 3-2013 1 90-165(c), (d) 2013-12 10- 1-2013 1       Dltd 54-421-54-429       Dltd 54-451-54-458       Added 54-421-54-458 2013-13 11- 5-2013 1 54-73(1) 2013-14  1- 7-2014 2 54-301-54-305       Added 54-306-54-314 3       Added 22-5-22-7 2014-01  5- 6-2014 1       Dltd 18-61-18-68       Dltd 18-91-18-94       Added 18-61-18-65       Added 18-91, 18-92 2014-02  6- 3-2014 1 54-152(c)(2) 2014-03  9- 2-2014 1 90-129(a) 2-4 90-162 2014-04  9- 2-2014 1 90-61(a), (b) 2015-01  3- 3-2015 1 90-6 2015-02  2- 3-2015 1 10-5 2015-04 11- 2-2015 1       Added 90-196-90-204 2015-05 12- 1-2015 2 18-63(b) 3 18-65 2016-01 10- 4-2016 1 58-2(a) 2 74-2 2017-01  5- 2-2017 1 2-55(a)(2) 2       Added 2-55(d) 3       Added 2-55(e) 2018-01  1- 9-2018 1 90-162(a)-(d) 2018-02  1- 9-2018 1 90-61(a), (b) 2018-03  1- 9-2018 1 70-62 2018-06  4- 3-2018 1       Added 10-6(d) 2018-07  6- 5-2018 1 54-421 2       Added 54-430  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 1-2 34.191 1-4 56.011 1-4 ch. 60 22-63, 22-64 60.05 18-3 Ch. 38, Art. II 86-61 86-65 60.06 18-3 Ch. 38, Art. II 86-61 86-65 64.071 26-72 ch. 83 Ch. 22, Art. III 83.43 22-61 83.51 22-65-22-68 83.54 et seq. 22-63, 22-64 85.031 26-72 ch. 97 et seq. 34-1 97.041 Char. § 39 100.011 34-5 101.21 Char. § 39 101.75 34-5 Char. § 39 101.031 Char. § 39 101.041 Char. § 39 101.635 Char. § 39 102.012 34-5 104.15 34-1 112.61 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 112.65 2-53 161.055 54-304 ch. 162 54-33 58-15 162.06 82-57 162.09 38-36 162.13 38-36 162.22 26-41 82-56 ch. 163 54-2 54-4 54-126 163.295 Ch. 22 163.330 et seq. Ch. 66 163.2511 et seq. 54-663 163.3161 et seq. 66-31 66-44 66-46 163.3174 66-31 66-33 66-37 66-46 66-48, 66-49 163.3174(5) 66-40 163.3177 66-47 163.3180(2)(c) 54-665 163.3181 66-44 163.3215 54-304 163.3220-163.3243 54-664, 54-665 ch. 166 Ch. 2 Char. § 6 Char. § 10 Char. § 18 Char. § 20-Char. § 22 Char. § 36-Char. § 41 166.21(5) Char. § 47 166.021 Char. § 19 166.032 Char. § 39 166.141 Char. § 38 166.201 et seq. Char. § 18 Char. § 26 166.231 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. III 166.0415 82-56 166.0415(7) 38-36 166.0425 Ch. 6 ch. 170 Ch. 74 170.201 38-31 ch. 171 Char. § 54 171.022 Char. § 54 ch. 173 38-32 Char. § 47 ch. 175 2-55 175.091 2-55 175.101 78-31 175.351(6) 2-55 ch. 177 54-598 177.031(16) 54-4 ch. 180 Ch. 70 Ch. 74 Ch. 90, Art. II, Ch. 90, Art. III 180.19 90-6 ch. 185 2-54 185.08 78-32 ch. 192 et seq. Char. § 26 Ch. 78 192.053 Char. § 47 193.116 Char. § 18 Char. § 40 196.199(8)(b) 26-37 ch. 197 38-32 197.056 Char. § 47 197.106 26-72 197.3632 38-59 197.3632(9) 38-59 202.19 78-62 205.042, 205.043 26-31, 26-32 205.043 26-38 26-39 205.053 26-32-26-34 206.625 Ch. 74 231.09 Ch. 42 ch. 286 54-425 ch. 316 et seq. Ch. 86 316.27 58-12 316.008 Ch. 86 86-148 316.008(1)(i) 86-102 316.008(1)(b) Ch. 86, Art. III 86-2, 86-3 316.008(1)(c) 86-62 316.008(1)(d) 86-103 316.008(1)(g) 86-4 86-141 316.008(1)(h) 86-4 316.008(1)(p) 86-37 316.008(1)(p), (s) 86-5 316.008(1)(u) 86-211 316.072 Ch. 42 316.074 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. III 316.081 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II 316.130 86-211 316.183 et seq. 86-34 316.189 86-33 316.193 86-32 316.194 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. IV 316.195 86-143 316.212 86-224 316.212(8) 86-226 316.271 58-15 316.550 86-144 316.0755 Ch. 86, Art. VI 316.1995 86-182 316.2065 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. V 316.2225 86-36 ch. 318 86-226 320.01 54-310 320.8249 54-314 322.03 86-31 322.05 86-32 336.045 Ch. 74 365.171 Ch. 42 366.02 54-304 373.036 54-304 ch. 380 54-664 381.0065 54-304 381.031 22-31 382.007 30-1 ch. 386 18-3 Ch. 38, Art. II 386.01 38-39 70-35 386.01 et seq. 70-4 386.02 38-40 386.041 38-33 38-36-38-38 ch. 387 Ch. 90, Art. II ch. 388 38-37 388.161 38-37 393.063 50-32 402.302(7) 54-4 403.011 et seq. 38-38 403.061(24) 38-37 403.085 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. II 403.091 38-38 403.182 Ch. 38, Art. II 403.413 38-35 70-7 403.702 et seq. Ch. 70 419.001(1)(a) 54-4 ch. 442 54-363 468.381 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III 468.388(7), (8) 26-74 469.05 22-32 475.01 Ch. 26, Art. VI 26-221 475.15 26-227 475.181 26-224 479.11 6-2 479.15 Ch. 6 479.155 Ch. 6 481.303(6) 66-87 ch. 489 Ch. 22 489.131 22-2 497.309 30-5 497.345(2) Ch. 30 ch. 500 Ch. 46, Art. II 509.013 54-152 ch. 534 Ch. 18 553.73 1-13 Ch. 22 553.73(5) 22-5 54-307 553.73(10)(k) 54-304 553.80 Ch. 22 ch. 561 et seq. Ch. 10 561.01 10-1 562.45 10-4 562.47(2) 10-3 570.36 46-51 582.45 10-5 ch. 585 Ch. 18 ch. 588 Ch. 18 588.12 et seq. 18-4 588.16-588.18 18-4 588.24 18-4 604.50 54-304 633.025(1) 42-84 ch. 650 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 3 2-81 650.02 2-81 650.05(1) 2-82 650.05(1)(e) 2-85 650.05(3)(a), 
650.05(3)(b) 2-86, 2-87 689.13 Ch. 30 705.103 38-73 ch. 713 70-4 713.78 26-72 715.041 26-191 ch. 767 Ch. 18, Art. III 767.04 18-32 18-66 775.01 10-5 775.01 et seq. 14-35 38-40 Ch. 58 58-12 775.08 et seq. 70-35 775.15 18-64 775.15(2)(d) 78-67 775.082 1-13 10-5 58-15 775.082 et seq. 26-42 775.083 1-13 10-5 58-15 790.01, 790.02 58-4 790.19 58-3 ch. 791 Ch. 42, Art. III ch. 806 Ch. 42 806.13 Ch. 58 ch. 817 Ch. 6 817.32, 
817.33 Ch. 26, Art. IV ch. 823 18-3 Ch. 38, Art. II 823.05 38-31 ch. 828 Ch. 18 828.30 18-5 847.011 et seq. Ch. 58 ch. 849 58-7 849.04 14-36 849.05 58-6 849.07 14-35 849.09 58-7 849.12 58-7 849.15 Ch. 26, Art. IV 26-102 849.36 58-7 849.235 Ch. 26, Art. IV 26-102 861.01 74-2 861.01 et seq. 58-2 861.011 74-2 865.02 et seq. Ch. 58 871.03 Ch. 62 877.08 Ch. 26, Art. IV 26-101 ch. 893 50-33 901.15 58-12 58-13 938.15 1-12  
