CHARTER AND CODE 
____________ 
CITY OF 
MIAMI, FLORIDA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Adopted: March 20, 1997 
Effective: April 18, 1997 
____________ 
Republished in 2018 by Order of City Commission Resolution R-18-0261 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIAMI, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joe Carollo 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tomas Regalado 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
J. L. Plummer, Jr. 
Humberto Hernandez 
Wifredo (Willy) Gort 
Commissioners 
____________ 
A. Quinn Jones, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Edward Marquez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Walter Foeman 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIAMI, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Francis Suarez 
Mayor 
____________ 
Wifredo (Willy) Gort, District 1 
Ken Russell, District 2 
Joe Carollo, District 3 
Manolo Reyes, District 4 
Keon Hardemon, District 5 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Victoria Méndez 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Emilio T. Gonzalez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Todd B. Hannon 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Miami, Florida. The republication includes the codification of Ord. No. 13676, the gender neutralization ordinance. Ord. No. 13676, adopted April 27, 2017, amended the City Code to modify any and all masculine and/or feminine language to gender neutral pronouns. The Code Comparative Table for Ord. No. 13676 identifies all of the sections of the City Code that were changed. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code during the 2018 republication were the 1967 Code as recodified in 1980 and in 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of this Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5, or new chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The 1996 codification of the Charter and Code publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Matty Hirai, former City Clerk, Walter Foeman, City Clerk, A. Quinn Jones, City Attorney, Rafael O. Dias, Deputy City Attorney, Warren Bitner, Assistant City Attorney, Lisa Malamud, Ana Maria Pando, Assistant City Attorney, Frank May, Assistant to the City Manager, Jim Kay, Deputy Director of Public Works Department, Lourdes Slazyk, Planner, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Miami, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Miami, Florida. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Miami, Florida. 2018.  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of this volume sets forth, for the reference of the user, the charter and related legislation deemed advisable for inclusion by the city. Also included in this part is a listing of special acts relating to the city. 
 
Subpart A - THE CHARTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The present charter of the City of Miami, excepting the later amendments and additions thereto, was prepared and proposed by a charter board of 15 citizens elected at a charter board election, held January 21, 1921. The charter prepared and proposed by such board was adopted by the electors of the city at an election held May 17, 1921; and Laws of Fla., ch. 9024(1921) validated, legalized and confirmed the proceedings in the election of the charter board and the adoption of the city charter, but did not enact the charter in full. The charter was amended by the legislature in its regular session in 1923, and the amendment was confirmed by the electorate of the city at an election held July 17, 1923. At the session of the legislature in 1925, the entire charter was reenacted as contained in Laws of Fla., ch. 10847(1925). The charter as contained in Laws of Fla., ch. 10847(1925) has been amended at subsequent sessions of the legislature, and by the electorate pursuant to the provisions of section 5.03 of the Dade County Charter. This version of the charter represents the text as amended by Ord. No. 9861 and approved by referendum on September 4, 1984, which amended the charter in its entirety, and as approved by final judgment in the case of the Rolle v. City of Miami Circuit Court Case No. 84-07522. 
Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
County Charter reference —Municipal charters, § 5.03. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipalities generally, F.S. § 166.021; charter amendments, F.S. § 166.031. 
 
Citizens' Bill of Rights 
(A)  This government has been created to protect the governed, not the governing. In order to provide the public with full and accurate information, to promote efficient administrative management, to make government more accountable, and to insure to all persons fair and equitable treatment, the City of Miami adopts the provisions of the Miami-Dade County Citizens' Bill of Rights as applied to municipal governments located within Miami-Dade County and guarantees the following additional rights to its Citizens: 
1.  To Be Governed By The Rule of Law. The City of Miami Charter is the Constitution of the City of Miami and the City shall abide by all of its express provisions. 
2.  Religion and Conscience. The City shall not interfere with the freedom of each person in the city to follow the dictates of his or her own conscience concerning religious worship, nor shall the city support any religion. 
3.  Speech, Assembly and Press. The City shall not interfere with the rights: (i) of freedom of speech; (ii) of freedom of the press; (iii) to petition the government, or (iv) to peaceable assembly. 
4.  Unreasonable Searches and Seizures. The City shall not authorize any unreasonable search or seizure. 
5.  Nondiscrimination. The City shall not, directly or indirectly, discriminate among persons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity and expression, or racial profiling. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Miami from remedying present discrimination or the present effects of past discrimination by a race-conscious affirmative action program which is in compliance with the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and the State of Florida. 
6.  Environmental Protection. The City shall promote the right of the people to clean air, pure water, freedom from excessive and unnecessary noise, and the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic qualities of the environment. 
7.  Natural Resources and Scenic Beauty. It shall be the policy of the City to conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty, which policy shall include the abatement of air and water pollution, and excessive and unnecessary noise. 
(B)  The foregoing enumeration of citizens' rights vests large and pervasive powers in the citizenry of the City of Miami. Such power necessarily carries with it responsibility of equal magnitude for the successful operation of government in the City. The orderly, efficient and fair operation of government requires the intelligent participation of individual citizens exercising their rights with dignity and restraint so as to avoid any sweeping acceleration in the cost of government because of the exercise of individual prerogatives, and for individual citizens to grant respect for the dignity of public office. 
(C)  Remedies for violations. Residents of the City shall have standing to bring legal actions to enforce the City Charter, the Citizens' Bill of Rights, and the Miami-Dade County Citizens' Bill of Rights as applied to the City. Such actions shall be filed in Miami-Dade County Circuit Court pursuant to its general equity jurisdiction and, if successful, the plaintiff shall be entitled to recover costs, but not attorney's fees, as fixed by the court. Any public official, or employee who is found by the court to have willfully violated this section shall forthwith forfeit his or her office or employment. 
(D)  Construction. All provisions of this article shall be construed to be supplementary to and not in conflict with the general laws of Florida or the provisions of the Florida Constitution. If any part of this article shall be declared invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
(Res. No. 07-0625, § 2, 10-25-07; Res. No. 16-0352, § 2, 7-29-16) 
LAWS OF FLORIDA, CHAPTER 10847 
An act to amend and reenact the Charter of the City of Miami, in the County of Dade, and to fix the boundaries and provide for the government, powers and privileges of said city and means for exercising the same; and to authorize the imposition of penalties for the violation of ordinances; and to ratify certain acts and proceedings of the commission and of the officers of the city. 
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:  
Sec. 1. - Creation and existence. 
The inhabitants of the City of Miami, Florida, within the boundaries hereinafter designated, or within such boundaries as may hereafter be established, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name the "City of Miami," and as such shall have perpetual succession and may use a common seal. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, amended § 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 1 pertained to body politic and corporate; name; seal; right to contract, sue, and be sued, and derived from original codification. 
Case Law reference— The city is a governmental entity created by the state. It is a public institution designed to promote the common interests of the inhabitants in their organized capacity as a local government, and its objects are governmental, not commercial. Miami Water Works Local No. 654 v. City of Miami, 157 Fla. 445, 26 So. 2d 194, 165 A.L.R. 967. 
The city is a municipal corporation and is not exempt from paying interest on its obligations. Highway Construction Co. v. City of Miami, 126 F.2d 777.  
Sec. 2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Miami shall include all the territory and inhabitants within the following area, and no other: 
[For the latest legal description of the city boundaries, the user is referred to exhibit A of this Charter, on file in the office of the city clerk.] 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— The territorial limits of the City of Miami were fixed pursuant to Laws of Fla., ch. 15687(1931). Further special acts extending, enlarging, or otherwise changing the corporate limits include Laws of Fla., ch. 15821(1931); Laws of Fla., ch. 18685(1937); Laws of Fla., chs. 21393, 21396(1941); Laws of Fla., chs. 23405, 23409(1945); Laws of Fla., ch. 26021(1949); Laws of Fla., ch. 57-1583. 
The board of county commissioners of Dade County further extended the boundaries of the city (Primrose Park) by Dade County Ordinance No. 63-6, adopted March 5, 1963. 
County Charter reference —Method of changing city boundaries, § 5.04. 
State Law reference— Municipalities within Dade County to adopt annexation or contraction ordinances pursuant to provisions of county home rule charter, F.S. § 171.071.  
Sec. 3. - Powers. 
The City of Miami shall have the governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services and may exercise any power for municipal purposes, except when expressly prohibited by law. 
The city shall have the extraterritorial powers granted to the city by general and special law and including Laws of Florida, ch. 10847 (1925), as amended. 
The City of Miami shall have power to: 
(a)—(e).  [Reserved.] 
(f)  Acquisition and disposition of property and services: 
(i)  To acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation or otherwise, real or personal property or any estate or interest therein, inside or outside the city, for any of the purposes of the city; and to improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of such property or any part thereof. 
(ii)  To acquire or dispose of services inside or outside the city, by purchase, gift, or otherwise for any purposes of the city. 
(iii)  To lease to or contract with entities for the management of any of the city's waterfront property, but only in compliance with the other requirements of this charter and on condition that: 
(A)  the terms of the contract allow reasonable public access to the water and reasonable public use of the property, and comply with other charter waterfront setback and view-corridor requirements; and 
(B)  the terms of the contract result in a fair return to the city based on two independent appraisals; and 
(C)  the use is authorized under the then existing master plan of the city; 
(D)  the procurement methods prescribed by ordinances are observed; 
(E)  the contract does not exceed five years and does not contain an automatic renewal or termination penalty. 
Any such lease or management agreement or proposed extension or modification of an existing such lease or management agreement which does not comply with each of the above conditions shall not be valid unless it has first been approved by a majority of the voters of the city. 
Nothing herein contained shall in any manner affect or apply to any project the financing of which has been provided by the authorization of bonds to be issued by the city. 
(g)—(l).  [Reserved.] 
(m)  Harbor and shipping facilities: To establish, construct, maintain, and operate, both inside and outside the city, public landings, wharves, docks, and warehouses; to dredge or deepen harbors and rivers, or any branch or portion thereof; to install turning basins, build jetties, and otherwise improve the harbor and shipping facilities of the city, inside and outside the city and inside and outside harbor lines where such improvements outside of harbor lines are approved by the United States Government or its proper agencies; to acquire by condemnation or otherwise all lands, riparian, and other rights and easements [necessary for the purposes aforesaid; to lay and collect] reasonable duties or fees on vessels coming through or using said landings, wharves, docks or warehouses; to regulate the manner of using other landings, wharves, docks, and warehouses within the city; to prescribe and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the protection and use of said property; to advance to the Government of the United States, with or without interest, funds to be expended in harbor improvements to be made by the government in or near the city, or directly affecting the city within Miami Harbor and the approaches thereto, if such work has been duly authorized by laws of the United States; and to issue bonds or notes to obtain funds for such advances. 
(n)—(ll).  [Reserved.] 
(mm)  Building and zoning: 
(i)  To provide by ordinance building, planning, and zoning regulations and restrictions governing the height, number of stories, method of construction, type, and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage and portion of the lot or site that may be occupied; the size of the front, rear, and side yards, courts, and other open spaces; the location, use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residences, apartment houses, and other purposes; and the widening and future widening of streets in zoned street areas that the city may establish. Such regulations may provide that a board of appeals or the city commission may determine and vary the application of building, planning, or zoning ordinances in harmony with their general purpose and intent. 
(ii)  In order to preserve the city's natural scenic beauty, to guarantee open spaces, and to protect the waterfront, anything in this Charter or the ordinances of the city to the contrary notwithstanding, neither the city nor any of its agencies shall issue building permits for any surface parking or enclosed structures located on Biscayne Bay or the Miami River from its mouth to the N.W. 5th Street Bridge, 
(A)  which are not set back at least 50 feet from the seawall (where the depth of the lot is less than 200 feet, the setback shall be at least 25 percent of the lot depth), and 
(B)  which do not have average side yards equal in aggregate to at least 25 percent of the water frontage of each lot based on average lot width. 
(iii)  The above setback and side-yard requirements may be modified by the city commission after design and site-plan review and public hearing only if the city commission determines that the modifications requested provide public benefits such as direct public access, public walkways, plaza dedications, covered parking up to the floodplain level, or comparable benefits which promote a better urban environment and public advantages, or which preserve natural features. Wherever setback, side-yard, or site-plan review requirements of zoning ordinances are greater than the foregoing requirements, such greater requirements shall govern. 
(iv)  These requirements shall not apply to docks and appurtenant structures, single-family residences and appurtenant structures, and waterfront industrial uses along the Miami River and at the Port of Miami. Nothing herein contained shall in any manner affect or apply to: the City of Miami/University of Miami James L. Knight International Center and hotel facility, including all improvements thereon, or to lands and projects which the city commission has approved prior to September 18, 1979, by development order pursuant to F.S. ch. 380 of a planned area development pursuant to article XXI-1, City of Miami Comprehensive Zoning ordinance or which have received site and development plan approval, including Plaza Venetia, Phase II, Resolution No. 72-113, April 20, 1972; Resolution No. 72-114, April 20, 1972; and Resolution No. 72-416, July 20, 1972. 
(Res. No. 01-841, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— The department of neighborhood rehabilitation of the city and all functions involved therein were abolished pursuant to Ord. No. 7576, § 1, adopted July 17, 1967, and effective on the date of transfer of said department to Dade County. At the direction of the city, § 3(vv), added to the charter by Char. Amend. No. 2, effective Jan. 1, 1963, is not set forth herein.  
Sec. 4. - Form of government; nomination and election. 
(a)  General description. The form of government of the City of Miami, Florida, provided for under this Charter shall be known as the "mayor-city commissioner plan," and the city commission shall consist of five citizens, who are qualified voters of the city and who shall be elected from districts in the manner hereinafter provided. The city commission shall constitute the governing body with powers (as hereinafter provided) to pass ordinances adopt regulations and exercise all powers conferred upon the city except as hereinafter provided. The mayor shall exercise all powers conferred herein and shall appoint as provided in section 4(g)(6) of this Charter a chief administrative officer to be known as the "city manager." 
(b)  Election of mayor and city commission; terms of office; recall. There shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city at large a mayor who shall be a qualified elector residing within the city at least one (1) year before qualifying and must maintain a residence in the city for the duration of his or her term. The mayor shall not serve as a member of the city commission. 
The city commission shall consist of five members who shall be elected from districts within the city, numbered 1 through 5. All persons desiring to run for the office of city commissioner shall file in the district, numbered 1 through 5, for which they are qualified as provided in subsection (c) of this section of the Charter. City commissioners in districts numbered 3 and 5 shall be elected at the general municipal election or runoff election to be held in the year 2001 and at the general municipal election or runoff election each four years thereafter. City commissioners in districts numbered 1, 2, and 4 shall be elected at the general municipal election or runoff election to be held in the year 2003 and at the general municipal election or runoff election each four years thereafter. 
The mayor shall be elected at large by the electors of the city and shall hold office for a term of four years. 
The mayor and all city commissioners [are] to hold office from twelve o'clock noon five days after the canvass of the vote by the supervisor of elections and the declaration of the result of either 1) the general municipal election or 2) runoff election and until their successors are elected and qualified. Commencing with the election to be held in November 2001, and all elections subsequent thereto, no mayor or city commissioner elected and qualified for two consecutive full terms shall be eligible for reelection in the next succeeding term. The mayor and all other members of the city commission shall be subject to recall. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in section 12[.] of the. 
If a candidate for office of mayor or city commissioner receives a majority of votes in the general municipal election for that office, the candidate shall be considered elected upon and after the canvass of the vote and the declaration of the result of the election as provided. If no candidate receives a majority of the votes for that office, the two candidates for the respective office who received the greatest number of votes for that office in the general municipal election shall be placed on the ballot at the runoff election. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the runoff election, shall be considered elected to the office for which the candidate has qualified. 
(c)  Qualifications of mayor and city commission; mayor, city commissioners, and other officers and employees not to be interested in contracts, etc.; franks, free tickets, passes or service. Candidates for mayor shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year prior to qualifying and shall be electors therein. Further, candidates for the city commission shall have resided within the district at least one (1) year before qualifying and be electors in that district, and shall maintain residence in that district for the duration of their term of office. The mayor, city commissioners, and other officers and employees shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the municipality. The mayor or any city commissioner who shall cease to possess any of the qualifications herein required shall forthwith forfeit his or her office, and any such contract in which any member is or may become interested may be declared void by the city commission. 
No mayor, city commissioner, or other officer or employee of said city shall accept any frank, free ticket, pass or service directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation upon terms more favorable than are granted to the public generally. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. Such prohibition of free service shall not apply to police or fire personnel in uniform or wearing their official badges, where same is provided by ordinance. 
(d)  City commission to be judge of its own elections; neither mayor nor city commission nor any committees nor members thereof to dictate appointments by or interfere with city manager. The city commission shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of the mayor and its own members, subject to review by the courts. Neither the mayor nor the city commission, nor any committees nor members thereof shall direct, request, take part in or dictate the appointment or removal of any person in office or employment by the city manager or subordinates or in any manner interfere with the city manager or prevent the city manager from exercising his/her own judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry and as may be necessary as provided in section 14, the mayor, the city commission, any committees and members thereof shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor nor the city commission, nor any committees nor members thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager, city attorney, city clerk and independent auditor general, either publicly or privately. Any such dictation, prevention, orders or other interference or violation of this section on the part of the mayor or a member of the city commission or committees shall be deemed to be violation of the Charter, and upon conviction before a court of competent jurisdiction any individual so convicted shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term of not exceeding sixty days or both, and in the discretion of the court shall forfeit his or her office. Any willful violation of the provisions to this section by the mayor or any city commissioner shall be grounds for his or her removal from office by an action brought in the Circuit Court by the state attorney of this county. 
(e)  Election of officers by city commission; rules of city commission; quorum. The city commission shall elect a city clerk and a city attorney. No member of the city commission or the mayor shall be chosen as city manager or as a member of the civil service board or appointed to any other city office or employment. The city commission may determine its own rules of procedure, may punish its own members for misconduct and may compel attendance of members. A majority of all the members of the city commission shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. 
(f)  Meetings of city commission; ordinance to be read by title only. At twelve o'clock noon on the day the mayor or city commissioners take office, they shall meet at the city hall. Thereafter, the city commission shall meet at such time and place as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. The meetings of the city commission and all sessions of committees of the city commission shall be public. Ordinances shall be read by title only. No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct, or where his or her financial interests are involved. 
(g)  Powers and duties of mayor. The mayor shall serve as the chief executive officer and head of the city government with the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city commission with the authority to designate another member of the city commission to serve as presiding officer. 
(2)  The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the governor for military purposes. 
(3)  In time of public danger or emergency, the mayor may declare a state of emergency as provided in state law and may with the consent of the city commission, take command of the police and maintain order and enforce the laws. 
(4)  During the temporary absence or disability, the mayor shall appoint a member of the city commission to perform the duties of the mayor. However, in the event that the mayor does not or is unable to make such designation, the city commission shall designate a member of the city commission to perform the duties of the mayor during the temporary absence or disability of the mayor by a four-fifths vote of the city commissioners then in office. 
(5)  The mayor shall, within ten days of final adoption by the city commission, have veto authority over any legislative, quasi-judicial, zoning, master plan or land use decision of the city commission, including the budget or any particular component contained therein which was approved by the city commission; provided, however that if any revenue item is vetoed, an expenditure item in the same or greater dollar amount must also be vetoed. The city commission may, at its next regularly scheduled or special meeting after the veto occurs, override that veto by a four-fifths vote of the city commissioners present, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in the Charter and city code. Said veto power shall include actions pursuant to sections 29-B through 29-D of the Charter. 
(6)  When one person succeeds another in the position of mayor, the successor shall have the right to appoint the city manager, subject to the approval within 14 days of a majority of the city commissioners then in office. In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the mayor shall appoint the city manager, subject to the approval within 14 days of a majority of the city commissioners then in office. The mayor may remove the city manager subject to the city commission's conducting a hearing within 10 days of said removal and the city commission's overriding the mayor's action by a four-fifths vote of those city commissioners then in office. Additionally, the city commission by a four-fifths vote of those city commissioners then in office shall be able to remove the city manager. 
(7)  The mayor shall establish and appoint the members of all standing and special committees of the city commission and the chairperson and vice-chairperson of each committee. There shall be as many standing and special committees of the city commission as deemed necessary by the Mayor. Standing or special committees of the city commission shall mean those comprised of city commission members only. 
(8)  The mayor shall prepare and deliver a report on the state of the city to the people of the city between November 1 and January 31 annually. Such report shall be prepared after consultation with the city commissioners and the city manager. 
(9)  The mayor shall prepare and deliver a budgetary address annually to the people of the city between July 1 and September 30. Such report shall be prepared after consultation with the city manager. 
(h)  Salaries of the mayor and commission. Effective on November 4, 2003, there shall be paid to the city commissioners the sum of $58,200, which is equal to sixty percent of the mayor's salary in effect on July 16, 2003. Such salary shall be paid per year for each commissioner, in twelve equal installments. The compensation of the mayor shall be determined by the commission. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 15344(1931); Laws of Fla., ch. 23401(1945); Laws of Fla., ch. 26022(1949); Laws of Fla., ch. 31000(1955); Char. Amend. No. 2, § 1, 1-1-60; Char. Amend. No. 1, 12-1-63; Char. Amend. No. 1, 12-1-65; Ord. No. 88-541, § 2a, 6-9-88/9-6-88; Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 99-613, § 3, 8-2-99; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 03-918, § 3, 9-5-03) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, amended § 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 4 pertained to form of government. The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes. 
Case Law reference— Officials provided for in subsection (e) shall be elected and none of them shall hold office at the will of the city commission when elected, but the city manager when appointed shall hold office subject to the will of the commission. State v. Bloodworth, 134 Fla. 369, 184 So. 1. 
Where resolution adopted by the city commission appointing the city clerk failed to fix or state the period of time he was to hold the said office, clerk was entitled to hold office until the next regular city election provided for in this charter unless lawfully removed. Id. See also, State v. Bloodworth, 135 Fla. 525, 185 So. 339.  
Sec. 5. - The initiative. 
(a)  Power to adopt ordinances. The electors shall have power at their option to adopt ordinances, excluding ordinances relating to subjects that would be precluded by law and to adopt the same at the polls, such power being known as the "initiative". A petition meeting the requirements hereinafter provided and requesting the city commission to pass an ordinance therein set forth or attached shall be termed an "initiative petition" and shall be acted upon as hereinafter provided. 
Any five registered voters may commence initiative proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the committee of the petition and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. The affidavit shall state the names and addresses of the members of the committee of the petition and shall specify the name and address of the member to whom all notices are to be sent. The affidavit shall set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance. 
(b)  Preparation of initiative petition; affidavit of genuineness of signatures. Signatures of 10 percent of the electors of the city registered at the last general municipal election are required for initiative petitions. The signatures need not all be on one paper, but must be in ink or indelible pencil and include the printed name and residence address of each signer and date signed. The proposed ordinance in full should be attached to the petition for review of the signer. The circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit on each page in substantially the following form: 
STATE OF FLORIDA ) 
ss. 
  
COUNTY OF MIAMI-DADE ) 
___________ being duly sworn, deposes and says that he or she is the circulator of the foregoing petition paper containing signatures, and that said signatures were made in his or her presence and are the signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(Signed) ___________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of _______ 19___. 
_____
Notary Public 
All papers pertaining to any one ordinance shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as one instrument and shall have written or printed thereon the names and addresses of the committee of the petition who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition and who shall constitute the committee of the petition for the purposes hereinafter named. 
(c)  Filing of petitions. Within 20 days after the filing of a petition, the city clerk shall ascertain by examination the number of registered voters in the city whose signatures are appended thereto and whether said number is at least 10 percent of the total number of registered voters as shown by the registration records. The city clerk shall attach to said petition a certificate showing the result of said examination and give notice thereof in writing to one or more of the members of the committee of the petition. If the number of signatures supporting the petition is shown to be insufficient, the petition may be amended once within 10 days from the date of said certificate by the filing of additional signatures. 
The city clerk shall, with 10 days after such amendments, make examination of the amended petition. The final finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(d)  Submission of petition to city commission. Upon ascertaining that a petition is supported by a sufficient number of signatures, the city clerk shall so certify, and the city clerk shall submit the proposed ordinance to the city commission at its next meeting. Upon receiving the proposed, the city commission shall proceed to consider it and shall take final action thereon within 30 days from the date the petition is certified by the city clerk. 
(e)  Election on initiated ordinances. If the city commission fails to pass the proposed ordinance, or if it passes it in a form different from that set forth in the petition, then the ordinance shall be submitted in its original form by the city commission to the vote of the electors at the next election occurring not fewer than 30 days from the date of the final action by the city commission. If no election is to be held within six months from such date, the city commission shall call a special election to be held not fewer than 30 days nor more than 120 days from such date. 
(f)  Initiative ballots. The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed ordinance shall state the substance thereof in clear, concise language, without argument or prejudice, and shall provide only for a vote "for the ordinance" or "against the ordinance". If a majority of the electors voting on any such ordinance vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the city. When a ordinance proposed by initiative petition is passed by the city commission, but not in its original form, the ordinance as passed by the city commission shall not take effect until after the vote of the electors; if the ordinance so submitted is approved by a majority of electors voting thereon, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the city, and the ordinance as passed by the city commission shall be deemed repealed. 
The following title shall be substantially the form of the ballot: 
TITLE OF WITH GENERAL 
STATEMENT OF SUBSTANCE THEREOF 
_____
FOR THE ORDINANCE. 
_____
AGAINST THE ORDINANCE. 
(g)  Number of ordinances to be initiated. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 6. - The referendum. 
(a)  Power of referendum. The electors shall have power at their option to approve or reject at the polls any measure passed by the city commission or measure submitted by the city commission to a vote of the electors excluding measures relating to subjects that would be precluded by law. Such power shall known as the "referendum". Measures submitted to the city commission by initiative petition and passed by the city commission without change or passed in an amended form shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other measures. 
Any five registered voters may commence referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the committee of the petition and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. The affidavit shall state the names and addresses of the members of the committee of the petition and shall specify the name and address of the member to whom all notices are to be sent. The affidavit shall set out in full the referred measure. 
(b)  Referendum petition. If within not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the final passage of any measure by the city commission, a petition signed by 15 percent of the total number of voters registered at the last general municipal election as shown by the city registration records, is filed with the city clerk requesting that such measure or any part thereof be repealed or be submitted to a vote of the electors, that measure or part shall not, except in the case of an emergency measure, become operative until the steps indicated herein have been taken. 
(c)  Signatures to petition. The signatures of the 15 percent of the electors of the city registered at the last general municipal election are required for referendum petitions. The referred measure in full shall be attached to the petition for review of the signer. The signatures of referendum petitions need not all be on one paper, but the circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit that each signature appended thereto is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Each signature shall be in ink or indelible pencil and shall include the date signed, the printed name and address of the signer. All such papers shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument. A referendum petition need not contain the text of the measure or part of which repeal is sought, but shall briefly describe the ordinance or part sought to be repealed and such measure shall be attached to the petition for review of the signer. 
The circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit on each page in substantially the following form: 
STATE OF FLORIDA ) 
ss. 
  
COUNTY OF MIAMI-DADE ) 
___________ being duly sworn, deposes and says that he (or she) is the circulator of the foregoing petition paper containing _______ signatures, and that said signatures were made in his (or her) presence and are the signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(Signed) ___________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of _______ 20___. 
___________ 
Notary Public 
All papers pertaining to any one measure shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument and shall have written or printed thereon the names and addresses of the committee of the petition who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition and who shall constitute the committee of the petition for the purposes hereinafter named. 
(d)  Certification of petition. Within 20 days after the filing of the petition, the city clerk shall ascertain by examination the number of registered voters whose signatures are appended thereto and whether said number is at least 15 percent of the total number of registered voters as shown by the city registration records. The city clerk shall attach to such petition his or her certificate showing the result of such examination and give notice thereof in writing to the person designated to receive notices by the committee of the petition. If the number of signatures supporting the petition is shown to be insufficient, the petition may be amended once within 10 days from the date of said certificate by the filing an amended petition with additional signatures. The city clerk shall, within 10 days after such amendment, make examination of the amended petition. 
(e)  Referendum election. If the petition is found sufficient, the city commission shall proceed to reconsider such measure or such section thereof as the petition shall specify. If upon such reconsideration such measure, or such part thereof, is not repealed or amended as demanded in the petition, the city commission shall provide for submitting the same, by the method herein provided, to a vote of the electors at the next general municipal election occurring not less than thirty days after the receipt by the city commission of the city clerk's certificate, and such measure, or such part thereof, shall thereupon be suspended from going into effect until said election and shall then be deemed repealed unless approved by a majority of those voting thereon. The city commission by a four-fifths vote may submit such measure or part thereof with like effect to the electors at a special election to be called by said city commission not less than thirty days after the receipt of the city clerk's certificate. 
(f)  Limitations on enforcement of ordinances. No measure shall go into effect until thirty days after its passage unless it is declared in such ordinance to be an emergency measure on the ground of urgent public need for the preservation of peace, health, safety, or property and the measure being passed by a vote of not less than four-fifths of the members of the city commission. No measure amending or repealing any measure adopted by the people at the polls or by the city commission in compliance with an initiative petition shall be regarded as an emergency measure. 
(g)  Form of ballot. The ballots used when voting upon such referendum shall state the substance of the measure in clear, concise language, without argument or prejudice, and shall specify whether the measure is being submitted for approval or for repeal. If the measure is being submitted for approval, the ballot shall provide only for a vote "for the measure" or "against the measure". If the measure is being submitted for repeal, the ballot shall provide only for a vote "for repeal" or "against repeal". 
(h)  Emergency measures. Measures passed as emergency measures shall be subject to referendum like other measures, except that they shall not be suspended from going into effect while referendum proceedings are pending. An emergency measure subsequently repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority for any payment made or expense incurred in accordance with the measure previous to the repeal. 
(i)  Conflict of referred measures. If two or more measures adopted or approved at the same election conflict with respect to any of their provisions, all nonconflicting provisions shall go into effect. The provisions of the measure receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail over the conflicting provisions of other measures. 
(j)  Adoption or repeal. If a majority of the electors voting on any referendum vote to adopt or repeal any measure or part thereof, such measure or part shall thereupon be deemed adopted or repealed, as the case may be. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 7. - Election of city commissioners and mayor. 
A general municipal election for the mayor and city commissioners shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years. A runoff election for the mayor and city commissioners shall be held on the third Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years. All elections held in said city shall be conducted and held according to the provisions of the general election laws of the State of Florida, except as otherwise provided for in the Charter. The name of any person qualified as provided in section 4 of this Charter shall be printed upon the ballot as a candidate for the office of mayor or city commissioner upon paying to the City of Miami the sum as prescribed by ordinance to be accepted by the city clerk as a qualifying fee along with the sum for election assessment as prescribed by state law during the qualifying period as prescribed in this Charter prior to the date of such general municipal election or special election to fill a vacancy. Any person qualified to run for mayor or city commissioner shall file an affidavit of candidacy in the form provided by the city clerk including his or her name, address, occupation and willingness to serve if elected, accompanied by the requisite documents and fees as provided in state law and section 7 of this Charter. An affidavit of candidacy shall be filed not earlier than 60 days and not later than 45 days prior to the date of the general municipal election or during the qualifying period for a special election to fill a vacancy. 
All such qualifying documents and fees shall be deposited with the city clerk no later than 6:00 pm. on the forty-fifth day prior to the general municipal election or the last day for qualifying in a special election to fill a vacancy. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 15339(1931); Laws of Fla., ch. 19974(1939); Laws of Fla., ch. 21387(1941); Laws of Fla., ch. 22395(1943); Laws of Fla., ch. 23408(1945); Char. Amend. No. 1, 3-14-72; Char. Amend. No. 6, 11-6-73; Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 16-0350, § 2, 7-29-16) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 1, adopted August 9, 2001, amended § 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 7 pertained to regular and primary elections of commissioners. The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes.  
Sec. 8. - Form of ballots. 
All ballots used in any general municipal election, runoff election or special election to fill a vacancy held under authority of this Charter shall be without party mark or designation and without any insignia or mark of any association or organization thereon, and shall be substantially in the same form as the election ballot used in all general state elections. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 15339(1931); Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, amended § 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 8 pertained to form of ballots; what candidates in primary election for mayor and commissioners placed on ballot. The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes.  
Sec. 9. - Declaration of election; how tie vote decided. 
At any runoff election or special election to fill a vacancy held under the provisions of this Charter, the candidates for the office of city commissioner, who shall have received the greatest number of votes cast, shall be declared elected after the canvass of the vote by the supervisor of elections as provided in section 4. A tie between two or more candidates for the office of city commissioner shall be decided by lot under the supervision of the chair of the canvassing board in the presence of the candidates. 
At any runoff election or election to fill a vacancy for the office of mayor held under the provisions of this Charter, the candidate for the office of mayor, who shall have received the greatest number of votes cast, shall be declared elected after the canvass of the vote by the supervisor of elections as provided in Section 4. A tie between the candidates for the office of mayor shall be decided by lot under the supervision of the chair of the canvassing board in the presence of the candidates. 
(Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Secs. 10, 11. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 10, 11 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 10, 11 pertained to distinction between general and special municipal election and the recall, respectively, and derived from Laws of Fla., ch. 14616(1929); Res. No. 97-47, § 2, adopted July 3, 1997.  
Sec. 12. - Filling vacancies for mayor and commission. 
(a)  A vacancy on the city commission or in the office of mayor caused by death, resignation, forfeiture, suspension, removal, or other action or causes shall be filled within ten days after such vacancy occurs by a majority of the remaining city commissioners. The person appointed must meet the qualifications of the office as required in section 4 of this Charter. The term of office of the person so appointed, except in the circumstances detailed in section (c) below, shall be until the successor in office is elected and qualified at whichever of the following occurs first: 
(1)  the odd-year general municipal election for mayor and city commissioners held pursuant to section 4 of the Charter, or 
(2)  the even-year State of Florida general election, at which election national, state and county offices are filled, 
The candidates for such election shall be qualified as provided in section 4 of this Charter and the qualifying period and requirements for such election shall be as provided in section 7 of this Charter. The person elected as provided in (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this Section shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of that office. 
(b)  If the remaining city commissioners shall fail or refuse to fill such vacancy within ten days after it occurs, as provided herein, the city commission shall call a special election to fill the vacancy to be held at a date not less than thirty-eight or more than forty-five days after the expiration of the ten-day period and the five day qualifying period. The qualifying period for such special election shall be for the five days not including Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays before the thirty-eighth day before the date of the election and the procedure for the election not otherwise provided for in this section shall be as provided in section 7 of this Charter. Except in the circumstances detailed in section (c), effective November 7, 2017, the person who receives the greatest number of votes for the office in said special election is elected to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term of that office. 
(c)  If a vacancy in any elected office is caused by forfeiture, suspension, or removal, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as described in sections (a) and (b) above, provided that if the elected official who has so vacated his or her seat is later absolved of the allegations of wrong-doing, that elected official shall be entitled to resume his or her elected position for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. The term of the individual who assumed the position previously vacated by that elected official shall automatically terminate upon the restoration to office of the original seat-holder. 
(d)  If the city commissioners shall fail to comply with their duties as set forth in this section, then, and in that event, the court is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce compliance with this act or to call an election itself to fill such vacancy or vacancies on the city commission or in the office of mayor. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 22393(1943); Laws of Fla., ch. 27724(1951); Ord. No. 8287, 11-5-74; Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 17-0318, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 13. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repeal § 13 in its entirety. Formerly, § 13 pertained to election when terms of four or more commissioners expire simultaneously, and derived from Laws of Fla., ch. 22393(1943); Laws of Fla., ch. 27724(1951).  
Sec. 14. - Commission may investigate official transactions, acts and conduct. 
The mayor, city commission, or any committee thereof may investigate the financial transactions of any office or department of the city government and the official acts and conduct of any city official, and by similar investigations may secure information upon any matter. In conducting such investigations the mayor, city commission, or any committee thereof, may require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas which shall be signed by the presiding officer of the city commission or the chair of such committee, as the case may be, which may be served and executed by any police officer. 
(Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 15. - City manager—Qualifications; appointment; term; salary; sickness or absence; removal. 
The city manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government. The city commission shall fix the city manager's compensation, and the city manager shall serve as provided in section 4(g). The city manager shall be chosen on the basis of the city manager's executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of the city manager's appointment the city manager need not be a resident of the state. Neither the mayor nor any city commissioner shall be eligible for the position of city manager during or within two years after the expiration of their respective terms. 
The mayor, subject to the approval of the city commission, may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to assume the duties and authority of the city manager during periods of temporary absence or disability of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of all units of the city government under the city manager's jurisdiction, and for carrying out policies adopted by the city commission. The city manager or designee shall execute contracts and other instruments, sign bonds and other evidences of indebtedness. 
(Char. Amend. No. 2, 1-1-62; Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 16. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be to: 
(a)  See that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  Appoint and remove, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all directors of the departments and all subordinate officers and employees in the departments in both the classified and unclassified service; all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone, and in the classified service all appointments and removals to be subject to the civil service provisions of this Charter. 
(c)  Exercise control over all departments and divisions created herein or that may be hereafter created by the city commission. 
(d)  Attend all meetings of the city commission with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. 
(e)  Recommend to the mayor and city commission for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
(f)  Keep the mayor and city commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; and 
(g)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required by the mayor or ordinance or resolution of the city commission. 
(Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— As to removal and suspension of chief of police, see annotation to charter § 26. 
Case Law reference— It was the intention of the legislature to make the city manager at all times hold office subject to the will of the commission upon whom rested the administrative affairs of the city government, which could be speedily checked and corrected if necessary at the will of the commission by a change in the office of the city manager. State v. Bloodworth, 134 Fla. 369, 184 So. 1. 
Subsection (b) —The phrase "except as herein provided," employed in subsection (b) of this section, qualifies or limits every provision of the city charter providing for removals in specific cases, and such other provisions must be construed with the subsection. Bryan v. Landis, 106 Fla. 19, 142 So. 650. 
The city manager has no summary power of appointment under civil service rules, and all appointments and promotions by the city manager must be within the requirements of such rules. Bloodworth v. Suggs, 60 So. 2d 768. 
Police officers may be demoted during probationary period after accepting probationary promotion in rank. Clarke v. City of Miami, 81 So. 2d 217. 
The city manager is not required as a matter of law to promote civil service employees when a vacancy occurs. His refusal to fill vacancies due to economic conditions is a matter within his discretion. City of Miami v. Elmore, 131 So. 2d 517. 
Where city manager opts to utilize advisory group to directly assist him in the decision-making process to select a new police chief, the advisory group is a "board" within the meaning of F.S. § 286.011, the city manager is an "agency" within the meaning of said statute, and meetings of the advisory group must be open meetings pursuant to said statute. State v. Krause, 47 Fla. Supp. 36, aff'd Krause v. Reno, 366 So. 2d 1244.  
Sec. 17. - Same—Examination of affairs of departments, officers or employees. 
The city manager may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or employee to be examined. Any person or persons appointed by the city manager to examine the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or employee shall have the same right to require the attendance of witnesses and production of books and papers and other evidence as is conferred upon the mayor and city commission by this Charter. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 18. - Departments established.[3] 
The following administrative departments are hereby established by this Charter: 
(1)  Department of law. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Department of public safety. 
(5)  Department of finance. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Pursuant to authority granted in section 19 of this charter, the departments of public service, public welfare and public safety have been discontinued and numerous new departments have been created by ordinance. The user's attention is directed to ch. 2 of the Code of Ordinances for existing departments and functions thereof. 
 
Sec. 19. - Creation of new departments; discontinuance of departments. 
The city commission may, by ordinance adopted by vote of at least three members of the city commission, create new departments or discontinue any department and determine, combine, and distribute the functions and duties of departments and subdivisions thereof. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 21391(1941); Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 19-A. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed § 19-A in its entirety. Formerly, § 19-A pertained to authority to create and discontinue departments by ordinance not limited to other charter provisions and derived from Laws of Fla., ch. 21391(1941).  
Sec. 20. - Directors of departments. 
The city manager shall appoint a director for each department and, in the city manager's discretion, may consolidate two departments under one director. Each such director shall serve until removed by the city manager or until a successor has been appointed and qualified, shall conduct the affairs of his or her department in accordance with rules and regulations made by the city manager, shall be responsible for the conduct of the officers and employees of his or her department, for the performance of its business, and for the custody and preservation of the books, records, papers and property under its control, and, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, shall manage the department. None of the provisions of this section, however, shall be applicable to the department of law, city clerk or office of independent auditor general. [4] 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 21388(1941); Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— Transfer of the operations of the city's department of water and sewers to Metropolitan Dade County was authorized by Res. No. 73-225, adopted March 22, 1973. 
 
Sec. 21. - Department of law. 
The city attorney shall be the director of the department of law and an attorney-at-law admitted to the practice in the State of Florida. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the city, and for all officers and departments thereof in matters relating to their official duties. The city attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits for and in behalf of the city, and shall prepare all contracts, bonds and instruments in writing in which the city is concerned and shall endorse on each approval of the form and correctness thereof. 
The city attorney shall be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. The city attorney shall have such number of assistants as the city commission by ordinance may authorize. The city attorney shall prosecute all cases brought before such court and perform the same duties, so far as they are applicable thereto, as are required of the prosecuting attorney of the county. 
When required to do so by the resolution of the city commission, the city attorney shall prosecute or defend for and in behalf of the city all complaints, suits and controversies in which the city is a party, and such other suits, matters and controversies as he shall, by resolution or ordinance, be directed to prosecute or defend. 
The mayor, city commission, the city manager, the director of any department, or any officer or board not included within a department, may require the opinion of the city attorney upon any question of law involving their respective powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be a full-time governmental employee; shall not engage in the private practice of law; and upon his or her election by the city commission shall serve until the time for the election of the city officials specified in section 4 of the Charter which follows the next general municipal election. 
(Char. Amend. No. 1, 11-6-73; Res. No. 97-447, § 2, 7-3-97; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Secs. 22—22-C. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 22—22-C in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 22—22-C pertained to department of public service, department of water and sewers; water and sewer board, department of public welfare, and board of trustees of Jackson Memorial Hospital, respectively.  
Sec. 23. - Department of off-street parking; off-street parking board. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established as an agency and instrumentality of the City of Miami, a new department to be named and known as the "Department of Off-Street Parking of the City of Miami" (hereinafter sometimes called the "department of off-street parking" or the "department"), and by that name it may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, contract and be contracted with and have an official seal; provided, however, that the department shall not commence business or exercise any of the powers granted by this act unless and until the city commission of the City of Miami shall by ordinance declare the need for the department and for the off-street parking board of the City of Miami hereinafter created. The department, which shall operate and function under the supervisory control of the board created and established in subsection (b) hereof, shall consist of a chief executive officer to be known as the "director of the department of off-street parking" (hereinafter sometimes called the "director of the department" or the "director") and such other officers and employees as shall be necessary to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the department. 
(b)  There is hereby created and established a board to be known as the "Off-Street Parking Board of the City of Miami" (hereinafter sometimes called the "off-street parking board" or the "board") which shall consist of five members. Each member of the board shall either reside or have his or her principal place of business in the city and shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability, but no officer or employee of the city shall serve as a member of the board while employed as such officer or employee of the city. 
Within thirty days after the city commission shall have adopted an ordinance declaring the need for the department and for the board, it shall appoint the members of the board, two of whom shall hold office for a term of two years, two of whom shall hold office for a term of three years, and one of whom shall hold office for a term of four years, and thereafter each member shall be appointed for a term of five years, as herein provided. 
At least twenty days prior to the date of expiration of the term of any member of the board, or within ten days after the death, resignation or removal of any such member, such member's successor shall be named and appointed by the remaining members of the board, subject to confirmation by the city commission of the city. In the event that any appointment so made shall not be confirmed by the city commission within ten days after notice of such appointment has been served upon the city commission, the appointment shall be null and void, and thereupon the remaining members of the board shall make a new appointment, or appointments, which shall likewise be subject to confirmation by the city commission and each member of the board shall be eligible for reappointment. The successor in each case shall be appointed and shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of expiration of the term of his or her predecessor, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term. 
Upon the effective date of his or her appointment, or as soon thereafter as practicable, each member of the board shall enter upon his or her duties, but before doing so he or she shall take the oath prescribed by law and shall execute a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the department and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office, which bond shall be approved by the city commission of the city and filed with the city clerk, the cost of the premium on any such bond to be treated as part of the cost of operating the department. 
The members of the board shall each be paid a salary of fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum, or such larger sum as the city commission may establish by ordinance, payable in monthly installments. 
Any member of the board may be removed by the city commission of the city for good cause and after proper hearing by the city commission, but if so removed, may apply to the Circuit Court of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit in and for Dade County, Florida, for a review of the action of the city commission. 
(c)  The board shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities customarily invested in the board of directors of a private corporation, and shall exercise supervisory control over the operation of the off-street parking facilities of the city, and all acts of the department and of the director with respect to such facilities shall be subject to the approval of the board. The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chair of the board, shall make appropriate rules and regulations for its own government and procedure, and shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month and such special meetings as it may deem necessary, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  From and after the date of appointment of the first member of the board, the department shall operate, manage and control the off-street parking facilities of the city and all properties pertaining thereto now owned or hereafter acquired or constructed by the city or by the department and shall succeed to and exercise all powers vested in and succeed to and perform all functions and duties imposed upon the department of off-street parking of the city by and under the provisions of this act. 
Upon the adoption by the city commission of an ordinance declaring the need for the department and the board, all powers, functions and duties relating to such off-street parking facilities and properties pertaining thereto then vested in the city or any of its departments officers, including but not limited to the exercise of the power of eminent domain, shall be and are hereby transferred to the department, and all books, records and papers now existing or hereafter acquired in the operation and maintenance of said facilities or relating thereto shall be the property of and under the jurisdiction and control of the department; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to vest in the department the power to establish and fix rates and charges for off-street parking service furnished by the off-street parking facilities of the city or the power to issue revenue bonds. The department shall have full power and authority to acquire, own, use, hire, lease, operate and dispose of real property and personal property and of any interest therein, including the power to acquire by eminent domain proceedings lands or any interest therein and rights-of-way and easements upon, in, along or across any public street, road or highway for the purpose of constructing, maintaining or operating off-street parking facilities as shall be necessary in the judgment of the off-street parking board, and to make and enter into all contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties and functions with respect to the operation, management and control of said facilities, and to promulgate and enforce appropriate rules and regulations governing the utilization of the services of the off-street parking facilities of the city. 
(e)  The director shall be appointed by and shall hold office at the will of the board. Such person shall be of good moral character and have an excellent reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability, but no member of the board shall be eligible for appointment as director. The director shall receive such salary, payable to him or her in equal semi-monthly installments, as shall be fixed by the board. Before entering upon his or her duties, the director shall take any oath and execute any bond prescribed by law. The director shall act as the chief executive officer of the department, shall devote his or her entire time and attention to the duties of his or her office and shall not engage actively in any other business or profession. Subject to the direction and approval of the board, the director shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the off-street parking facilities of the city and shall exercise the powers vested in and perform the functions and duties imposed upon him or her as herein provided. The director shall attend all meetings of the board, shall furnish to the board and the city commission of the city a monthly report with respect to the operation, maintenance and financial condition of the department of off-street parking, and shall from time to time have prepared and shall furnish such reports, audits and other information relating to said facilities as may be required by the board. 
In the event that the director shall for any reason be temporarily incapable of exercising the powers and of performing the duties and functions of his or her office, the board may appoint an acting director to exercise such powers and to perform such functions and duties until such incapacity of the director shall be terminated. 
(f)  Subject to the approval of the board, the director shall employ such additional executive and operating assistance, including engineering and other experts and professional assistance, as shall be necessary to provide for the efficient operation of the department. Included in the personnel to be employed, there shall be the following subordinate officers whose positions shall be in the unclassified service of the city: 
(1)  A treasurer, who shall perform the functions and duties customarily performed by the treasurer of a private corporation. The treasurer shall be responsible for all funds of the department, for all accounts and accounting records relating to the department and its operation, and for the preparation of all checks and vouchers requisite to the operation of the department. 
(2)  A secretary, who shall perform the functions and duties customarily performed by the secretary of a private corporation. The secretary shall have charge and custody of the official seal and of all books, records, documents and papers of the department other than those required to be in the custody of the treasurer. He or she shall attend in person all meetings of the board, and shall keep a correct record of all the proceedings of the board, and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him or her as secretary by the board. 
(g)  The city attorney shall act as general counsel for the department and for the board in all matters of law which may arise, and shall prosecute or defend all suits brought by or against the city or the department or the board which relate to the off-street parking facilities of the city. Special counsel as shall be deemed necessary by the city attorney may be employed by the director subject to the approval of the board, city attorney and city commission. Such special counsel shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the city attorney. 
(h)  All budgets, funds and accounts pertaining to the off-street parking facilities of the city shall be segregated from all other budgets, funds and accounts of the city and shall be so kept that they shall reflect the financial condition and the operation of each off-street parking facility of the city separately. Not later than one month before the end of each fiscal year the director, with the approval of the board, shall prepare and submit to the city commission of the city a budget estimate of expenditures and revenues for the ensuing fiscal year in the same form and like manner as all other departments of the city for approval by the city commission with the exception, however, that such budget estimate will be submitted directly to the city commission of the city for its approval. 
(i)  All expenses incurred by the department and by the board in exercising their powers and performing their functions and duties shall be paid solely from the revenues of the off-street parking facilities of the city and no liability or obligation not payable from the revenues of said facilities shall at any time be incurred in connection with the operation thereof. 
(j)  Should there occur in any fiscal year an excess of revenue over expenditures required for operation, maintenance, required reserves and debt service, then such excess revenues shall, subject to the provisions of any ordinance of the city commission of the city authorizing the issuance of parking facilities revenue bonds of the city, and to the provisions of any trust indenture or trust agreement securing such bonds, be paid into the general funds of the city. 
(k)  All powers and rights conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to those conferred by any other general or special law and shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes hereof; and the department and the board shall have power, in addition to exercising the powers expressly conferred in and by this section, to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes hereof. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 30997(1955); Res. No. 88-535, 6-9-88/9-6-88; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 24. - Department of public safety. 
The head of the department of public safety shall be known as the director of public safety. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the head of the department of public safety shall be the executive head of the division of police and fire. He or she shall be the chief administrative authority in all matters pertaining to the erection, maintenance, repair, removal, razing, occupancy and inspection of buildings under such regulations as may be ordained by the city commission. 
(a)  Division of police. The police force shall be composed of a chief and such officers and other employees as the city manager may determine. The chief of police shall have the immediate direction and control of the police force, subject to the supervision of the director of public safety, and to such rules, regulations and orders as the said director may prescribe, and through the chief of police, the director of public safety shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the police force. The chief of police shall devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official duties and shall not be absent from the city except in the performance of his or her official duties, unless granted a written leave of absence by the city manager. His or her office shall be kept open at all hours, day or night, and either the chief of police or a subordinate shall be in constant attendance. In case of the disability of the chief of police by reason of sickness, absence from the city or other cause, the director of public safety shall designate one of the captains or lieutenants of police to act as chief of police during such disability, and the officer so designated shall serve without additional compensation. The members of the police force, other than the chief, shall be selected from the list of eligibles prepared by the civil service board, and in accordance with such rules as the said board may prescribe; provided, that in case of riot or emergency, the director of public safety may appoint additional patrolmen for temporary service, who need not be in the classified service. Each member of the police force, both rank and file, shall have receive a warrant of appointment signed by the city manager, in which the date of the appointment shall be stated, and such shall be that member's commission. 
No person, except as otherwise provided by general law or this Charter, shall act as special police or special detective except upon written authority from the director of public safety. Such authority, when conferred, shall be exercised only under the direction and control of the chief of police and for a time specified in the appointment. 
The members of the police force of said city shall be invested with all the power and authority necessary for enforcing the ordinances of said city. 
The chief of police or any police officer of the City of Miami, may arrest without warrant, any person violating any of the ordinances of the city committed in the presence of such officer, and when knowledge of the violation of any ordinance of said city shall come to the said chief of police or police officer, not committed in his or her presence, he or she shall make affidavit before the judge or clerk of municipal court against the person charged with such violation, whereupon, said judge or clerk shall issue a warrant for the arrest of such person. 
(b)  Division of fire. The fire force shall be composed of a chief and such other officers, firemen and employees as the city manager may determine. The fire chief shall have immediate direction and control of the said department, subject to the supervision of the director of public safety and to such rules, regulations and orders as the said director may prescribe and through the fire chief the director of public safety shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the fire department. 
The members of the fire department, other than the chief, shall be appointed from the list of eligibles prepared by the civil service board and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by said board; provided, that in case of riot, conflagration or emergency, the director of public safety may appoint additional firemen and officers for temporary service who need not be in the classified service. 
The chief of the fire department and his or her assistants are authorized to exercise the powers of police officers while going to, attending or returning from any fire or alarm of fire. The fire chief and each of his or her assistants shall have issued to him or her a warrant of appointment signed by the city manager, in which the date of his or her appointment shall be stated, and such warrant shall be his or her commission. 
Whenever any building in said city shall be on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief of the fire department to order and direct such building or any other building which he or she may deem hazardous and likely to communicate fire to other buildings, or any part of such buildings, to be pulled down or destroyed and no action shall be maintained against said chief or any person acting under his or her authority therefor. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— This section and sections 25 and 26 were purportedly repealed by chapter 27719, Special Acts of 1951. However, that act, together with chapters 27720 and 27721, which established the departments of police and fire, was held invalid in the case of City of Miami v. Headley, 61 So. 2d 321, and, consequently, this section and sections 25 and 26 remained in effect. Also, chapter 27722, Special Acts of 1951, which added a section creating the department of communications, is deemed to have been held invalid by implication by the same case and has been omitted. 
Although this section has never been expressly repealed, the department of public safety and all divisions thereof were discontinued pursuant to the exercise of the authority contained in the provisions of charter section 19 (Laws of Fla., ch. 21391(1941)) by the adoption of ordinances establishing separate departments of fire, police and communications.  
Sec. 25. - Supervision in divisions of police and fire. 
The chief of police and fire chief shall have the right and power to suspend any of the officers and employees in their respective division who may be under their management and control for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by proper authority, or for any other just and reasonable cause. If any officer or employee be suspended as herein provided, the chief of the division concerned shall forthwith in writing certify the fact together with the cause of suspension, to the director of public safety, who shall render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be a reprimand, fine, suspension, reduction in rank or dismissal. 
The director of public safety in any investigation shall have the power to administer oaths and secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers. 
The employee shall be allowed the same appeal procedure as set forth in section 36(f) of the Charter, provided, however, in the event the offices of city manager and director of public safety are held by the same person, the city manager-director of public safety, before passing upon the guilt or innocence of the person suspended, may authorize the civil service board to conduct a hearing upon the suspension charges preferred by the chiefs of fire or police and to report its findings and recommendations back to said city manager-director of public safety. The city manager-director of public safety then shall pass judgment upon the person suspended, after considering the findings and recommendations of the civil service board. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 24695(1947); Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 24. Also, although this section has never been expressly repealed, the department of public safety and all divisions thereof were discontinued pursuant to the exercise of the authority contained in the provisions of charter section 19 (Laws of Fla., ch. 21391(1941)) by the adoption of ordinances establishing separate departments of fire, police and communications. 
Case Law reference— In Rosenfelder v. Huttoe, 156 Fla. 682, 24 So. 2d 108, a mandamus proceeding by a civil service member of the police force, arising before the amendment, to cancel an order dismissing him from the division of police, it was held that while a court might not under all circumstances substitute its judgment for that of the director, it was competent to determine whether jurisdictional charges were brought against accused and whether or not the requirements of the charter preliminary to his suspension were complied with.  
Sec. 26. - Suspension and removal of chief of police and fire chief. 
The city manager shall have the exclusive right to suspend the chief of police and fire chief for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by proper authority, or for any other just and reasonable cause. If either of such chiefs be so suspended the city manager shall forthwith certify the fact, together with the cause of suspension, to the commission who within five (5) days from the date of receipt of such notice, shall proceed to hear such charges and render judgment thereon, which judgment shall be final. 
Editor's note— See note to § 24. 
Case Law reference— This section provides the sole and exclusive means for suspending and removing the chief of police. Bryan v. Landis, 106 Fla. 19, 142 So. 650, 653. 
The chief of police may be suspended by the city manager only for one or more of the causes enumerated in this section, and when such suspension has been certified to the city commission and the cause thereof examined by them and found after a full hearing to be well grounded, then the commission enters its affirmative judgment which is final. When the affirmative judgment of the commission is entered, the suspension of the chief of police eo instante becomes a removal, but, if the judgment of the commission is in the negative, the suspension ceases, and he is eo instante reinstated. Bryan v. Landis, 106 Fla. 19, 142 So. 650, 653. 
The city manager may not summarily remove from office the chief of police without notice or opportunity to be heard in his defense. Bryan v. Landis, 106 Fla. 19, 142 So. 650, 651. 
Pursuant to charter section 19 the department of public safety and the divisions thereof, police and fire, were discontinued. Subsequent ordinances established a department of police and department of fire with each department having a director. Section 16 of this charter authorizes the city manager to remove all department directors in accordance with the provisions set forth in this charter.  
Sec. 27. - Finance, department of finance. 
(a)  Department director. Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the director of finance shall have charge of the department of finance and shall administer the financial affairs of the city, including the keeping and supervision of all accounts, the levy, assessment and collection of revenues, the making and collection of special assessments, the custody and disbursement of city funds and monies, the control over expenditures, and such other duties as the city manager may direct. 
(b)  Form and manner of keeping accounts and making reports. Accounts shall be kept by the department of finance showing the financial transactions of all departments and offices of the city. The forms of all such accounts and the financial reports rendered to or by the department of finance shall be prescribed by the director of finance with the approval of the city manager. The accounts and accounting procedure of the city shall be consistent with the pronouncements of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board and accounting principles as generally accepted in the United States. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Secs. 27-A—28. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 27-A—28 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 27-A—28 pertained to limitation as to levy of ad valorem taxes for public library and library systems; levy of taxes; tax assessor; board of equalization; assessor to have power of county assessor, general assessment roll; signing and endorsing general assessment roll, return and presumption of validity; copy of assessment roll annexed to warrant commanding collection; state law as to taxes applies; discounts if taxes paid before certain time; when taxes become delinquent, interest rates on delinquent taxes; tax certificates, interest rate thereon; and chief procurement officer, respectively.  
Sec. 29-A. - Contracts for, unified development projects, and real property; safeguards. 
(a)  Unified development projects. A unified development project shall mean a project where an interest in real property is owned or is to be acquired by the city, is to be used for the development of improvements, and as to which the city commission determines that for the development of said improvements it is most advantageous to the city to procure from a private person, as defined in the Code of the City of Miami, one or more of the following integrated packages: 
(1)  planning and design, construction, and leasing; or 
(2)  planning and design, leasing, and management; or 
(3)  planning and design, construction, and management; or 
(4)  planning and design, construction, leasing, and management. 
So long as the person from whom the city procures one of the above-mentioned integrated packages provides all of the functions listed for that package, such person need not provide each listed function for the entire unified development project nor for the same part of the unified development project. 
As many members of the public having expertise in the field of real estate development or in other relevant technical areas or who reside within the vicinity of a proposed unified development project site as deemed appropriate by the city manager shall be invited by the city manager to provide input during the preparation of documents for competitive processes of the unified development project. 
If deemed appropriate by the city manager, the unified development project process shall include a request for qualifications process prior to the issuance of a request for proposals. Qualifications shall be evaluated by the city manager or designee(s) and only those deemed qualified in accordance with the specified evaluation criteria shall be invited to participate in the subsequent request for proposal process for said unified development project. 
Requests for proposals for unified development projects shall generally define the nature of the uses the city is seeking for the unified development project and the estimated allocations of land for each use. They shall also state the following: 
(1)  the specific parcel of land contemplated to be used or the geographic area the city desires to develop pursuant to the unified development project; 
(2)  the specific evaluation criteria to be used by the below-mentioned certified public accounting firm; 
(3)  the specific evaluation criteria to be used by the below-mentioned review committee; 
(4)  the extent of the city's proposed commitment of funds, property, and services; 
(5)  the definitions of the terms "substantial increase" and "material alteration" that will apply to the project pursuant to subsection (e)(4) hereof; and 
(6)  a reservation of the right to reject all proposals and of the right of termination referred to in subsection (e)(4), below. 
After public notice there shall be a public hearing at which the commission shall consider: 
(1)  the contents of the request for proposals for the subject unified development project; 
(2)  the selection of a certified public accounting firm, which shall include at least one member with previous experience in the type of development in question; and 
(3)  the recommendations of the city manager for the appointment of persons to serve on the review committee. Said review committee shall consist of an appropriate number of city officials or employees and an equal number plus one of members of the public, whose names shall be submitted by the city manager no fewer than five days prior to the above-mentioned public hearing. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing the city commission shall authorize the issuance of a request for proposals, select a certified public accounting firm, and appoint the members of the review committee only from among the persons recommended by the city manager. 
The procedure for the selection of an integrated package proposals shall be as follows: 
(1)  all proposals shall be analyzed by a certified public accounting firm appointed by the commission based only on the evaluation criteria applicable to said certified public accounting firm contained in the request for proposals. Said certified public accounting firm shall render a written report of its findings to the city manager. 
(2)  the review committee shall evaluate each proposal based only on the evaluation criteria applicable to said review committee contained in the request for proposals. Said review committee shall render a written report to the city manager of its evaluation of each proposal, including any minority opinions. 
(3)  taking into consideration the findings of the aforementioned certified public accounting firm and the evaluations of the aforementioned review committee, the city manager shall recommend one or more of the proposals for acceptance by the city commission, or alternatively, the city manager may recommend that all proposals be rejected. If there are three or more proposals and the city manager recommends only one, or if the city manager recommends rejection of all proposals, the city manager shall state in writing the reasons for such recommendation. 
In transmitting his or her recommendation or recommendations to the commission, the city manager shall include the written reports, including any minority opinions, rendered to by the aforementioned certified accounting firm and review committee. 
(4)  all contracts for unified development projects shall be awarded to the person whose proposal is most advantageous to the city, as determined by the city commission. 
The commission may accept any recommendation of the city manager by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members. In the event the commission does not accept a proposal recommended by the city manager or does not reject all proposals, the commission shall seek recommendations directly from the aforementioned review committee, which shall make a recommendation or recommendations to the commission taking into account the report of the aforementioned certified public accounting firm and the evaluation criteria specified for the review committee in the request for proposals. 
After receiving the direct recommendations of the review committee, the commission shall, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members: 
(1)  accept any recommendation of the review committee; or 
(2)  accept any previous recommendation of the city manager; or 
(3)  reject all proposals. 
All contracts for unified development projects shall be signed by the city manager or designee after approval thereof by the commission. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for developing a minority procurement program as may be prescribed by ordinance and permitted by law in conjunction with the award of contracts for unified development projects. The provisions of this charter section shall supersede any other charter or code provision to the contrary. 
(b)  Sales and leases of real property; prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in this section, there shall be no sale, conveyance, or disposition of any interest, including any leasehold, in real property owned by the city, the department of off-street parking, or the downtown development authority, unless there has been prior public notice and a prior opportunity given to the public to compete for said real property or interest. Any such sale, conveyance, or disposition shall be conditioned upon compliance with: the provisions of this section; such procurement methods as may be prescribed by ordinance; and any restrictions that may be imposed by the city, the department of off-street parking, or the downtown development authority, as appropriate. Further, no right, title, or interest shall vest in the transferee of such property unless the sale, conveyance, or disposition is made to the highest responsible bidder, as is determined by the city commission, or the off-street parking board, or the downtown development authority board of directors. The city commission or the off-street parking board or the downtown development authority board of directors, as appropriate, may by resolution waive the requirement of sale, conveyance, or disposition to the highest responsible bidder by means of the following procedure: the city manager, the director of the off-street parking authority, or the director of the downtown development authority, as appropriate, must make a written finding that a valid emergency exists, which finding must be ratified by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the city commission after a properly advertised public hearing. When the requirement of sale, conveyance, or disposition to the highest responsible bidder is waived, other procurement methods as may be prescribed by ordinance shall be followed. The city or the department of off-street parking or the downtown development authority shall have the power to reject all offers. All invitations for bids, requests for proposals, or other solicitations shall contain a reservation of the foregoing right to reject all offers. This section shall not apply to transfers to the United States or any department or agency thereof, to the State of Florida, or to any political subdivision or agency thereof. 
(c)  Safeguards. 
(1)  All persons contracting with the city under this section shall be required to certify their compliance with the antitrust laws of the United States and of the State of Florida and to hold harmless, defend, and indemnify the city for any noncompliance by said persons with the above laws. 
(2)  All persons contracting with the city under this section shall be obligated to pay whichever is the greater of the following: (i) all applicable ad valorem taxes that are lawfully assessed against the property involved or (ii) an amount to be paid to the city equal to what the ad valorem taxes would be if the property were privately owned and used for a profit-making purpose. Such taxes shall not be credited against any revenues accruing to the city under any contract that may be awarded under this section. 
(3)  Any proposal by a potential bidder or contractor that contemplates more than the estimated extent of the city's proposed commitment of funds, property, or services shall be ineligible for acceptance by the city commission. 
(4)  Any substantial increase in the city's commitment of funds, property, or services, or any material alteration of any contract awarded under subsection (c) of this section shall entitle the city commission to terminate the contract after a public hearing. Prior to such public hearing, the city commission shall seek and obtain a report from the city manager and from the review committee that evaluated the proposals for the project, concerning the advisability of exercising that right. 
(Char. Amend. No. 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 9507, § 1, 10-28-82/11-2-82; Res. No. 86-656, § 2.a, 7-24-86/11-4-86; Res. No. 87-678, § 2(a), 7-9-87/11-3-87; Res. No. 01-841, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, amended § 29-A in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 29-A pertained to contracts for personal property, public works or improvements, unified development projects, and real property; safeguards. The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes. 
  Ord. No. 9489, adopted by the commission on Sept. 17, 1982, set forth Charter Amendment No. 1 for approval/rejection at election on Nov. 2, 1982. On Oct. 28, 1982, Ord. No. 9507 amended the language of subsections (a) and (c) of § 53 as proposed by Ord. No. 9489. The election was to approve the language of Charter Amendment No. 1, as amended by Ord. No. 9507. Subsequently, in light of Charter Amendment No. 2 of Nov. 3, 1987, the city attorney directed the codifier to delete paragraph (ii) of subsection (d) as superseded by § 29-B. 
Case Law reference— For case decided prior to enactment by Charter Amendment No. 3 of 1979 of a competitive-bidding requirement for disposition of city property, see Mahoney v. Givens, 64 So. 2d 926. Said case held that competitive bidding is not required to lease city real estate. 
Material variance between plans bid upon and plans submitted and adopted renders contract void, Glatstein v. City of Miami, 399 So. 2d 1005.  
Sec. 29-B. - City-owned property sale or lease—Generally. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this Charter or the City Code, and except as provided below, the city commission is prohibited from favorably considering any sale or lease of property owned by the city unless there is a return to the city of fair market value under such proposed sale or lease. The city commission is also prohibited from favorably considering any sale or lease of city-owned property unless (a) there shall have been, prior to the date of the city commission's consideration of such sale or lease, an advertisement soliciting proposals for said sale or lease published in a daily newspaper of general paid circulation in the city, allowing not less than ninety (90) days for the city's receipt of proposals from prospective purchasers or lessees, said advertisement to be no less than one-fourth (¼) page and the headline in the advertisement to be in a type no smaller than 18-point and, (b) except as provided below, there shall have been at least three (3) written proposals received from prospective purchasers or lessees; however, if there are less than three (3) such proposals received and if the guaranteed return under the proposal whose acceptance is being considered is equal to fair market value the city commission determines that the contemplated sale or lease will be in the city's best interest then, subject to the approval of a majority of the votes cast by the electorate at a referendum, the sale or lease may be consummated. Any lease for the development of improvements of city-owned property which has been approved by voter referendum shall require additional voter referendum approval for a development on City-owned property where the developer has not obtained the necessary building permits within four (4) years of the effective date of the lease. Such section shall not be applicable when the delay in the performance of any obligation is as a result of force majeure, or litigation that questions the validity of the vote, or the City Commission action to place the question for referendum, then the performance of such obligation shall be extended by the length of the delay. In the case of city-owned property which is not waterfront, when the value of such property to be sold or leased (individual leaseholds within a single city-owned property shall not be considered as a single parcel of property for such valuation purposes) is five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) or less, based on an appraisal performed by a state-certified appraiser, the city commission, by a 4/5 ths affirmative vote, may sell or lease said city-owned property after compliance with the advertisement requirements set forth above but without the necessity of a referendum. 
The above provisions and any other city requirements for competitive bidding shall not apply when: 
(a)  conveying property to implement housing programs or projects which are intended to benefit persons or households with low and/or moderate income, the criteria of which to be provided for by federal and/or state law or by the city commission; 
(b)  conveying property to implement projects authorized under the Florida Community Redevelopment Act of 1969, as amended; 
(c)  conveying property to implement projects of any governmental agency or instrumentality; 
(d)  disposing of property acquired as a result of foreclosure; 
(e)  disposing of property acquired in connection with delinquent taxes which properties were conveyed to the city by the Miami-Dade board of county commissioners under the provisions of Section 197.592 Florida Statutes, as amended; and 
(f)  disposing of non-waterfront property to the owner of an adjacent property when the subject property is 7,500 square feet or less or the subject non-waterfront property is non-buildable. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the city commission, by a 4/5 ths affirmative vote, may: 
(a)  grant a lessee of city-owned property a one-time extension during the last five years of its lease, without the necessity of a referendum, for the purpose of funding additional capital improvements. The extended term shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the original term or ten years, whichever is less. The granting of such an extension is subject to the lessee paying fair market rent as determined by the city at the time of such extension and not being in default of its lease with the city nor in arrearage of any monies due the city; and 
(b)  amend the Lease Agreement between the City of Miami and Biscayne Bay Restaurant Corp., d/b/a Rusty Pelican, dated February 13, 1970, as amended, to (i) extend the lease for an additional term of fifteen (15) years, with the option to renew for two (2) additional five (5) year periods, (ii) increase the amount of the minimum guarantee to the City to at least $360,000 per lease year effective upon execution of the lease amendment, and (iii) require Rusty Pelican to complete capital improvements to the property, including a public baywalk, in the amount of not less than $3 Million, within twenty-four (24) months of the effective date of the lease amendment; and 
(c)  waive competitive bidding and execute a lease with Dade Heritage Trust, Inc. for the City-owned building located at 190 Southeast 12th Terrace, for a term of thirty (30) years, with two (2) thirty (30) year renewals, for minimum annual rent of $600.00 with Consumer Price Index adjustments, with restrictions, reversions, and retention by the City of all other rights; and 
(d)  waive competitive bidding and execute a Fifth Amendment to the Lease Agreement with Aligned Bayshore Marina, LLC, also known as Monty's, to extend the current lease term by an additional term of approximately thirty-two (32) years (to expire May 31, 2067), with two (2) ten (10) year options to renew for a total term of fifty-two (52) years (to expire May 31, 2087); which will increase minimum rent payment by an additional two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per lease year, for a minimum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) over the base term of the amended Lease Agreement, or one and three quarters percent (1.75%) of gross rent receipts from the Property, whichever is greater, as additional rent due to the City and, commencing January 1, 2019, minimum annual total rent (inclusive of the additional minimum rent) shall be one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00), plus an additional twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to be paid on an annual basis for the full amended term to a special fund to be established by the City for the benefit of low income housing renovation; further providing capital improvements to the Property of a minimum of seven million five hundred thousand dollars ($7,500,000.00) to be spent within three (3) years of the electorate's approval of the Fifth Amendment to the Lease Agreement; further creating a capital account requiring a minimum additional investment in the Property of four million dollars ($4,000,000.00) over the amended Lease term, inclusive of the renewal options; requiring a Transfer Fee payment to the City if the Property is transferred or assigned; and further requiring a Refinancing Fee payment to the City should the Property be refinanced after the initial refinancing. 
(e)  waive competitive bidding and approve the Fifth Modification to the Lease with ESJ JI Leasehold, LLC, which modifies the remaining term of approximately forty three (43) years and extends the Term from the year 2060 to the year 2099 and includes a Fifteen (15) year option to extend the Lease to the year 2114; providing an additional annual rent payment of Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00) increasing, once the proposed hotel has stabilized, to the greater of One Million Two Hundred Twenty Thousand Dollars ($1,220,000.00) or Five Percent (5%) of annual hotel gross revenues from a new privately funded hotel development with a minimum cost of Fifty Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00) with a maximum of Three Hundred (300) rooms and a maximum height of One Hundred Thirty (130) feet, at ESJ's expense and option, and a design subject to City approval and successful land use and zoning changes, as necessary, with said rent being in addition to the currently received greater of annual rent of Five Hundred Two Thousand One Hundred Sixty Eight Dollars ($502,168.00) and percentage rent from Jungle Island revenue; with parking spaces sufficient to meet zoning ordinance requirements; ancillary improvements consisting of retail and/or restaurant space of up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet and meeting room space of up to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet; with an aggregate payment of Seven Hundred Thousand Dollars ($700,000.00) towards the Ichimura-Miami Japanese Gardens for construction of a walkway to Jungle Island and necessary repairs and maintenance of the Ichimura-Miami Japanese Gardens; payments totaling Seven Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($750,000.00) over a ten (10) year period to be used for affordable housing; establishing a reserve account for capital repairs of Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00) per year; implementing a transfer fee of Three Percent (3%) of gross sales proceeds if the Property is transferred or assigned; implementing a refinancing fee of One Percent (1%) of refinancing loan proceeds if the Property is refinanced after the initial refinancing. 
(f)  waive competitive bidding to negotiate and execute a Ground Lease and Master Development Agreement with Miami Freedom Park, LLC, for a total lease term of ninety-nine (99) years, for approximately seventy-three (73) acres of City-owned property located generally at 1400 Northwest 37th Avenue, Miami, Florida 33125, also known as Melreese County Club, with a minimum annual base rent payable to the City equal to the greater of (a) fair market value as determined by state certified appraisers or (b) five percent (5.0%) of rent from the retail, office, and hotel development within the Demised Property, but annual base rent of no less than three million five hundred seventy-seven thousand three hundred sixty-five dollars ($3,577,365.00), in addition to a contribution to the City of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) payable over thirty (30) years in annual installments, and any rent increases and/or additional rents negotiated by the parties; authorizing the use of the Demised Property for a soccer stadium; with at least one (1) million square feet of art and entertainment center including food and beverage venues, offices, retail, and a hotel with at least 750 units and conference center with ancillary commercial uses, guaranteeing a living wage for all on-site employees, further requiring MFP to undertake the remediation and Site development for a public park of approximately fifty-eight (58) acres to be developed on property adjacent to the Demised Property as MFP's sole cost, with any restrictions, reversions, and retention by the City of all other rights including at least a one (1%) transfer fee payable to the City, with such Lease and Master Development Agreement requiring City Commission approval by a four-fifths (?ths) vote. 
Note— See editor's note at the end of this section. 
Notwithstanding anything in this Charter to the contrary, the City may enter into leases or management agreements, for any City-owned submerged lands, with entities having a possessory or ownership interest in the abutting riparian uplands for building marinas, docks or like facilities, using methods adopted by ordinance on the condition that such leases or management agreements result in a return to the City of at least fair market value. 
(Res. No. 87-678, § 2(a), 7-9-87/11-3-87; Res. No. 01-841, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 03-855, § 2, 7-24-03; Res. No. 14-0184, § 1, 5-8-14; Res. No. 14-0225, § 1, 6-12-14; Res. No. 16-0348, § 3, 7-29-16; Res. No. 17-0351, § 3, 7-27-17; Res. No. 18-0232, § 3, 6-8-18; Res. No. 18-0309, § 3, 7-18-18) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 18-0309, § 3, adopted July 18, 2018, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection (e). Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection (f).  
Sec. 29-C. - Same—Watson Island. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Charter or Code of the City of Miami, no sale, conveyance, lease or management agreement may be entered into for the management, occupancy or use of the area known as Watson Island for periods greater than one year unless (1) there shall have been, prior to the date of the city commission's consideration of such sale, lease, management agreement, an advertisement soliciting proposals for said sale, lease or management agreement, published in a daily newspaper of general paid circulation in the city, allowing not less than ninety (90) days for the city's receipt of proposals from prospective purchasers or lessees, said advertisement to be no less than one-fourth page and the headline in the advertisement to be in a type no smaller than 18-point; and, (2) the proposed transaction be approved by a majority of the votes cast by the electorate at a referendum. The procedures for selection of proposals shall be those provided by Charter section 29-A(c) or (d) as appropriate and/or by applicable City Code provisions. Nothing herein shall affect the existing rights or privileges, if any, of any lessee, permittee, licensee or concessionaire currently situated in said area; however, any enlargement, amendment, transfer, or increase in those rights or privileges as may be in existence at the time this amendment is adopted shall require compliance with the provisions of this amendment. This Charter Amendment shall not affect the city's use or occupancy of the area, nor shall it apply to contracts for the construction of any city facilities or improvements in the area; further, nothing contained herein shall apply to projects of any governmental agency or instrumentality. 
The city commission, by a 4/5 ths affirmative vote, may authorize issuance of a license or concession agreement for a period not exceeding one (1) year, without the necessity of a referendum, for the use of Watson Island. 
(Res. No. 87-677, § 2(a), 7-9-87/11-3-87; Res. No. 01-841, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 29-D. - City-owned waterfront property; leases with nonprofit organizations; authorization to waive competitive bidding and referendum requirements; terms of lease. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Charter or Code of the City of Miami, the city commission is authorized to waive all competitive bidding and referendum requirements, if applicable, when entering into a lease or extending an existing lease with a nonprofit, noncommercial, water-dependent organization which provides or seeks to provide marine-recreational services and/or activities to the community at any city-owned waterfront property, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(A)  The terms of the lease allow reasonable public access to the water and reasonable public use of the property, and complies with all waterfront setback and view-corridor requirements set forth in the Charter and Code; 
(B)  The use is authorized under the then existing comprehensive plan of the city; 
(C)  The terms of the lease require that the property be used for public purposes only; 
(D)  The terms of the lease result in a return to the city based on fair market value pursuant to two (2) independent appraisals; and 
(E)  The terms of the lease comply with all requirements pertaining to membership prescribed by ordinance for organizations using city facilities. 
(Res. No. 93-485, § 2, 7-22-93; Res. No. 01-841, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Secs. 30—35. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 30—35 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 30—35 pertained to local improvements, temporary bonds, general bonds, bond anticipation notes, execution of bonds, and municipal court, respectively.  
Sec. 36. - Civil service. 
(a)  Creation of board; appointment; terms of office; vacancies; rules and regulations. A civil service board of the city is hereby created and established. There shall be five members constituting the said civil service board. Three shall be appointed by the city commission, and two shall be elected by the employees of the city with civil service status, from said employees with such civil service status. The two so elected shall become members of the board when confirmed by the city commission. All members of the said civil service board shall serve for two years, and they shall take office as soon as appointed and qualified. The city commission may remove any member of the board for cause, upon stating in writing the reasons for the removal, after allowing him or her to be heard by the city commission in his or her own defense. Any vacancy shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term. The city manager shall be authorized to prescribe the rules, regulations, and procedure for the holding of election for the purpose of electing the two members of the civil service board by the city employees with civil service status. 
(b)  Chairperson; examiner; subordinates. Immediately after appointment, the board shall organize by electing one of its members chairperson. The board shall appoint a chief examiner who shall be a member of the board and who shall also act as secretary. The board may appoint such other subordinates as may by appropriation be provided for. 
(c)  Unclassified and classified service. The civil service of the city is hereby divided into the unclassified and the classified service. 
(1)  The unclassified service shall include: 
(A)  The city manager, his or her assistants, and secretarial staff; 
(B)  The heads of departments, members of appointive boards, judges of the city court, the city clerk, chief of police, chief of fire division, and the superintendent of communications division; 
(C)  Assistants to department heads: 
Assistant chiefs of the police division; 
All ranks in the police division above the classified position of police captain; 
Assistant chiefs of the fire division; 
Chief of fire prevention; 
Director of training in the fire division; 
Battalion chiefs; 
Chief of fire rescue; 
Assistant to the superintendent of the division of communications; 
Director of corrections. 
(D)  All attorneys employed by the city. The city attorney shall be the supervisor of all attorneys employed by the city. The city attorney shall have exclusive authority regarding, but not limited to appointment, removal and salary as to assistant city attorneys. The foregoing provisions of subsection (D) shall not apply to those attorneys in the classified service of the city on November 1, 1972. 
Attorneys with permanent civil service rights appointed by the city attorney to any applicable unclassified position above, shall retain civil service rights in the position from which selected as may have accrued. 
(E)  All employees employed by the City and working within the Office of the Independent Auditor General. 
Personnel with permanent civil service rights appointed by the city manager to unclassified positions shall retain said civil [service] rights in the position from which selected as may have accrued. 
(2)  The classified services shall include all positions not specifically included by this Charter in the unclassified service. There shall be in the classified service three classes, to be known as the competitive class, noncompetitive class, and labor class. 
(A)  The competitive class shall include all positions and employment for which it is practicable to determine the merit and fitness of applicants by competitive examinations. 
(B)  The noncompetitive class shall consist of all positions requiring peculiar and exceptional qualifications of a scientific, city managerial, professional, or educational character, as may be determined by the rules of the board. 
(C)  The labor class shall include ordinary unskilled labor. 
(d)  Rules; examinations; eligible lists; certification of vacancies. Subject to the approval of the city commission, the board shall adopt, amend, and enforce a code of rules and regulations which shall have the force and effect of law providing for appointment and employment in all positions in the classified service, based on merit, efficiency, character, and industry; shall make investigations concerning the enforcement and effect of this article and of the rules adopted; and shall make an annual report to the city commission. The chief examiner shall provide examinations in accordance with regulations of the board and maintain lists of eligibles of each class of the services of those meeting the requirements of said regulations. Positions in the classified service shall be filled from such eligible lists upon requisition from and after consultation with the city manager. When positions are filled, the employment officer shall so certify, by proper and prescribed form, to the director of finance and to the director of the department in which the vacancy exists. 
(e)  Promotion. The board shall provide uniform rules for promotion to all positions in the classified service. 
(f)  Power of suspension, removal, fine, or demotion. 
(1)  Any officer or employee in the classified service may be removed, suspended, fined, laid off, or demoted by the city manager or by the head of the department in which such person is employed, for any cause which will promote the efficiency of the service; but such person must be furnished with a written statement of the reasons therefor within five days from the date of the removal, suspension, fine, layoff, or demotion, and be allowed a reasonable time for answering such reasons in writing, which answer shall be made a part of the records of the board, with the suspension to take effect as of the date that such written statement is furnished. No trial or examination of witnesses shall be required except in the discretion of the city manager or the head of the department. Any employee in the classified service who deems that he or she has been suspended, removed, fined, laid off, or demoted without just cause may, within 15 days of such action, request in writing a hearing before the civil service board to determine the reasonableness of the action. The board shall, within 30 days after appeal of the employee disciplined, proceed to hear such appeal. After hearing and considering the evidence for and against the employee, the board shall report in writing to the city manager its findings and recommendations. The city manager shall then sustain, reverse, or modify the action of the department director. Any member of the civil service board and the director of personnel may administer an oath to witnesses appearing before said board or before said director in an investigation, disciplinary or appeal proceedings, and they shall have the power to issue witness subpoenas and to compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(2)  The civil service board shall also have the right to remove or demote any official or employee in the classified service upon written charges of misconduct made by any citizen, but only after reasonable notice to the officer or employee and after a full hearing. It shall also be the duty of the board to fix a minimum standard of conduct and efficiency for each grade in the service. Whenever it appears from the reports of efficiency made to said board for a period of six months that the conduct or efficiency of any employee has fallen below such minimum standard, that employee shall be called before the board to show cause why he or she should not be disciplined. If upon hearing no reason is shown satisfactory to the board, the employee shall be removed, suspended, or demoted, as the board may determine. 
(g)  Present employees. All persons in the employ of the city holding positions in the classified service, as established by this Charter, at the time it takes effect, shall, unless their position is abolished, retain same until discharged, demoted, promoted, or transferred, in accordance herewith. 
(h)  Certificate of board on payroll account necessary before payment of classified service member. The treasurer or other public disbursing officer shall not pay any salary or compensation for service to any person holding a position in the classified service unless the payroll or account for such salary or compensation bears the certificate of the board, by its secretary, that the persons named therein have been appointed or employed and are performing service in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and of the rules established thereunder. 
(i)  Investigations and hearings. In any investigation conducted by the board, it shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production thereby of books and papers pertinent to the investigation and to administer oaths to such witnesses. 
(j)  No discrimination in classified service. No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be appointed, demoted, removed, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations. No person holding a position in the classified service shall take part in political management or affairs or in political campaigns during city working hours or with personal property belonging to the city. 
(k)  Penalties. The civil service board, subject to the approval of the city commission, shall determine the penalties for the violation of the civil service provisions of this Charter. 
(l)  Salaries of board and employees. The salaries of the civil service board and its employees shall be determined by the city commission, and a sufficient sum shall be appropriated each year to carry out the civil service provisions of this Charter. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res No. 17-0319, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 37. - Pension funds. 
(a)  The city commission shall establish a fund or funds for the relief or pension of persons in the classified service of the city. The city commission, on behalf of the city, may receive gifts, devises, and bequests of money or property for the benefit of such fund or funds; may make contributions of public money thereto on such terms and conditions as it may see fit; and shall make rules and regulations for the management, investment, and administration of such fund or funds. 
(b)  The city commission shall have power to make contracts of insurance with any insurance company authorized to transact business in this state, insuring its employees or any class or classes thereof under a policy or policies of group insurance covering life or health or accident insurance or any two or more of such classes of insurance and may contract with any company granting annuities or pensions and authorized to transact business within the state for the pensioning of such employees or any class or classes thereof; for any and all such purposes the city commission may appropriate the funds necessary to pay premiums or charges incident to the carrying on of such policies or contracts. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 38. - City planning and zoning board. 
(a)  Comprehensive planning. The city commission is empowered to plan for the future development of the city and, as an integral part of the planning process, to take all lawful actions necessary to implement plans made. 
In furtherance of this authority, the city commission may undertake continuing comprehensive planning programs and may adopt comprehensive plans to guide the future development of the city in order to preserve and enhance the present advantages of the city, to overcome present handicaps, and to prevent or minimize future problems. Continuing comprehensive planning programs and comprehensive plans that may be adopted may include, but are not to be deemed as limited to: 
(1)  principles and policies to be followed in future development of the city; 
(2)  location, relocation, and character of the various uses of land and water; 
(3)  location, relocation, and character of public and private open spaces for recreation, amenity, and cultural life; 
(4)  modes and means of travel and transportation; 
(5)  location and character of public buildings, services, and facilities; 
(6)  provision of necessary utilities; 
(7)  conservation, rehabilitation, or replacement of housing; 
(8)  density of population; 
(9)  methods and policies for encouragement of cooperation of private persons and groups in the accomplishment of adopted comprehensive plans; 
(10)  taxing and financial arrangements and long-range capital improvement programs deemed necessary to implement the planning program; and 
(11)  land-use control and regulatory measures and other instruments deemed necessary to accomplish the aims and objectives of adopted comprehensive plans. 
(b)  Authority to implement comprehensive plans. The city commission is authorized to use all lawful powers conferred upon the city to implement comprehensive plans that may be adopted and to provide for the status of such adopted plans. Particularly, but not in limitation thereof, the city commission is authorized to adopt and enforce: 
(1)  controls on the use of lands and waters; 
(2)  zoning of lands and waters; 
(3)  regulations for the development or subdivision of land; 
(4)  building, plumbing, electrical, gas, fire, safety, sanitary, and other codes; and 
(5)  minimum housing codes. 
(c)  Creation of implementing boards. The city commission shall by ordinance create such appropriate board or boards as it may deem necessary to carry out the functions as set out in subsections (a) and (b) above. 
The city commission may by ordinance provide for the establishment and method of composition of the board or boards; the number of members; the qualifications of members; the staggering of terms to insure board continuity; the method of filling vacancies; the method of removal; the compensation, if any; the participation of alternate members, if any, in board business; the general rules of organization, procedures, and conduct of business; the giving of notice and necessary public hearings on matters relating to the functions of the board or boards; and other matters deemed necessary by the city commission to the proper functioning of such board or boards. 
The city commission may by ordinance make provision for the functions, responsibility, advisory or quasijudicial duties, and authority of the board or boards created by the city commission. The city commission may by ordinance set out the standards and limitations under which such board or boards shall operate; the relationship of the board or boards to each other, to the city commission, or to the courts as provided by law; and the method of review of any decisions of such board or boards. 
(d)  Administrative support and appropriations. The city commission shall provide such administrative arrangements, support, and appropriations as it may deem necessary to enable the board or boards established under this section properly to perform their functions and meet their responsibilities and to insure that proper and necessary liaison is maintained between them and with the city commission. 
(e)  Task forces or committees. The city commission may by resolution appoint task forces or committees to serve as advisory or recommendatory agents to the board or boards established under this section on particular problems relating to the areas of responsibility and authority of the particular board. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 39. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed § 39 in its entirety. Formerly, § 39 pertained to franchises and public utilities—Ordinance requires four-fifths vote of commission; approval of ordinance by voters; limitation on duration of grant.  
Sec. 40. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Plat requirements. Any owner of lots or grounds within the city who subdivides same for sale shall cause to be made an accurate plat of said subdivision describing with certainty all grounds laid out or granted for streets or other public uses. Lots intended for sale shall be numbered by progressive numbers or described by the squares in which situated, and the precise length and width shall be given of each lot sold or intended for sale; such plat shall be subscribed by the owner, acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgement of deeds, approved by the director of public works, and recorded in the office of the clerk of circuit court in and for Dade County, Florida. No such plat shall be approved unless it clearly gives an accurate description of the property showing section corners or quarter-section corners or at least tying the property to one or more sections or quarter-section corners or government monuments. 
(b)  Supervisor of plats. The director of public works shall be supervisor of plats of the city and shall provide regulations governing the platting of all lands so as to require all streets and alleys to be of proper width, to be coterminous with adjoining streets and alleys, and otherwise to conform to the regulations prescribed. Whenever said director shall deem it expedient to plat any portion of territory within the city limits, within which the necessary streets or alleys have not already been accepted by the city, so as to become public streets or alleys, or when any person plats land within the corporate limits or within two miles thereof, the director of public works shall, if such plats are in accordance with the prescribed regulation, endorse his or her written approval thereon. No plat subdividing lands within the corporate limits of the city or within two miles thereof shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for Dade County, Florida, without such written approval. 
(c)  Streets or alleys not accepted unless laid down on plat. No streets or alleys except those laid down on the plats referred to in this section and bearing the approval of the director of public works, as hereinbefore provided for, shall subsequently in any way be accepted as public streets or alleys by the city, nor shall any public funds be expended in the repair or improvement of streets and alleys subsequently laid out and not on such plat. This restriction shall not apply to a street or alley laid out by the city nor to streets, alleys, or public grounds laid out on a plat by or with the approval of the director of public works. 
(d)  Acceptance and confirmation of street or alley dedication. No streets or alleys hereafter dedicated to public use by the owner of ground in the city shall be deemed a public street or alley, or under the care and control of the city commission, unless the dedication be provided in the plat or by warranty deed or other instrument of grant; unless the grant be accepted and confirmed by resolution passed for that purpose; and unless the provisions of this Charter relating to subdivisions shall have been complied with. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Secs. 41, 42. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 41 and 42 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 41 and 42 pertained to conduct of a city business, compensation, duties, and oaths or officers and employees and power to appoint boards or commissions of citizens, respectively, and derived from Res. No. 97-447, § 2, adopted July 2, 1997.  
Sec. 43. - Continuity. 
(a)  All city ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in force at the time this Charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, are hereby continued in force until the same shall be duly amended or repealed. 
(b)  Present officers and powers. All persons holding office in or employed by the city at the time this charter goes into effect shall continue in such office or employment and in the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been otherwise made in accordance with the provisions of this charter for the performance or discontinuance of the duties of any such office or employment. When such provisions are made the term of any such officer shall expire, and the office shall be abolished. The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any officer, board, commission, or department of the city under the laws of the state, shall, if such officer, board, commission, or department is abolished by this charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board, or department upon whom are imposed corresponding functions, duties, and powers under the provisions of this charter. 
(c)  Present contracts and proceedings. All rights, actions, proceedings, prosecutions, and contracts of the city or of any of its departments or officers, pending or unexecuted when this charter goes into effect, and not inconsistent therewith, shall be enforced, continued, or completed, in all respects, as though begun or executed hereunder. 
(d)  Present titles and rights. The title, rights, and ownership of property, uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, decrees, and choses in action held or owned by the city at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue. 
(e)  Acts under former charters. All acts and proceedings of the commission or of any officer of the city done or taken pursuant to the provisions of the previous city charter are hereby ratified. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 44. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed § 44. Formerly, § 44 pertained to suits against the city.  
Sec. 45. - General provisions. 
(a)  Codification of ordinances. The city commission may at any time appoint a person or persons and authorize them to arrange and codify the ordinances of the city and to publish such codification in appropriate volume or volumes, which shall become the laws of the city upon adoption by ordinance; provided, that in the exercise of the power by the city commission to adopt said codification, it shall not be necessary to publish said codification, the publication of the ordinance adopting the same being sufficient to make said publication binding as the law of the city. 
(b)  Record of ordinances; evidence. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to record all ordinances adopted by the city commission within 10 days after their passage in a book kept for that purpose, properly indexed. A copy of any ordinance therefrom, certified by the city clerk under the seal of the city, shall be received in evidence in all courts of this state. 
(c)  Ordaining clause. The ordaining clause of every ordinance shall be as follows: "Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City of Miami". 
(d)  Enumeration of powers not exclusive. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be deemed or held to be exclusive, but additional to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof; the city shall have and may exercise all other powers which are now, or may hereafter be, possessed or enjoyed by cities under the constitution and general laws of this state; and all the powers of the city, whether express or implied, shall be exercised and embraced in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or when not so prescribed, then in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  General laws to apply. All general laws of the state, applicable to municipal corporations, heretofore or hereafter enacted and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter or with ordinances or resolutions hereafter enacted by this city commission pursuant to authority conferred by this Charter shall be applicable to the city; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed as limiting the power of the city commission to enact any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with the constitution of the state or with the express provisions of this Charter. 
(f)  Effect of state law and present ordinances. Nothing in this act shall be so construed as to alter, abolish, affect or amend any of the laws of this state now in force or which may hereafter be enacted relative to towns and cities of the state incorporated under the general law, nor any of the ordinances of the city now in force, except such as are in conflict with the provisions of this Charter; all such laws and ordinances are hereby declared to be in full force and effect. 
(g)  Unconstitutionality of part of Charter. If any section or part of this Charter is declared invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or part of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part is wholly and necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(h)  Effective Date. This Charter shall take effect immediately upon being approved by a majority of the electors of the city voting at an election called for the purpose of approving this Charter. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01) 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Secs. 46, 47. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-843, § 2, adopted August 9, 2001, repealed §§ 46 and 47 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 46 and 47 pertained to bureau of legal aid and credit to prisoners for work, costs in criminal prosecutions, respectively.  
Sec. 48. - Office of independent auditor general. 
(a)  Created; responsibility. There is hereby created the Office and position of Independent Auditor General to provide the City Commission with independent oversight of audit and analytical functions of the City. The Office of the Independent Auditor General shall report directly to the City Commission. 
(b)  Appointment, qualifications and term of Independent Auditor General. The city commission shall appoint an auditor, who shall be a Certified Public Accountant, to serve as the director of the Office of the Independent Auditor General and to be known as the Independent Auditor General ("IAG"). At the time of appointment, the IAG shall have and maintain an active license, shall be certified under the public accountancy law in Florida, shall have a degree in public administration or in lieu of such degree shall have at least five years experience in public administration and shall have sufficient experience in governmental accounting and auditing practices. The initial appointment shall begin January 1, 2000, and shall end with the election in November 2001. Thereafter, the appointment shall be for a term of four (4) years. During the initial and any subsequent term, the IAG shall be subject to suspension and/or removal by the city commission for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by proper authority, or for any other just and reasonable cause. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The IAG shall be responsible to provide independent oversight of audit functions, and for the performance of such other duties as may be assigned by the city commission or any member of the city commission. To the degree necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of the office, the IAG shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Examine city audit functions and accounting systems, provide budget and legislative analysis, conduct financial, operational, compliance, single act and performance audits of city government, officials, and independent agencies, with reports submitted to the city commission as deemed necessary by the IAG or as may be required by the city commission, from time to time, and copied to the administration. 
(2)  Have free and unrestricted access to city government employees, officials, records and reports and where appropriate, require all branches, departments, agencies and officials of city government to provide oral and written reports and to produce documents, files and other records. 
(3)  Render assistance to external auditors retained by the city commission. Such assistance shall be limited to special audits or limited examinations ordered by the city commission. 
(d)  Staffing. The Office of Independent Auditor General shall be staffed by such professional assistants and support personnel as shall be designated by the IAG and as are approved in the city's annual budget, as may be amended from time to time by the City Commission. The IAG shall be the supervisor for all auditors and support personnel employed by the Office of the Independent Auditor General. The IAG shall have exclusive authority regarding, but not limited to, appointment/hiring, removal, and salary as to all employees of the Office of Independent Auditor General. 
(e)  Establishment of operating procedures and responsibilities. The IAG may, from time to time, issue directives setting forth the operating procedures to be followed and responsibilities to be discharged by the Office. 
(Res. No. 99-608, § 2, 8-2-99; Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 17-0320, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 49. - Office of the City Clerk. 
(a)  There is established the office of the city clerk. The director of the office of the city clerk shall be the city clerk. The city clerk shall be appointed as provided in Charter section 4(e). The city clerk shall be the custodian of the seal of the city. 
(b)  The office of the city clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Prepare and distribute notice of all public meetings as required by law and the minutes of such meetings; 
(2)  Be custodian of inactive, archived and vital records of the city and maintain a records management system; 
(3)  Conduct, supervise and certify all city elections; 
(4)  Be custodian of all legislation, lobbyist registration, contracts and bids; 
(5)  Perform such other duties as required in this Charter or as directed by the city commission. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 50. - Certain former Charter provisions to become ordinances. 
All provisions of the present charter, Laws of Florida, ch. 10847 (1925), as amended and as compiled and printed in the Code of Ordinances, 1996, which are not included in this Charter or amended by or inconsistent with this Charter shall become ordinances of the city and continued in effect as ordinances and not new enactments and shall be subject to amendment or repeal in the same manner as other ordinances of the city. The provisions of this Charter where they are the same as the provisions in the former charter are to be considered continuations of the former charter provisions and not new enactments. 
(Res. No. 01-843, § 2, 8-9-01)  
Sec. 51. - Civilian investigative panel. 
The city commission shall, by ordinance, create and establish a civilian investigative panel to act as independent citizens' oversight of the sworn police department, to be: 
(A)  Composed of: (i) twelve (12) civilian members who shall be nominated by the civilian investigative panel and approved by the city commission and (ii) a thirteenth (13th) member who shall be an appointee of the Chief of Police who is not a City of Miami Police Officer; 
(B)  Staffed with professional personnel, including but not limited to: (i) an executive director who shall serve as chief executive officer and (ii) an independent legal counsel who is an experienced and competent member of the Florida Bar with at least seven years membership in the Florida Bar and is generally knowledgeable in municipal law, both of whom shall be appointed by and subject to removal by the panel with the approval of the City Commission; 
(C)  Operated on an annual budget established by the City Commission, by ordinance, that will allow the panel to maintain its independence and perform its Charter mandated functions, with sufficient professional staff, while taking into account the City Manager's declaration of a fiscal emergency, a financial urgency, or financial emergency in the City; 
(D)  Authorized by vote of the CIP and in "consultation" with the state attorney of Miami-Dade County, to issue subpoenas for allegations which are criminal in nature, provided that the CIP may not confer immunity and must advise all city employees appearing before it that no adverse employment consequences will result from the valid exercise of their right to be free from self-incrimination, and, further, that no actions of the CIP may interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution; and 
(E)  Authorized to: 
(1)  Conduct independent investigations of allegations of police misconduct and police uses of force resulting in death or great bodily harm to a person; 
(2)  Conduct independent investigations of other matters pertaining to repeated issues of conduct by City of Miami Police Officers; 
(3)  Review police department policies and practices; and 
(4)  Make written requests and recommendations regarding the CIP's reviews and investigations to the city manager and the police chief, to which the Police shall issue a written response within forty-five (45) days. 
(Res. No. 01-844, § 2, 8-9-01; Res. No. 16-0351, § 2, 7-29-16)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute, be designated as, and be cited as the "Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended" ("Code"). 
(Code 1967, § 1-1; Code 1980, § 1-1; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18) 
Charter reference— Authority for codification of ordinances, §§ 3(ff), 104.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
This section provides definitions of terms to be used throughout the Code, as defined herein, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission or the context of this Code: 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, as printed in part I of this Code. 
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Miami, in Miami-Dade County and the State of Florida. 
City commission or commission. The terms "city commission" or "commission" shall mean the city commission of the City. 
City manager. The term "city manager" shall mean the head of the administrative branch of the city government or his or her designee. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended. 
County. The term "county" shall mean Miami-Dade County, in the State of Florida. 
State Law reference— Dade County, F.S. § 7.13. 
Following. The term "following" shall mean immediately next. 
F.S. The term "F.S." shall mean the official Florida Statutes and all amendments and latest supplements. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Office, officer, board, committee, etc. The terms "office", "officer", "board", "committee", and similar terms shall mean of the city and includes any person authorized by law to perform the duties of such office, officer, board, committee, etc. 
Owner. the word "owner," shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall mean a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" shall mean immediately before. 
Rendition. The term "rendition" shall mean the filing of the referenced item with the clerk of the board. 
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Florida. 
Tenant; occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Ways; streets; highways. The terms "ways," "streets," and "highways," shall mean any way, street, and highway and include but not be limited to boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, places, terraces, and sidewalks, so far as the same are public; and each of these words includes every other of them. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2; Code 1980, § 1-2; Ord. No. 11564, § 3, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18) 
State Law reference— State law definitions of terms generally, F.S. § 1.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public right-of-way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any ordinances regarding building codes, land use, zoning, rezoning, or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, or benefits or setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law. 
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section, subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the sections of this Code may be made by amending such sections by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not existing prior to the adoption of this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  Every subsection, section, division, article or chapter desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by subsection, section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18) 
State Law reference— Minimum procedure and requirements for enactment of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission of the portions from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, or titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ through _______." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 1-10. - Continuation of prior ordinances; effect of provisions of Code. 
So far as the provisions of this Code are the same in effect as those of previously existing provisions of the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, 1980, or other city ordinances, they shall be construed as a continuation of such Code or other ordinances. They shall not affect any act done; any right accrued; any penalty incurred; any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending; or the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time they take effect. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3; Code 1980, § 1-3; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4; Code 1980, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5; Code 1980, § 1-5; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of any section of this Code or any other ordinance, where no other penalty is prescribed, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00, imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or shall be both fined and imprisoned. Each day that such violation shall continue (or, in the case of shows and exhibitions illegally conducted, each performance) shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6; Code 1980, § 1-6; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose penalties for ordinance violations, limitation on penalties, § 3(z). 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of ordinances, F.S. § 162.22; fines and forfeitures collected in county court for violations of municipal ordinances payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083.  
Sec. 1-14. - Computation of time. 
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
(Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 1-15. - Public clocks to use official time. 
All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained at the expense of the city shall be set and run according to the official time as provided by the Congress of the United States, unless otherwise modified by the legislature of the state. It is hereby made the duty of the officer or other person having control and charge of such building or premises to see that such clocks or other timepieces are set and run in accordance with official time. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8; Code 1980, § 1-7; Ord. No. 13748, § 2, 3-8-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13748, § 2, adopted March 8, 2018, redesignated the former section 1-14 as section 1-15. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Federal law reference— Provisions establishing standard time throughout the United States, but permitting states to exempt themselves from daylight saving time, 15 USC 260—267. 
State Law reference— Legal time, F.S. § 1.02.  
Sec. 1-16. - City seal. 
(a)  City seal. As used herein, the city seal shall mean the graphical seal as depicted below and comprised of a round seal with the words "The City of Miami" and "Florida" arranged in a semicircular form, constituting the border and the design of the Royal Palm Tree in an upright position in the center of the seal, with the inscription "Incorporated 1896" inserted just below the center of the seal. Said city seal shall be the official seal of the city. 
 
(b)  Unauthorized use of the city seal. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to manufacture, use, display, or otherwise employ any facsimile or reproduction of the city seal, except by city officials or employees in their official duties, without the express approval of the city commission. Such unauthorized use shall constitute a violation of this section and may be punished by a court of competent jurisdiction up to the maximum penalty permitted by law as provided by section 1-13 of this Code and F.S. § 165.043. 
(c)  All seals previously used or adopted by the city are solely reserved for use by the city, its agencies, and instrumentalities, which shall maintain all rights authorized and provided for pursuant to F.S. § 165.043. 
(Ord. No. 13750, § 2, 3-22-18)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Downtown development authority board, § 14-52 et seq.; elections, ch. 16; finance, ch. 18; personnel, ch. 40; police, ch. 42; historic and environmental preservation board, § 62-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Intergovernmental programs, F.S. ch. 163. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City offices to be closed on Saturdays; exceptions. 
Saturday of each week is hereby designated a legal holiday, and the public offices of the city shall be closed on Saturday, except those offices whose personnel render services essential to the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city including but not limited to the police, fire-rescue, and general services administration departments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1; Code 1980, § 2-1; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish hours for city offices to be open, § 41(b). 
State Law reference— Holidays, F.S. § 683.01.  
Sec. 2-2. - Hearings and investigations—Authority of city officers to issue subpoenas, require attendance of witnesses, etc. 
Every officer of the city who is authorized in and by any provisions of the City Charter to conduct hearings or investigations is hereby authorized and empowered to issue subpoenas which shall require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, and other evidence, and is further authorized and empowered to administer to any person the oath usually administered to witnesses and to require such person to make a full and fair disclosure of all facts within the witness' knowledge which are properly relevant to the subject matter of any such hearing or investigation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2; Code 1980, § 2-2; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18) 
City Code cross reference— Investigations of possible violation of lobbying regulations, § 2-657.  
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Right of person subject to hearing or investigation to require attendance of witnesses, production of books, papers, etc. 
Every person whose conduct or activities are the subject of any hearing or investigation by an officer of the city shall have the right to require subpoenas to be issued in his or her behalf to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence. For the purpose of exercising such right, such person shall file a praecipe for the issuance of witness subpoenas with the officer conducting such hearing or investigation, setting forth in such praecipe the name and the address of each person upon whom a subpoena is to be served and describing with adequate clearness any books, papers, records, or other evidence to be produced at such hearing or investigation, and, contemporaneously with the filing of such praecipe, shall deposit with such officer the amount provided for in section 2-5 as witness fees for one day for each person, other than members of the city commission or officers or employees of the city, upon whom a subpoena is to be served. Upon the filing of such praecipe and the deposit of such witness fees, the subpoenas covered thereby shall be issued forthwith by the officer conducting such hearing or investigation, and they shall be served and returns shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the relevant sections of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3; Code 1980, § 2-3; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Contents, service and return of subpoenas. 
Each subpoena issued pursuant to sections 2-2 and 2-3 shall set forth the general purpose of the hearing or investigation to which the subpoena pertains; shall bear the signature of the officer issuing the same; shall command the person named therein to be present at the time and place therein stated; and, in the event that such person is to be required to produce books, papers, records, or other evidence at such time and place, shall describe with adequate clearness the books, papers, records, or other evidence to be so produced. The process server charged with the duty of serving any such subpoena shall make a written return to the officer issuing the subpoena, setting forth in such return whether service was duly completed and, if so, the time, place, and manner thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4; Code 1980, § 2-4; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 2-5. - Same—Witnesses' fees. 
(a)  Every person upon whom a subpoena shall be served as provided in sections 2-3 and 2-4, and who is not a member of the city commission or an officer or an employee of the city shall be entitled to receive, upon demand of the witness and in advance, witness fees at the rate of $3.50 per diem if the witness resides within the municipal boundaries of the city, and at the rate of $4.00 per diem if the witness resides outside the municipal boundaries of the city, for each day upon which the witness' attendance at any such hearing or investigation is required, and it shall be the duty of such person to attend such hearing or investigation from day to day until the witness is discharged from further attendance by the officer conducting the same, provided that, if the witness shall demand payment in advance of such witness fees and such payment is not made in compliance with the witness' demand, the witness shall not be required to attend that session of such hearing or investigation to which such demand applied; and the witness shall not be entitled to demand in advance at any one time payment of an amount in excess of the witness fees payable to the witness under this section for attending the next scheduled daily session of such hearing or investigation. 
(b)  All amounts paid as witness fees to persons subpoenaed upon the initiative of the officer conducting such hearing or investigation shall constitute and be recognized as municipal expenses and shall be made available and paid in such manner as the city manager shall prescribe. 
(c)  All amounts paid as witness fees to persons subpoenaed as the result of the filing of the praecipe described in section 2-3 shall be advanced by and shall constitute an expense of the person filing such praecipe, unless the officer conducting such hearing or investigation should otherwise direct. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5; Code 1980, § 2-5; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 2-6. - Same—Failure to attend hearing or give testimony. 
No person regularly served with a subpoena under the provisions of sections 2-2 through 2-5 shall fail to attend a hearing or investigation as directed in such subpoena; refuse to be sworn as a witness; or refuse to testify, give evidence, or answer fully and fairly any proper question propounded to the witness. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6; Code 1980, § 2-6; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Sec. 2-7. - Service charge on refused checks. 
At any time the city is in possession of a check, draft, or order which has been refused by the drawee because of lack of funds or credit, a service charge for the handling of such instrument is hereby imposed upon the drawer and/or last endorser of the instrument, not to exceed maximum as provided by state law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6.1; Code 1980, § 2-7; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18) 
State Law reference— Dishonored check fee, F.S. § 166.251.  
Sec. 2-8. - Disclosure requirement. 
(a)  Each person or entity requesting approval, relief, or other action from the city commission or any of its boards, authorities, agencies, councils, or committees regarding any issue, shall disclose, at the commencement (or continuance) of the public hearing on the issue, any consideration provided or committed, directly or on its behalf, for an agreement to support or withhold objection to the requested approval, relief, or action. 
(b)  The disclosure shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Indicate to whom the consideration has been provided or committed; 
(3)  Describe the nature of the consideration, and specify the amount of any funds paid or committed; 
(4)  Describe what is being requested in exchange for the consideration; and 
(5)  Be read into the record by the requesting person or entity prior to submission to the secretary/clerk of the respective board. 
(c)  Upon determination by the city commission, board, authority, agency, council, or committee as applicable that the foregoing disclosure requirement was not timely satisfied by the person or entity requesting approval, relief, or other action as provided above, then: 
(1)  The application or order, as applicable, shall immediately be void without further force or effect, and 
(2)  No application from said person or entity for the subject of the request shall be reviewed or considered by the applicable board(s) until expiration of a period of one year after the nullification of the application or order. 
(d)  The validity of any action or determination of the city commission or any of its boards, authorities, agencies, councils, or committees shall not be affected by the failure of any person or entity to comply with the provisions of this section unless a challenge is presented to the city commission or any of its boards, authorities, agencies, councils, or committees at the first regularly scheduled meeting of such board authority agency, council, or committee following the date such violation of the disclosure requirement is alleged to have occurred. 
(e)  "Consideration" shall be defined to include any gift, payment, contribution, donation, fee, commission, promise, or grant of any money, property, service, credit, or financial assistance of any kind or value, whether direct or implied, or any promise or agreement to provide any of the foregoing in the future. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to employ any device, scheme, or artifice to circumvent the disclosure requirements of this section and such circumvention shall be deemed a violation of the disclosure requirements of this section. 
(g)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect individuals retained or employed by a principal as lobbyist as defined in section 2-653. 
(Ord. No. 12918, § 1, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 13749, § 2, 3-8-18)  
Secs. 2-9—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11564, § 4, adopted Oct. 28, 1997, changed the title of art. II from City Commission to Mayor and City Commission. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Election and general powers. 
The mayor and members of the city commission shall be elected as provided in Section 4 of the City Charter and shall exercise the powers and duties prescribed in Section 3 and other sections of the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7; Code 1980, § 2-11; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-32. - Time and place of meeting. 
(a)  City hall, located at 3500 Pan American Drive, Miami, Florida, is hereby designated as the meeting place for the city commission. All meetings of the city commission shall be held on the first floor of city hall. The city commission may designate alternate meeting places and times from time to time as may appear appropriate by resolution. Such resolution shall specify the date, time, and place and shall be limited to one city commission meeting per resolution. The date so specified shall be not sooner than 30 days subsequent to the effective date of the resolution. 
(b)  Regular meetings of the city commission shall be held on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month except the months of August, November, and December and unless otherwise provided by city commission action. Regular meetings of the city commission shall convene promptly at 9:00 a.m. At the first meeting of the month, matters to be considered by the city commission shall be limited to those matters not arising from or under the provisions of Miami 21, as amended, the zoning ordinance for the city. At the second monthly meeting, matters to be considered shall be generally limited to those matters arising from or under the provisions of Miami 21, as amended, and shall not be addressed by the city commission until after 2:00 p.m. Further, all public hearings on land use ordinances, including those involving ten acres or more, may be held before 5:00 p.m. unless the city commission, state law, or administrative rule specifically provides otherwise. During the month of November, the regular meeting shall be held on the third Thursday at 9:00 a.m. and matters arising from or under the provisions of Miami 21, as amended, shall be heard after 2:00 p.m. on the third Thursday. During the month of December, the regular meeting shall be held on the second Thursday at 9:00 a.m. and matters arising from or under the provisions of Miami 21, as amended, shall be heard after 2:00 p.m. on the second Thursday. The city commission shall be in recess during the month of August. 
(c)  The city commission may, by resolution, designate a substitute day or time upon which regular city commission meetings shall be held whenever, in the opinion of a majority of the members of the city commission, there is good cause for such substitution. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8; Ord. No. 9294, § 1, 7-9-81; Code 1980, § 2-12; Ord. No. 11530, § 2, 7-24-97; Ord. No. 11580, § 1, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 11865, § 2, 11-14-99; Ord. No. 12074, § 1, 5-24-01; Ord. No. 13348, § 1, 10-25-12; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18) 
Editor's note— Miami 21, the zoning ordinance, is published in a separate volume. 
Charter reference— Place and time of commission meetings, § 4(f). 
City Code cross reference— Zoning and planning, ch. 62.  
Sec. 2-33. - Order of business and rules of procedure. 
(a)  The rules and regulations regarding the procedure of the city commission at all regular meetings are hereby established and adopted. 
(b)  The first order of business shall be the approval of the minutes of the previous meeting. A copy of said minutes shall be distributed to the mayor and each of the commissioners prior to the meeting to enable the mayor and each commissioner to review the contents thereof. 
(c)  After approval of the minutes of the previous meeting(s), all business that shall come before the city commission shall be taken up in the order as such items of business appear on the city commission agenda in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The agenda shall be prepared by the city manager in an appropriate form approved, from time to time, by the city commission. Matters may be placed on the agenda by the mayor, any member of the city commission, the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, and a city board as defined in section 2-882 of this Code. 
(2)  Any member of the public shall be entitled to speak on any proposition before the city commission in which the city commission may take any action through the presiding officer. Unless further time to speak is granted by the presiding officer of the city commission, any person addressing the commission shall limit his or her address to two minutes. The opportunity to be heard need not occur at the same meeting at which the city commission takes official action on the proposition, if the opportunity occurs at a meeting that is during the decision making process and is within reasonable proximity in time before the meeting at which the city commission takes official action. This does not prohibit the city commission from maintaining orderly conduct or proper decorum in a public meeting. 
(3)  The requirements of subsection (c)(2) shall not apply to: 
a.  An official act that must be taken to deal with an emergency situation affecting the public health, welfare, or safety, if compliance with the above requirements would cause an unreasonable delay in the ability of the city commission to act; or 
b.  A ministerial act, including but not limited to, approval of minutes and ceremonial proclamations. 
(4)  Any member of the public shall be entitled to be scheduled on the agenda of a regular meeting of the city commission for presentation of information and material to be considered by the commission within the scope of the jurisdiction of the city commission after the city manager has communicated with the member of the public and reviewed or investigated the member's issue, unless otherwise directed by the mayor or a member of the city commission. If the city manager is able to resolve or remedy the concerns of the member of the public, the member of the public may elect to withdraw the request to appear before the city commission. If the matter is not or cannot be resolved or remedied by the city manager, then, at the will of the member of the public, the request for appearance shall be scheduled on the next available agenda and the city manager shall submit a report in the agenda packet detailing actions taken to resolve or remedy the matter and administrative recommendations. 
(5)  The total number of items that may be scheduled on a regular city commission agenda shall not exceed 60 items. All matters on the consent agenda shall count as one item. 
(6)  The lunch recess shall begin: 
a.  At 12:00 noon; 
b.  At the conclusion of deliberations of the agenda item being considered at 12:00 noon; 
c.  At the conclusion of statements made by the person who has been recognized to address the commission immediately prior to 12:00 noon; or 
d.  At any time deemed appropriate by the city commission. 
(7)  The city commission meetings, shall adjourn: 
a.  At the conclusion of deliberation of the agenda item being considered at 10:00 p.m., unless the time is extended by unanimous agreement of the members of the city commission then present, or 
b.  At the conclusion of the regularly scheduled agenda, whichever occurs first. This rule does not apply to city commission meetings required for annual budget hearings. 
(8)  Any vote of the city commission pertaining to the establishment of a rescue mission, the continuation of a rescue mission, or action relating to a rescue mission in the city that arises pursuant to the zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan requires the concurrence of four affirmative votes. 
(9)  The city commission may, when it deems necessary, create legislative pilot programs for a limited period of time not to exceed one year regulating any area within the city commission's powers set forth in Section 4 of the City Charter. Any such pilot program may be reinstated for one additional year. 
(d)  A copy of requests, petitions, and applications shall be placed before the mayor and each member of the city commission, supported by administrative memoranda and such information as may be necessary to enable the city commission to reach a decision. All such requests, petitions, and applications, except in cases of extreme emergency, shall be in the hands of the city manager for a period of at least 21 days prior to a regular meeting, to enable the administration to prepare necessary memoranda, data, or reports. 
(e)  All resolutions and ordinances except land use changes, zoning changes, board and committee appointments, and election results shall be reviewed by the office of management and budget for any fiscal impact prior to placement on any agenda. 
(f)  A copy of each agenda item including each resolution and ordinance and all attachments and back-up material shall be furnished to the mayor and members of the city commission at least five full business days before each regular city commission meeting with the exception of veto items. This rule shall be deemed suspended unless invoked by a commissioner before the commission takes action on the resolution or ordinance in question. Once the rule is invoked, no action can be taken on the resolution or ordinance unless the rule is suspended by majority vote of the commissioners present. Nonscheduled ("pocket") items may be introduced for consideration at a city commission meeting by the mayor, a commissioner, the city manager, or the city attorney provided that the city commission by a majority vote deems such resolution or ordinance to be of an emergency nature. 
(g)  Consistent with the time frame requirements set forth in subsection (e) above, the following shall be posted on the internet: 
(1)  The city commission agenda simultaneous with its distribution; 
(2)  The supplemental agenda and any information related to the upcoming agenda simultaneous with its distribution; and 
(3)  The city clerk's report and annotations to the agenda immediately after its release by the city clerk subsequent to the city commission meeting to which it applies. 
(h)  All notices of all intentions to ask questions, together with a copy of such questions, shall be given to the city manager five days before each regular meeting. In all questions of policy presented to the city commission by the mayor, the city manager, or any departmental head, notice thereof, together with a copy of questions supported by memorandum setting forth the rules of action by the city commission, shall be filed three days before the meeting and given to the mayor and each member of the city commission. 
(i)  All ordinances shall be read by title only prior to passage by the city attorney. All resolutions shall be briefly described upon a printed agenda. 
(j)  The agenda portion entitled "consent agenda" shall be scheduled among the initial items for city commission consideration. Consent agenda items that are removed from the agenda prior to city commission consideration shall automatically be scheduled as a regular agenda item at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission, unless, by an unanimous vote of all commissioners present, the city commission considers such consent item as a regular item at the same meeting. 
(k)  Any scheduled agenda item not considered prior to the adjournment of the first regular monthly city commission meeting shall be perfunctorily regarded as a continued item and scheduled on the next immediate month's first regular city commission agenda. Any scheduled agenda item not considered prior to the adjournment of the second regular monthly city commission meeting shall be perfunctorily regarded as a continued item and scheduled on the next immediate month's second regular city commission agenda. 
(l)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit either the mayor, the commissioner designated as the presiding officer of the city commission, or three city commissioners from calling special meetings at any time provided that written notice of the request for a special meeting is delivered to the city clerk at least 72 hours in advance. The city clerk shall then notify the mayor, each member of the commission, the city manager, the city attorney, and the public of the special meeting including the business to be considered at the special meeting. No business shall be conducted or a vote taken at a special city commission meeting on business other than the subject(s) for which the special meeting is called. 
(m)  Any commissioner who so desires may be a signatory on city proclamations. Any such proclamations or other protocol items may be presented at a city commission meeting or, in the discretion of the presiding officer, may be presented prior to the commencement of any city commission meeting. Nothing herein shall prevent a proclamation from being presented at a non-city commission meeting. 
(n)  If the engagement of an executive director, regardless of title, of any board as defined in section 2-882 of this chapter, is required to be approved, ratified, or confirmed by the city commission, prior to such approval, ratification, or confirmation, the individual proposed to be engaged by a board shall make every reasonable attempt to meet with each member of the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9; Ord. No. 8857, § 1, 9-28-78; Ord. No. 11114, § 1, 1-13-94; Ord. No. 11120, § 1, 2-17-94; Code 1980, § 2-13; Ord. No. 11293, § 2(2-13), 9-14-95; Ord. No. 11532, § 2, 7-24-97; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 11642, § 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 11654, § 2, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 11723, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11724, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11786, § 1, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 11865, § 2, 11-14-99; Ord. No. 11942, § 1, 7-20-00; Ord. No. 12074, § 2, 5-24-01; Ord. No. 12134, § 1, 10-11-01; Ord. No. 12310, § 1, 12-12-02; Ord. No. 12352, § 1, 4-10-03; Ord. No. 12409, § 1, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 12498, § 1, 2-26-04; Ord. No. 12586, § 1, 9-9-04; Ord. No. 13182, § 1, 6-10-10; Ord. No. 13438, § 2, 3-13-14; Ord. No. 13768, § 2, 6-14-18; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18; Ord. No. 13832, § 2, 3-28-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12498, § 1, adopted February 26, 2004, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection (c)(7). Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection (c)(8). 
Charter reference— Authority of commission to determine its own rules of procedure, § 4(e). 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12352, § 1, adopted April 10, 2003, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection (m). Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection (n).  
Sec. 2-34. - Presiding officer; vacancy. 
(a)  In accordance with provisions of Section 4(g)(1) of the City Charter, the mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city commission unless the mayor designates another member of the city commission to serve as presiding officer. 
(b)  The mayor, as presiding officer, shall not move, second, debate, or vote on any matter that comes before the city commission. If the presiding officer is a member of the city commission, the presiding officer, upon relinquishing the chair, may move, second, debate, and vote on any matter that comes before the city commission, subject only to such limitations as are imposed on all members of the city commission. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor as contemplated in Section 12 of the City Charter, the city commissioner designated as the presiding officer/chair, or, in the absence of same, the city commissioner designated as the vice chair, or, in the absence of both, a city commissioner appointed by a majority vote of the city commission then in office shall serve as the ceremonial head of city government until the mayoral vacancy is filled pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10; Ord. No. 10927, § 1, 10-3-91; Code 1980, § 2-14; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 11642, § 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18) 
Charter reference— Duties of mayor to be performed by member of city commission elected for that purpose during disability or absence of mayor, § 4(g).  
Sec. 2-35. - Terms of elected officials as members of any authority, board, or committee; annual review. 
In accordance with the provisions of law and with the provisions of this section, the appointment of the mayor and/or any city commissioner currently serving as a member of any authority, board, or committee created by resolution or ordinance shall be subject to the review of the city commission on an annual basis at the commission's December meeting. It is the intent of the city commission that the mayor and each commissioner be considered for appointment to an authority, board, or committee before the mayor or any one commissioner shall have served a consecutive term; however, there shall be no prohibition against the mayor or any commissioner from being reappointed to serve consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 10715, § 1, 3-8-90; Code 1980, § 2-15; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-36. - Mayoral veto and commission override. 
The veto provisions of Section 4(g)(5) of the City Charter shall be exercised exclusively in accordance with the terms and conditions herein: 
(1)  Each ordinance and resolution adopted by the commission shall contain a place for noting mayoral approval or veto, and commission override, if applicable. The mayor may indicate approval of any ordinance or resolution by signing it in the place provided, or the mayor may permit the item to become effective in accordance with its terms by allowing ten days to elapse without exercising a veto. 
(2)  If the mayor determines to veto an ordinance, resolution, motion, or budget line item, the mayor shall personally sign a copy of the form set forth herein in the place so provided and shall indicate with specificity the reason(s) for the veto. The form shall be stated substantially as follows: 
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR 
MIAMI, FLORIDA 
VETO AND VETO MESSAGE 
  
To: 
Honorable Members of the City Commission 
Miami, Florida 
From: 
[Signature of the Mayor] Mayor, 
Miami, Florida 
Pursuant to the authority vested in me under the provisions of Section 4(g)(5) of the Charter of the City of Miami, Florida, I hereby veto: 
[State ordinance, resolution, motion, or budget line item] 
Veto message: 
(3)  The completed form shall be submitted to the city clerk on or before 4:30 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following final commission enactment or adoption thereof. The city clerk's official date and time recorder stamp on the completed form shall conclusively determine compliance or noncompliance within the ten-day time frame. 
(4)  The city clerk shall place any item(s) vetoed by the mayor, together with the completed veto forms, on the next regularly scheduled commission agenda as the first substantive item(s) for commission consideration. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other rule of the commission, items vetoed by the mayor shall not be subject to the "5 day rule" as provided in section 2-33; not be deferred to a future meeting; not require committee review; not be subject to a motion to reconsider, except at the same meeting; not require first reading; not require publication or additional public hearings; or not be amended if the item required special publication or a public hearing to be originally adopted or enacted. Members of the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to speak on vetoed items consistent with F.S. § 286.0114, and subsection 2-33(c)(2) of the City Code. 
(6)  A motion to override a mayoral veto shall be stated substantially as follows: 
a.  "I move that [the ordinance, resolution, or motion] be adopted and become effective notwithstanding the veto of the mayor"; or 
b.  "I move that [the specific line item in the budget] be restored and become effective notwithstanding the veto of the mayor." 
(7)  If four-fifths of all commissioners present vote in favor of a resolution to override a mayoral veto as provided in subsection (6) above, the commission action in question shall be deemed enacted or adopted and effective in accordance with its terms; otherwise, the mayoral veto shall be deemed sustained. 
(8)  The provisions of this rule shall not be waived. 
(Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13646, § 2, 11-17-16; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-37. - Removal of the city manager by mayor; effective date. 
The removal of the city manager by the mayor, pursuant to section 4(g)(6) of the City Charter shall take effect at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day after the manager is notified of said removal by the mayor unless said removal is overridden by a four-fifths vote of the commissioners then in office. 
(Ord. No. 11851, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-38. - Ethics requirement. 
The mayor, city commissioners, city manager, chief of operations, chief financial officer, chief information officer, chief of fire, chief of police, department directors and those with equivalent positions, executive directors of boards or committees and all appointed board members are required to have completed an ethics course within 90 days of taking office or within at least one year prior to taking office or employment. The city manager, city attorney, and city clerk shall coordinate and present or cause to be presented an ethics course and make such course available at least quarterly. Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 13125, § 2, 1-14-10; Ord. No. 13769, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Secs. 2-39—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13770, § 2, adopted June 28, 2018, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 2-11—2-13, 2-15—2-17; Ord. No. 9638, § 1, adopted June 9, 1983; the Code of 1980, §§ 2-31—2-33, 2-41, 2-46—2-48; Ord. No. 10116, § 1, adopted June 12, 1986; Ord. No. 11159, § 1, adopted June 9, 1994; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, adopted October 28, 1997; Ord. No. 11575, § 1, adopted November 26, 1997; Ord. No. 12106, § 2, adopted September 13, 2001; Ord. No. 12154, § 1, adopted November 15, 2001; Ord. No. 12175, § 1, adopted January 10, 2002; Ord. No. 12431, § 1, adopted November 13, 2003; Ord. No. 12893, § 2, adopted March 8, 2007; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, adopted February 11, 2010; Ord. No. 13289, § 1, adopted October 13, 2011, and Ord. No. 13676, § 2, adopted April 27, 2017. 
 
DIVISION 1. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Powers and duties in general. 
The city manager shall be appointed pursuant to and shall have the powers and duties enumerated in the laws of the state, the City Charter, and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-62. - Assistant city manager and administrative assistant to the city manager—Positions created. 
The city manager shall employ such number of assistant city managers and administrative assistants necessary for the city manager to perform his/her duties as required by the laws of the state, the City Charter, and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
DIVISION 2. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-63. - Supervision and control of attorneys employed by city. 
(a)  All attorneys at law retained or employed by the city including all boards, authorities, and agencies, regardless of the nature or kind of service performed or the title or designation under which such attorney renders legal service for the city, are hereby placed under the direct supervision and control of the city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney may engage such outside counsel necessary to ensure compliance with the Rules Regulating The Florida Bar. 
(c)  The mayor may engage special counsel for the specific purpose of providing advice to the mayor and the mayor's office. The compensation and funding for such engagement shall be subject to the advice, consent, and approval of the city commission. Any subsequent special counsel vacancy shall be filled in this manner and subject to the advice, consent, and approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-64. - Charter amendments, method of drafting; approval by city commission; submission to electorate. 
(a)  The city attorney shall draft, with the assistance of any individual the city attorney deems necessary, a Charter amendment within 120 days after the city commission adopts a resolution directing the city attorney to prepare such amendment or after the certification of a petition of ten percent of the qualified electors of the city requesting such amendment. 
(b)  The Charter amendment drafted by the city attorney shall be approved in final form by the city commission in a resolution calling for a special election upon the amendment. The resolution calling for the special election shall include the text of the amendment draft approved by the city commission, and such draft shall be deemed submitted to the electorate by the adoption of said resolution. 
(c)  A special election upon said amendment shall occur not less than 60 nor more than 120 days after the draft is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-65. - Public records. 
(a)  The city attorney shall act as the public records coordinator for all public records requests submitted to the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Exemption means a provision of general law which provides that a specified record, or portion thereof, is not subject to the access requirements of F.S. § 119.07(1) or § 286.011, as amended, or Section 24, Article I of the Florida Constitution. 
Public records means any and all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, sound recordings, data processing software, or other material, regardless of the physical form, characteristics, or means of transmission, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business of the city. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 119.07, as may be amended or revised from time to time, with respect to public records requests, the city is permitted and may charge the following fees: 
(1)  The city may collect a "per copy" fee or the actual cost for materials and supplies used to duplicate public records as established in F.S. § 119.07, as may be amended or revised from time to time. 
(2)  The city may charge an "extensive use fee" whenever extraordinary time constraint is designated by the person requesting copies or research of public records requiring extraordinary expenditure of time by the applicable records custodian. To comply with the request, the records custodian may collect the cost of providing such extraordinary services (i.e. the "extensive use fee") in advance and in addition to the fees set forth in this section. For purposes of this section, "extraordinary expenditure of time" shall mean 20 minutes or more. The extensive use fee shall be calculated using the hourly wage of the employee performing such services and shall not exceed the amounts permitted by law. 
(3)  For the certification of any public record, the city may collect a fee of $1.00 for each document certified plus the maximum fee(s) as provided pursuant to Florida Statutes for duplication of the public record. 
(d)  All city officials and department directors shall: 
(1)  Manage all record management functions within their respective departments and act in close coordination with the city attorney. 
(2)  With the advice and assistance of the city attorney, inventory all public records for disposition scheduling and transfer action in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(3)  Consult with any other personnel responsible for creation or maintenance of specific records within his/her department regarding records retention and transfer recommendations. 
(4)  Review established record retention schedules at least annually to ensure compliance. 
(e)  City officials and city department directors shall annually certify and file with the city clerk the departmental/office records disposition compliance authorization form provided by the city clerk within seven days after the end of each fiscal year. The foregoing procedure is established to ensure compliance with the provisions of F.S. §§ 119.041(1) and 257.36(6), as may be amended or revised from time to time, and Rule 1B-24.002, Florida Administrative Code, as may be amended or revised from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
DIVISION 3. - INDEPENDENT AUDITOR GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Appointment, qualifications of the independent auditor general. 
The city commission shall appoint an independent auditor general ("IAG") pursuant to Section 48(b) of the City Charter. The IAG shall be qualified by education and have broad experience in auditing, accounting, and management. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-67. - Duties and powers of the independent auditor general. 
(a)  The IAG, subject to the control and direction of the city commission, pursuant to Section 48(c) of the City Charter, and upon requests from the city manager or any elected official shall be empowered to perform all internal audit functions. 
(b)  The IAG shall file written reports pursuant to Section 48(c) of the City Charter with the city commission reporting the results of individual audits undertaken in conformity with this section with copies to the mayor, city manager, and city attorney. Said reports shall, at a minimum, state: 
(1)  The subject of the audit; 
(2)  The findings of the audit; and 
(3)  The recommendations for action as a result of the audit, if any. 
(c)  The IAG shall file the annual audit report within 30 days from the end of the third quarter of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-68. - Staffing. 
The IAG shall employ such professional assistants and support personnel as shall be designated by the IAG and as are approved in the city's annual budget, as may be amended from time to time by the city commission. All employees of the IAG are placed under the direct supervision and control of the IAG. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-69. - Operating procedures and responsibilities. 
Audits to be performed by the IAG shall be requested by the city commission, any member of the city commission, the mayor, the city manager, the city attorney, or the city clerk at a public meeting. The city commission may, by majority vote, direct the IAG not to conduct any such requested audit. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-70. - Special assignments. 
The IAG, subject to specific authorization and direction by the city commission, is authorized to execute special audits and assignments in matters not expressly set forth herein including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Assistance to any independent auditor of the city, and 
(2)  Cooperation with the city's audit advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Secs. 2-71—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Recordation and indexing of ordinances. 
The city clerk shall procure a suitably bound book, in which the city clerk shall record, within ten days after their passage, all ordinances adopted by the city commission, and the city clerk shall make and keep a proper index to such ordinance book. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 2-142. - Fees for copies of ordinances and other records. 
(a)  For the preparation and issuance of photocopies of resolutions, ordinances, and all other official records of the city prepared and issued through the city clerk's office, the city clerk shall collect the maximum fee as provided by law. 
(b)  For the preparation and issuance of copies of resolutions, ordinances, and all other official records on microfilm, the city clerk shall collect the maximum fee as provided by law. 
(c)  For the service of duplicating cassette tapes from original tapes used by the city clerk in the voice recording of city commission meetings, the city clerk shall collect a fee as provided by law for such service, provided the person requesting such service furnishes his or her own cassette; if the city clerk furnishes the cassette, the city clerk shall collect a fee of $8.50. For the service of duplicating digital voice recordings in compact disc form of city commission proceedings, the city clerk shall collect a fee not greater than $15.75 to cover the costs associated with providing such service. 
(d)  For the certification of any document, the city clerk shall collect a fee of $1.00 for each document certified, plus the maximum fee(s) as provided pursuant to Florida Statutes for duplication of the public record. 
(Ord. No. 13770, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Secs. 2-143—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city commission to create new departments or change duties or discontinue existing departments, §§ 19, 19-A; department of law, § 21. 
City Code cross references— Downtown development authority, § 14-26 et seq.; police department, ch. 42. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-181—2-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING, BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the planning, building and zoning department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-19; Ord. No. 8742, § 1, 1-11-78; Ord. No. 10089, § 2, 3-27-86; Code 1980, § 2-69)  
Sec. 2-202. - Director—Appointment. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint the director of the planning, building and zoning department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-20; Ord. No. 10089, § 2, 3-27-86; Code 1980, § 2-70)  
Sec. 2-203. - Same—Supervision and control of department. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the director shall administer the affairs of the planning, building and zoning department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-21; Ord. No. 10089, § 2, 3-27-86; Code 1980, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-204. - Functions of department. 
The functions of the planning, building and zoning department shall include the management and supervision of all functions and personnel of the planning, building, electrical, plumbing, and zoning functions, and boiler and elevator inspection. 
(Code 1967, § 2-22; Ord. No. 10089, § 2, 3-27-86; Code 1980, § 2-72)  
Sec. 2-205. - Divisions of department; directors. 
(a)  The planning, building and zoning department shall have two divisions, the division of planning and zoning and the building division. Each division shall have a director. 
(b)  Under the supervision of the city manager, the director of the planning and zoning division shall be responsible for, among other things: 
(1)  Preparation of neighborhood plans in order to complement the metropolitan master planning responsibilities. 
(2)  Conducting studies of the city's population, land use, facilities, resources, needs and other factors which influence the city's development and redevelopment, and, on the basis of such studies, prepare official and other maps and reports. 
(3)  Preparation for the review and public hearing by the department of administration for planning advisory board and zoning board, and for adoption by the city commission of zoning, subdivision and related regulations for the city. 
(4)  Conducting special surveys and studies and reporting thereon, at the direction of the mayor, city commission and the city manager. 
(5)  Promoting public understanding of an interest in the master plan and orderly community development. 
(6)  Sitting on and cooperating with the plat committee of the city and making recommendations on all proposed plats and local area developments. 
(7)  Coordinating planning activities with the county's planning department so as to complement the efforts of that agency as the agencies may overlap or affect each other with regard to urban renewal, redevelopment, public housing and related matters. 
(8)  Formulating city guides and standards establishing minimum guidelines and standards for the administrative review of off-street parking lots, garages and related landscaping; landscaping generally; urban plazas, throughout the city; Latin Quarter district, all in conjunction with the zoning ordinance; and bay/riverwalks in conjunction with the zoning ordinance and section 3(mmm) of the Charter. The city guides and standards, upon approval by the city commission, shall be administered by the planning, building and zoning department and recorded and kept on file for public inspection in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The functions of the planning and zoning division shall include, but not to be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reviewing and making recommendations regarding the city capital improvements program, but shall not assume the responsibility of the financial planning to fund the program. 
(2)  Preparation and making of staff findings and recommendations for the planning advisory board and zoning board for those requests that are scheduled for public hearing. 
(3)  Providing staff support for the planning advisory board and zoning board. 
(4)  Preparation of the comprehensive plan for the welfare, recreational, economic and physical development of the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 163 and under the direction of the city manager and with the advice of the planning advisory board and zoning board. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-61—2-69; Ord. No. 9612, § 1, 4-28-83; Ord. No. 10430, § 1, 4-28-88; Code 1980, §§ 2-135—2-139; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 2-206. - Fees for extraordinary services in connection with reproduction of records, plans and maps, including those on microfilm. 
A fee is established for furnishing services in connection with the reproduction of records, plans and maps, including those on microfilm, of the planning, building and zoning department. The fee shall be the maximum permitted in state law, if applicable, and is on file in the offices of the department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-24; Ord. No. 8866, § 1, 10-24-78; Ord. No. 9615, § 1, 5-12-83; Ord. No. 10089, § 4, 3-27-86; Ord. No. 10452, § 1, 7-14-88; Code 1980, § 2-74) 
State Law reference— Cost of duplicating public records, F.S. § 119.07(1).  
Sec. 2-207. - Zoning certificate of use required; annual reinspection of buildings and premises; fees for inspections and issuance of certificates. 
(a)  Inspection and service fees for certificate of use. All persons applying for a certificate of use shall pay the following inspection and service fees: 
(1)  Residential, other than single-family residence or two-family housing, as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  Three to 12 units: $263.00 
b.  Each additional unit: $21.00 
(2)  Lodging as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 12 units or less: $263.00 
b.  Each additional unit: $21.00 
(3)  Office as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 2,000 square feet or less: $263.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess 2,000 square feet: $53.00 
(4)  Commercial as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 2,000 square feet or less: $263.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess of 2,000 square feet: $53.00 
(5)  Civic as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 1,000 square feet or less: $53.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess 2,000 square feet: $26.00 
(6)  Civil support as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 2,000 square feet or less: $263.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess 2,000 square feet: $53.00 
(7)  Educational as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 1,000 square feet or less: $105.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess 2,000 square feet: $26.00 
(8)  Industrial as defined by Miami 21. 
a.  First 2,000 square feet or less: $263.00 
b.  Each additional 1,000 square foot or part thereof in excess 2,000 square feet: $53.00 
(9)  Miscellaneous. All uses not previously covered by this section shall be assessed a fee as provided for in "Commercial," subsection (a)(4). 
(10)  Sharing by a sublessee office space approved under an existing certificate of use: $105.00 
(11)  Amendment to an existing CU not requiring inspections: $105.00 
(12)  Transfer. A transfer of the CU is permissible upon payment of the fee below and only when there has been a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock and trade, and not otherwise; provided that the seller of the business shall present the CU to the zoning office and finance department with an endorsement assigning all right, title and interest to the purchaser, and the purchaser shall produce a properly executed bill of sale showing the transfer of stock from the person to the purchaser: $263.00 
(13)  Change of name. A building or premises or part thereof shall be required to obtain a new CU when a change in the name of the business or entity occupying space therein has occurred. However, if no change in the use has occurred, the following fee will apply: $263.00 
(b)  Certificates of use for new buildings and premises and for change of use. 
(1)  No new buildings or premises or part thereof and no existing building or premises when there has been a change of use in said building or premises, except one- and two-family residences, shall be occupied until a zoning certificate of use shall have been issued by the zoning office. Certificates of use shall not be issued until the premises have been inspected and found to comply with all code requirements of the zoning office, fire-rescue department and such other agencies as may have jurisdiction. All applications for certificates of use shall expire 90 working days from the date of application if approval is not received for issuance of a certificate, unless the space is under construction with a valid building permit and approvals cannot be made until work is completed. 
a.  Buildings designed or proposed to be used as office buildings shall require one zoning certificate of use for each separate office tenant and one for each commercial activity contained therein. Each separate office tenant in existing office buildings not having an individual certificate of use on the effective date of this section must obtain one prior to the renewal of its city local business tax receipt. 
b.  Apartment buildings, hotels, and other multiple-residential occupancies containing three or more units and occupied only by residential tenants shall require one zoning certificate of use per building. 
c.  Apartment buildings, hotels, and other residential occupancies containing commercial tenants shall require additional zoning certificates of use for each commercial activity contained therein. 
d.  Industrial buildings containing one tenant shall require a single zoning certificate of use. 
e.  Industrial and commercial buildings containing more than one tenant shall require a zoning certificate of use for each tenant. 
f.  Buildings with common areas including but not limited to hallways, elevators, and lobbies, shall have a separate shell certificate of use. 
(2)  Upon the issuance of a zoning certificate of use for a building or premises, an annual inspection schedule will be established and annual inspections will be conducted thereafter. 
(3)  Annual inspections will be conducted to determine that each building or premises complies with the regulations established in the city zoning ordinance, building code, fire code, health regulations, and such other regulations that may apply to the particular building or premises. 
(c)  Annual reinspection of buildings and premises. 
(1)  Annual reinspection certificates will be issued, and each existing use or premises shall be inspected annually to determine that it complies with the provisions of applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  The owner will be notified of any deficiencies noted, and appropriate reinspections may be made to determine that the deficiencies have been corrected. 
(3)  With the exception of life-safety facilities (which may be from time to time required to be upgraded by the provisions of the Florida Building Code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code), only those regulations which were in effect at the time a particular occupancy or use was established will be applicable. 
(4)  The invoice for the issuance of the annual reinspection certificate will be billed during the fiscal year and said fees are herein fixed as follows: 
a.  Residential, other than single-family residence and two-family housing, as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Three to 12 units: $53.00 
2.  13 to 50 units: $74.00 
3.  Each additional unit: $2.50 
b.  Lodging as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  First 12 units or less: $53.00 
2.  13 to 50 units: $74.00 
3.  Each additional unit: $2.50 
c.  Office as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Less than 500 square feet: $42.00 
2.  500 square feet or more but less than 2,500 square feet: $53.00 
3.  2,500 square feet or more but less than 5,000 square feet: $63.00 
4.  5,000 square feet or more but less than 15,000 square feet: $74.00 
5.  15,000 square feet or more but less than 25,000 square feet: $84.00 
6.  25,000 square feet or more but less than 50,000 square feet: $95.00 
7.  50,000 square feet or more: $105.00 
d.  Commercial as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Less than 500 square feet: $42.00 
2.  500 square feet or more but less than 2,500 square feet: $53.00 
3.  2,500 square feet or more but less than 5,000 square feet: $63.00 
4.  5,000 square feet or more but less than 15,000 square feet: $74.00 
5.  15,000 square feet or more but less than 25,000 square feet: $84.00 
6.  25,000 square feet or more but less than 50,000 square feet: $95.00 
7.  50,000 square feet or more: $105.00 
e.  Civic as defined by Miami 21: $79.00 
f.  Civil support, other than hospitals, as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Less than 20,000 square feet: $53.00 
2.  20,000 square feet or more but less than 50,000 square feet: $63.00 
3.  50,000 square feet or more: $105.00 
g.  Hospitals: 
1.  100 beds or less: $131.00 
2.  Each bed over 100: $1.75 
h.  Educational as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Less than 10,000 square feet: $79.00 
2.  10,000 square feet or more but less than 50,000 square feet: $105.00 
3.  50,000 square feet or more: $131.00 
i.  Industrial as defined by Miami 21: 
1.  Less than 500 square feet: $42.00 
2.  500 square feet or more but less than 2,500 square feet: $53.00 
3.  2,500 square feet or more but less than 5,000 square feet: $63.00 
4.  5,000 square feet or more but less than 15,000 square feet: $74.00 
5.  15,000 square feet or more but less than 25,000 square feet: $84.00 
6.  25,000 square feet or more but less than 50,000 square feet: $95.00 
7.  50,000 square feet or more: $105.00 
j.  Miscellaneous. All uses not previously covered by this section shall be assessed a fee as provided for under "Commercial," subsection (c)(4)d. 
(5)  When a reinspection is required due to continued life safety violations after the second inspection by the department of fire-rescue, there shall be charged a fee of $53.00. 
(6)  Any renewal fee specified in subsection (c)(4) above, which is not paid by the due date specified, will be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty of ten percent of the current renewal fee plus an additional five-percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter, until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the certificate of use fee for any annual period. 
(d)  Fees for accessory use certificates. 
(1)  All persons desiring to have a home office as defined in Miami 21 shall apply to the zoning office for an accessory use certificate, which shall be granted upon payment of an annual fee of $79.00 to the city and when issued shall be valid through the following September 30. In instances where a person 65 years of age or over is engaged in the conduct of home occupation, there shall be no required payment of an accessory fee in conjunction with the issuance of an accessory use certificate or the subsequent renewal of such certificate. All renewals of accessory use certificates shall be made on the subsequent renewal of such certificate or before October 1 of each calendar year. 
(2)  Those owners of private pleasure craft and housebarges on the Miami River shall apply to the zoning office for a housebarge/private pleasure craft accessory use certificate, which subject to inspection and compliance with applicable regulations, shall be granted upon the payment of an annual fee of $263.00; all required renewals shall be made on or before October 1 of each year hereafter. 
(e)  Zoning inspection. 
(1)  The city will provide, upon request of the owner or owner's agent, an on-site inspection of properties within the city by the code compliance department to ascertain whether zoning violations openly exist on the real property. 
(2)  The following fee shall be paid prior to each such inspection for each folio number: zoning inspection fee, $84.00. 
(3)  A report on the results of each such inspection will be issued to the owner or owner's agent and shall only constitute prima facie evidence of compliance/noncompliance with the city's zoning ordinance and shall not be conclusive proof of compliance/noncompliance with said zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Should a zoning violation be observed by a city zoning inspector during the course of an on-site inspection, the property owner will be required to appear before the code enforcement board of the city in regard to such violation no sooner than 30 days after said inspection, except as provided in subsection 2-814(c). 
(f)  There is hereby established a schedule of fees for reviewing plans on new construction and inspecting new construction performed by the department of fire-rescue, except for single-family and duplex residents: 
(1)  Minimum fee: $53.00 
(2)  New building or additions: 
Each 100 square feet or fractional part of floor area: $1.50 
(3)  New construction other than as specified herein (water towers, pylons, bulk storage-tank foundations, seawalls, bulkheads, unusual limited-use buildings, freestanding rigid canopies, marquees and similar construction): 
Each $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fractional part: $1.50 
(4)  Alterations and repairs to buildings and other structures: 
Up to $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fractional part: $5.00 
Each additional $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fractional part: $1.50 
(5)  Expedited plan review service: 
Reviews conducted by external entity: Actual cost plus 20 percent. 
Reviews conducted internally: Per every four hours of review or fraction thereof: $263.00 
(Code 1967, § 2-24.1; Ord. No. 8686, § 1, 9-8-77; Ord. No. 8985, § 1, 9-27-79; Ord. No. 9161, § 1, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 9345, § 1, 11-12-81; Ord. No. 10089, § 5, 3-27-86; Ord. No. 10158, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 10225, § 1, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 10397, § 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 10453, § 1, 7-14-88; Ord. No. 10596, § 1, 6-7-89; Ord. No. 10607, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 10737, § 1, 5-24-90; Ord. No. 10766, § 1, 7-26-90; Ord. No. 10890, § 1, 6-20-91; Ord. No. 10931, § 1, 10-24-91; Ord. No. 11077, § 2, 7-22-93; Ord. No. 11085, § 1, 9-7-93; Code 1980, § 2-75; Ord. No. 11353, § 2, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11721, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 12803, § 2, 5-11-06; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13108, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13347, § 2, 10-25-12; Ord. No. 13711, § 2, 11-16-17) 
City Code cross reference— Schedule of zoning and planning fees, § 62-22.  
Sec. 2-208. - New permits prohibited, non-homestead properties. 
Permits shall not be issued for a non-homestead property with any outstanding code enforcement violations, building violations, or any relevant city lien or invoice due and owing to the city. Permits required to cure life safety issues, permits which are required to bring outstanding violations into compliance, or permits for any properties owned by a governmental entity are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 13717, § 2, 12-14-17) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 2-208 by Ord. No. 13717, § 2, adopted December 14, 2017, Ord. No. 13311, § 2, adopted February 23, 2012, repealed the former section 2-208 in its entirety, which pertained to the fee for inspections and examinations of plans for compliance with the provisions of the City of Miami zoning ordinance, and derived from the Code of 1967, § 2-24.2; Ord. No. 8687, § 1, adopted September 8, 1977; Ord. No. 9189, § 1, adopted October 30, 1980; Ord. No. 9345, § 1, adopted November 12, 1981; Ord. No. 10089, § 6, adopted March 27, 1986; Ord. No. 10158, § 1, adopted October 7, 1986; Ord. No. 10397, § 1, adopted March 10, 1988; Ord. No. 10453, § 1, adopted July 14, 1988; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, adopted October 8, 1992; Ord. No. 11077, § 3, adopted July 22, 1993; the Code of 1980, § 2-76; Ord. No. 11353, § 3, adopted April 25, 1996, and Ord. No. 13108, § 2, adopted October 8, 2009.  
Sec. 2-209. - Bond required for the moving of buildings. 
(a)  Authorization. The director of the planning, building and zoning department is authorized to require that a bond be posted in connection with the moving of buildings to assure that any property damage caused during transportation is repaired. 
(b)  Amount of bond. Amount of required bond will be determined as follows: $0.50 per square foot of building to be moved. Bond may be from a surety company or a cashier's check, payable to the "City of Miami," or cash. 
(c)  Release of bond. 
(1)  When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is completed and all damage, if any, to public streets or other public property has been repaired to the satisfaction of the director of the resilience and public works department and all costs of repairing the damages have been paid, any portion of the bond then remaining shall be returned. Should the cost, however, of repairing damages and/or performing other work as may be required hereunder exceed the total amount of the bond, the person or firm to whom said permit was granted shall be held liable for the amount of damages and/or other costs which are in excess of the bond proceeds. 
(2)  Prior to release of bond or return of unused monies, the fee set forth in the then-existing permit fee schedule for reinspections shall be paid or deducted from said bond proceeds for each required inspection or reinspection. 
(d)  Retention of unclaimed bond. All right, title and interest in bond proceeds which have been or which may be deposited with the city by reason of building moving activity, unless claimed by the person or firm submitting the same within 90 days from the date that notice has been sent by the city via certified mail to the last known address of the said person or firm, shall be vested in the city, and shall be promptly paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 9466, § 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 10089, § 7, 3-27-86; Code 1980, § 2-89; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-210. - Phased design and construction (east track). 
(a)  Procedures and guidelines. Procedures and guidelines for requests by owner/developer or owner shall be in accordance with those maintained as required by the department of fire-rescue, and the planning, building and zoning department, and attached hereto, but not reproduced at length herein and on file in the offices of the respective departments. 
(b)  Application and agreements. Application for approval and required agreement of design and construction procedure shall be as outlined in the aforementioned procedures and guidelines. 
(c)  Fees. Fees shall be as paid in accordance with fee schedule as provided in Ordinance No. 6145 as amended, section 5d.(24) [adopting the South Florida Building Code, on file in the office of the city clerk]. 
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 10-10-84; Code 1980, § 2-90)  
Sec. 2-211. - Denial or revocation of certificate of use. 
(a)  The zoning administrator may deny the issuance or renewal of a certificate of use for good cause. 
(b)  Revocation of certificate of use. The zoning administrator may revoke a certificate of use for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant provided a material false statement in the application or in the supplemental or additional statements of fact or studies required by the city. 
(2)  There is a failure to comply with the terms or conditions of the certificate of use. 
(3)  There is a violation of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  The certificate of use holder subsequent to being issued a certificate of use, has been convicted of, or has pled guilty to, a violation of a law of Florida, or ordinance of Miami-Dade County or the city, which violation resulted from actions relating to the terms or conditions of the certificate of use. 
(5)  The certificate of use holder is engaging or has engaged in an activity from the proposed premises that is not in compliance with a zoning ordinance or other city ordinance. 
(6)  The business tax receipt ("BTR") for the certificate of use holder has been denied, suspended or revoked. 
The zoning administrator shall send written notice of the revocation, reason for the revocation and the effective date of the revocation to the holder of the certificate of use at the address of record on file with the city. 
(c)  Appeal. If a certificate of use is denied or revoked, the applicant or an aggrieved party who resides, occupies, or owns property within 500 feet of the property may file an appeal with the office of hearing boards within 15 days of the decision to deny or revoke the certificate of use. The appeal shall be heard at the next available regular meeting of the planning, zoning and appeals board. The decision of the planning, zoning and appeals board regarding a certificate of use may be appealed to the city commission by an applicant, an aggrieved party who resides, occupies or owns property within 500 feet of the affected property, or the planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 13264, § 2, 5-12-11; Ord. No. 13587, § 2, 1-28-16; Ord. No. 13612, § 2, 6-23-16)  
Sec. 2-212. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 13280, adopted July 28, 2011; modified by Ord. No. 13539, adopted July 23, 2015; modified by Ord. No. 13660, adopted February 23, 2017; and modified by Ord. No. 13684, adopted May 25, 2017; the program previously known as the "Nonconforming Use Pilot Program" codified in section 2-212 was to automatically terminate on August 1, 2017. Accordingly, the language for this program was deleted from the Code in September 2017.  
Sec. 2-213. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 13468, adopted July 24, 2014, the program previously known as the "Pilot Program for Distressed Development Sites" codified in section 2-213 was to automatically terminate on August 1, 2015. Accordingly, the language for this program was deleted from the Code in September 2017.  
Secs. 2-214—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE-RESCUE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish, regulate and control a fire department or division, § 3(r). 
City Code cross reference— Fire protection, ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department to be known as the department of fire-rescue. 
(Ord. No. 10744, § 3, 6-28-90; Ord. No. 11101, § 1, 11-23-93; Code 1980, § 2-81)  
Sec. 2-232. - Director—Appointment. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the department of fire-rescue who shall serve subject to the supervision and control of the city manager. The fire chief shall be the director of the department of fire-rescue, and appointed in accordance with the provisions set forth in the City Charter. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the exclusive right to suspend the fire chief for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by proper authority, or for any other just and reasonable cause. If such chief be so suspended, the city manager shall forthwith certify the fact, together with the cause of suspension, to the commission who, within five days from the date of receipt of such notice, shall proceed to hear such charges and render judgment thereon, which judgment shall be final. 
(c)  If the chief is arrested for felony or for a misdemeanor related to the duties of office or is indicted or informed against for the commission of a federal felony or misdemeanor or state felony or misdemeanor, the provisions of F.S. § 112.51(2) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 10744, § 3, 6-28-90; Code 1980, § 2-82)  
Sec. 2-233. - Same—Powers and duties, functions. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the director of the department of fire-rescue shall administer the affairs of the department, which shall include the immediate direction and control of the fire force, and is charged with responsibilities for the prevention, control and suppression of fire, and providing emergency medical and rescue service in the city. The responsibilities of the department shall include, but not be limited to, the activities of fire administration, fire training, fire prevention, firefighting, maintenance and operation of fire equipment and coordination of the installation of new fire hydrants as well as maintenance of existing fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 10744, § 3, 6-28-90; Code 1980, § 2-83)  
Sec. 2-234. - Emergency medical transportation service fee. 
(a)  There is hereby established a schedule of fees for use of the emergency medical transportation services of the department of fire-rescue. Such fees shall be charged to each person receiving basic and advance life support transportation service and shall be collected according to a procedure recommended by the city manager and approved by the city commission; such schedule of fees being as follows: 
(1)  Basic life support—Base rate ..... $135.00 
(2)  Advance life support—Base rate ..... 235.21 
(3)  Oxygen ..... 22.00 
(4)  Mileage, per mile ..... 6.60 
(5)  IV solution ..... 22.00 
(6)  Cardiac monitoring ..... 22.00 
(7)  Cervical collar ..... 22.00 
(8)  Special handling (extrication, antishock trousers, nonbreathing patients and hare-traction splints) ..... 22.00 
(9)  Nonresidents of the City of Miami will be assessed a surcharge of ..... 100.00 
(b)  The city manager shall increase the charges for services as set forth in this section when necessary to reasonably cover the cost of providing such services. Whenever such charges are to be increased, the city manager shall file a list of the new charges which shall become effective no earlier than 30 days after such filing with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 10079, § 1, 2-13-86; Ord. No. 10596, § 1, 6-7-89; Ord. No. 10767, § 1, 7-26-90; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 2-83.1) 
City Code cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 57.  
Sec. 2-235. - Fire prevention bureau. 
(a)  The fire code of the city shall be enforced by the fire prevention bureau in the department of fire-rescue, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the director of the department of fire-rescue. 
(b)  The chief in charge of the fire prevention bureau shall be appointed from the officers of the department of fire-rescue by the director of the department of fire-rescue subject to the approval of the city manager, and such chief of fire prevention shall be known as the fire marshal. The position of fire marshal shall be a noncompetitive position in the city, and the holder thereof, while so engaged, shall not forfeit the civil service status which he/she held prior to such appointment. 
(c)  The director of the department of fire-rescue may detail such members of the department of fire-rescue as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the fire prevention bureau shall be made annually and transmitted to the city manager. It shall contain all proceedings under this chapter and the fire code, with such statistics as the director of the department of fire-rescue may wish to include therein. The director of the department of fire-rescue shall also recommend any amendments to the fire code which, in his/her judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1967, § 2-36; Code 1980, § 2-84; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Secs. 2-236—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESILIENCE AND PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13792, § 1, adopted October 11, 2018, changed the title of division 4 from "Public works department" to "Resilience and public works department." 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs on public property, § 17-71 et seq.; landfills and waterfront improvements, ch. 29; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 49; streets and sidewalks, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the resilience and public works department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-79; Code 1980, § 2-91; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-262. - Director—Head of department. 
The head of the resilience and public works department shall be known as the director of resilience and public works. 
(Code 1967, § 2-80; Code 1980, § 2-92; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-263. - Same—Appointment. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint the director of resilience and public works. 
(Code 1967, § 2-81; Code 1980, § 2-93; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-264. - Same—Duties generally. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the director of resilience and public works shall administer the affairs of the resilience and public works department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-82; Code 1980, § 2-94; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-265. - Same—Duty to establish minimum standards for public works. 
The director of resilience and public works is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations establishing minimum standards pertaining to the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, viaducts and other public highways, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, streams, watercourses, boulevards, squares and other public places and grounds belonging to the city or dedicated to public use or owned by the city as an easement or any other right of use whatsoever, and to establish, amend, publish and enforce uniform and comprehensive minimum standards, plans, drawings, specifications and control of the design, construction, development, improvement, repair and location of all public works under his/her authority, whether on or above or below the surface of the land or water, whether financed or constructed by any federal or state political subdivision or private person, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-82.1; Code 1980, § 2-95; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-266. - Functions of department—Generally. 
The functions of the resilience and public works department shall include the management and supervision of all public works, including those public works projects carried on in the public right-of-way, and all duties and functions heretofore a part of the department of engineering and the division of streets, bridges and sewers heretofore a part of the department of public service. These functions and duties are hereby transferred to the resilience and public works department and shall be carried on by such department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-83; Code 1980, § 2-96; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-267. - Same—Enumeration. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the director of resilience and public works shall administer the affairs of the department, which shall include reviewing proposed street developments and improvements to determine their adequacy as to traffic safety and capacities, performing additional duties in traffic planning as assigned from time to time, and determining the best routings and terminal locations for buses to serve the community needs and to coordinate these with other traffic. 
The director of the resilience and public works department is authorized to execute and issue license agreements, without the necessity of further approvals, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, with willing property owners to allow the city, itself or by a duly licensed contractor, to make minimal improvements, such as sloping, grading, and tying-in, on such private property when required for transition or harmony with city right-of-way improvements. 
(Code 1967, § 2-84; Code 1980, § 2-97; Ord. No. 12616, § 1, 11-18-04; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-268. - Fee for preparation of documents containing covenants to run with the land, waiver of fee; fee for preparation of documents allowing the use of public right-of-way by private entities; recording fee. 
(a)  For the preparation and processing of any legal document running with the land covenanting the construction or postponement of construction of a public works improvement either in the public right-of-way or on private property, a fee of $495.00 shall be collected by the director of resilience and public works. The fee required under this subsection may be waived for governmental entities and agencies. 
(b)  For the preparation and processing of legal documents, including, but not limited to, subdivision improvement bonds and hold harmless agreements, allowing the use of public right-of-way by private entities, excluding permits, a fee of $2,750.00 shall be collected by the director of resilience and public works. 
(c)  In addition to the above fees, the party proffering the legal document shall also pay the recording fee, as established by the state. 
(Code 1967, § 2-82.C2; Ord. No. 9004, § 1, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Ord. No. 10658, § 1, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-98; Ord. No. 13108, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13195, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-269. - Checking and recording plats and alley closures or vacations—Fee schedule; waiver of fee. 
(a)  The fees to be charged by the resilience and public works department for platting determinations, processing tentative plats, and recording plats submitted for approval of the city, including the inspection of the permanent reference monuments set in the field, are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Platting determination. Platting determination or determination on folio separation ..... $695.00 
(2)  Recording plat. 
a.  To accompany tentative plat application ..... 1,800.00 
b.  For resubmission of tentative plat when submitted for recording ..... 900.00 
c.  For resubmission of tentative plat by different owner ..... 900.00 
d.  For resubmission of tentative plat with new boundary ..... 900.00 
e.  To accompany final plat when submitted for recording ..... 2,500.00 
(3)  Extending subdivision improvement time limit. For each time limit extension granted for completion of subdivision improvements required in conjunction with a recorded plat ..... 295.00 
or, five percent of the subdivision improvement bond amount, whichever is greater. 
(b)  The processing fees required by subsection (a) may be waived for governmental entities and agencies. 
(c)  The fees to be charged for an expedited review for processing tentative plats and recording plats submitted for approval of the city, including inspection of the permanent reference monuments set in the field, are fixed as follows: 
Outside source review fee: Actual cost plus 20 percent administrative fee for processing. 
(d)  Fees to be charged pursuant to subsections 55-15(i) and 55-15(j) providing for an alternative method for the closure or vacation of alleys which abut parcels of land zoned solely residential. 
Application fee ..... $525.00 
Recording fee ..... *** 
Publication fee ..... *** 
Vacation and alley closure fee pursuant to subsection 62-156(6) ..... Not 
applicable 
*** These fees shall be determined contingent upon fees charged by the newspaper and Miami-Dade County recorder's office at time of publication and recordation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-85; Ord. No. 9004, § 2, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Ord. No. 10658, § 1, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-99; Ord. No. 12453, § 2, 12-18-03; Ord. No. 12643, § 1, 1-13-05; Ord. No. 13108, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13195, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12453, § 2, adopted December 18, 2003, changed the title of section 2-269 from "checking and recording plats—fee schedule; waiver of fee" to "checking and recording plats and alley closures or vacations—fee schedule; waiver of fee." The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes.  
Sec. 2-270. - Same—Finding material errors, additional fee; waiver of fee. 
(a)  If, in the process of the first check of a proposed record plat, material errors are found, the plat shall be returned to the engineer or surveyor who made it, for correction without further checking by the resilience and public works department. For all subsequent office checking, the director of resilience and public works shall collect a fee of $21.00 per man-hour. 
(b)  The fee required under this section shall be waived for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Code 1967, § 2-86; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Code 1980, § 2-100; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-271. - Same—Permanent reference monuments not properly placed, additional fee; waiver of fee. 
(a)  If, in the process of the first check of a proposed plat, it is found that the permanent reference monuments are not properly placed on the ground, the engineer or surveyor who made the plat shall be notified, and all subsequent trips to the subdivision for the purpose of checking permanent reference monuments shall be charged for at the rate of $21.00 per hour, such charges to be collected by the director of resilience and public works. If it should be necessary to use a survey party in such subsequent checking of permanent reference monuments, the director of resilience and public works shall collect a fee of $52.50 for each hour such survey party is used. 
(b)  The fee required under this section may be waived by the director of resilience and public works for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Code 1967, § 2-87; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Ord. No. 10658, § 1, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-101; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-272. - Construction plan checking fee. 
(a)  The fees to be charged by the resilience and public works department for processing and checking construction plans submitted for approval of the city are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Fence, wall, slab, or sign ..... $50.00 
(2)  Underground tank permit ..... 155.00 
(3)  Single-family or duplex residential construction, reconstruction, remodeling, renovation, repair, or addition permit ..... 268.00 
(4)  Multi-family residential and all nonresidential construction, reconstruction, remodeling, renovation, repair, or addition permit: 
New multi-family residential (<½ acre) ..... 940.00 
New commercial (<½ acre) ..... 1,043.00 
New multi-family residential (=½ acre and <1 acre) ..... 1,520.00 
New commercial (=½ acre and <1 acre) ..... 1,650.00 
Large development (residential/commercial =1 acre) ..... 2,775.00 
(b)  Expedited plan review service for special projects. A "special project" is defined as a project having a development order, or any other project as determined by the city manager, or designee, as having special interest to the city. The services will cover the resilience and public works department expedited review and shall be in addition to any and all other applicable permit fees. Outside source review will be the preferred method. 
Outside source review fee: Actual cost plus 15 percent* 
*Fifteen percent is the administrative fee to cover the cost of processing. 
In-house review fee not to exceed four hours: $350.00 
(c)  The fee required under this section may be waived by the director of resilience and public works for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Ord. No. 10658, § 1, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-102; Ord. No. 12642, § 1, 1-13-05; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13195, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-273. - Turning money over to finance department. 
All money so collected by the director of resilience and public works pursuant to sections 2-269, 2-270, 2-271 and 2-272 shall be turned over to the finance department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-88; Ord. No. 10658, § 1, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-103; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18; Ord. No. 13798, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Secs. 2-274—2-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OFF-STREET PARKING DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Department of off-street parking, off-street parking board, § 23. 
City Code cross reference— Public off-street facilities, § 35-121 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Determination of need for department and board; ratification of acts and proceedings of department and board. 
(a)  The city commission has determined and does hereby declare that there is an urgent need for the department of off-street parking of the city and for the off-street parking board of the city which were created and established by section 23 of the Charter. 
(b)  All acts and proceedings of the department of off-street parking and of the off-street parking board which were created and established by Ordinance Number 5461, passed and adopted by the city commission on November 2, 1955, as amended by Ordinance Numbers 5556 through 5560, inclusive, all passed and adopted on March 7, 1956, are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-55; Code 1980, § 2-110)  
Secs. 2-302—2-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
City Code cross reference— Garbage and other solid waste, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 2-326. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the general services administration department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-89; Ord. No. 8742, § 1, 1-11-78; Ord. No. 10068, § 2, 1-9-86; Code 1980, § 2-116)  
Sec. 2-327. - Director—Appointment. 
(a)  The head of the general services administration department shall be known as the director of the general services administration department. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint the director of the general services administration department. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-90, 2-91; Ord. No. 10068, § 2, 1-9-86; Code 1980, §§ 2-117, 2-118)  
Sec. 2-328. - Same—Duties generally. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the director of the general services administration department shall administer the affairs of the general services administration department which shall include the immediate direction and control of all staff personnel; management and supervision of all functions and responsibilities, including functions and personnel of the garage, motor pool, property maintenance, print shop, communication services, including telecommunication systems, purchasing, including an "office of minority and women business affairs and procurement" which office is to be created by the city manager, and including property and lease management. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-92, 2-93; Ord. No. 10068, § 2, 1-9-86; Code 1980, §§ 2-119, 2-120, 2-263) 
City Code cross reference— City manager's office to implement minority and women business affairs and procurement program, § 18-138.  
Secs. 2-329—2-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - REAL ESTATE AND ASSET MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13818, § 2, adopted January 10, 2019, changed the title of division 7 from "Conferences and conventions and public facilities department" to "Real estate and asset management department." 
City Code cross references— Downtown development, ch. 14; stadiums and convention centers, ch. 53. 
 
Sec. 2-356. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the real estate and asset management department. 
(Ord. No. 8741, § 1, 1-11-78; Code 1980, § 2-166; Ord. No. 13818, § 2, 1-10-19)  
Sec. 2-357. - Appointment, duties of director. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the real estate and asset management department. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. The director of the department will be the director of the City of Miami/University of Miami James L. Knight International Center. 
(Ord. No. 8741, § 2, 1-11-78; Code 1980, § 2-167; Ord. No. 13818, § 2, 1-10-19)  
Sec. 2-358. - Organization of department. 
The functions and duties of the real estate and asset management department are to be carried out by the office of the director of the department and the following divisions: 
(1)  Conference center development division. The conference center development division shall complete the development and construction process of the City of Miami/University of Miami James L. Knight International Center (sometimes referred to as the city's "downtown convention center"). The aforesaid division shall also forthwith begin the process of booking conventions into the facility in conjunction with the University of Miami's Conference Center. 
(2)  Convention services division. The convention services division shall henceforth perform, for the entire community, the activities of convention research, solicitation and servicing. 
(3)  Public facilities division: The public facilities division shall have the planning, development, management, maintenance and supervision of the day-to-day operations of the city marinas and the Miami Marine Stadium, including the coordination and management of planning, development, and construction efforts at all city facilities. The division shall have the duty of planning and management of promotions, negotiations, and bookings of special events such as concerts, sports, and other exhibitions and competitions, and other forms of entertainment as appropriate in those public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 8740, § 3, 1-11-78; Ord. No. 10125, § 4, 7-10-86; Code 1980, §§ 2-168, 2-189(b); Ord. No. 11998, § 2, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 12184, § 2, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13818, § 2, 1-10-19)  
Secs. 2-359—2-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Created. 
A department to be known as the department of development and housing conservation is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 10105, § 2, 5-22-86; Code 1980, § 2-171)  
Sec. 2-382. - Appointment, duties of director. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the department of development and housing conservation. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(b)  The department director, subject to specific authorization by the city manager, is also empowered to carry out special assignments in matters not expressly set forth in this division. 
(c)  The city manager may, from time to time, issue directives setting forth operating procedures to be followed and responsibilities to be discharged by the department director. 
(Ord. No. 10105, § 2, 5-22-86; Code 1980, §§ 2-172, 2-174, 2-175)  
Sec. 2-383. - Division of housing conservation created, functions, duties. 
The division of housing conservation, hereby created, subject to the control and direction of the city manager, shall be empowered to perform the following duties: 
(1)  Develop, implement and manage all programs related to providing housing assistance initiated by the city commission, not including public housing; 
(2)  Evaluate and recommend priorities for an annual housing assistance plan, provide for staff review and the evaluation and coordination of said review; 
(3)  Plan and implement projects to preserve, improve and expand the city's housing stock including but not limited to the utilization of resources provided by the federal, state and county government; 
(4)  Assist private developers in preserving, improving and expanding the city's housing stock; and 
(5)  Develop and coordinate the implementation of citywide housing improvement strategies and recommend programs to further the goals of the strategy. 
(Ord. No. 10105, § 2, 5-22-86; Code 1980, § 2-173)  
Sec. 2-384. - Division of development created, functions, duties. 
(a)  Created. A division to be known as the division of development is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment, duties of director. The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the division of development. The director shall administer the affairs of the division subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. The director, subject to specific authorization by the city manager, is also empowered to carry out special assignments in matters not expressly set forth herein. The city manager may, from time to time, issue directives setting forth operating procedures to be followed and responsibilities to be discharged by the director. 
(c)  Functions, duties. The division of development, subject to the control and direction of the city manager, shall be empowered to perform the following duties: 
(1)  Development implementation, project management, and construction administration of major development projects initiated by the city commission, administration and departments; 
(2)  Evaluate and recommend priorities for major capital improvement projects, provision of staff review, evaluation and coordination of same; 
(3)  Plan and implement community redevelopment and revitalization projects; 
(4)  Facilitate and administer programs for expansion, attraction and retention of local businesses and business investments; 
(5)  Facilitate and administer programs to attract international businesses and business investments in the city; and 
(6)  Promote the city as a trade center. 
(Ord. No. 10070, § 2, 1-23-86; Code 1980, §§ 2-206—2-210)  
Secs. 2-385—2-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13491, § 2, adopted November 20, 2014, amended division 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 9, §§ 2-411—2-413 pertained to the community development department, and derived from Ord. No. 8740, §§ 1—3, adopted January 11, 1978; Ord. No. 9034, § 1, adopted December 5, 1979; the Code of 1980, §§ 2-176—2-178; Ord. No. 10105, § 1, adopted May 22, 1986, and Ord. No. 11904, § 2, adopted March 9, 2000. 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Created. 
A department to be known as the community and economic development department is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 2-412. - Appointment, duties of director. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the community and economic development department. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 2-413. - Functions and duties of the department. 
The functions and duties of the community and economic development department are to: 
(1)  Provide or cause to be developed programs designed to identify and remove physical, social, economic, employment and cultural barriers which preclude vulnerable persons from enhancing the quality of their lives. 
(2)  Provide recommendations for funding and/or coordinate services to city citizens and neighborhood-based organizations of a social service, economic or community development nature, which funding may be allocated after an advertised public hearing and authorization by the city commission. 
(3)  Administer the community development block grant and adult/youth job training programs, recommend projects for funding and coordinate the planning and implementation of such projects which funding may be allocated only after an advertised public hearing and authorization by the city commission. 
(4)  Establish, maintain, and administer programs that will ensure grassroots citizen participation. 
The advertisements required by subsections (2) and (3) above shall include the time, date, and place of the meeting and a description of the proposed funding allocation and shall be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 2-414. - Affordable housing notice to residents of the city and city elected and appointed officials. 
Legislative intent. Any developer with a project that receives affordable or workforce housing incentives or benefits from the city, its departments, instrumentalities or community redevelopment agencies, including but not limited to, financing, grants in kind or other grants, impact fee waivers or deferrals, parking waivers or reductions, etc., shall provide notice to residents of the city and elected and appointed officials simultaneous to their regular notices of lease outs, sales, conveyances, or similar dispositions. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 2-415. - Notice. 
Prior to the initial leasing and/or sales period, developers shall deliver written notice to the directors of the community and economic development department and the planning and zoning department, respectively, simultaneous to their regular notices of the availability of these affordable units so that city elected and appointed officials can notify residents of the city of the availability of these units. The notice shall include the number of available units, street address, and contact information for the development. 
(Ord. No. 13491, § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 2-416. - Definitions. 
Affordable housing, solely for purposes of this article, shall mean owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 30 percent to 80 percent of area median income as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"). 
City resident(s), solely for purposes of this article, shall mean an individual or household which has resided within the City of Miami designated boundaries for the immediate past 12 consecutive months. 
Preference, solely for purposes of this article, shall mean the developer, manager, operator, or owner of units shall make all reasonable efforts to first enroll eligible city residents prior to leasing or selling to non-city residents. If there are no city residents available to lease or sell preference units, then the developer, manager, operator or owner of the units may lease or sell units to non-city residents. 
Restricted unit, solely for purposes of this article, shall mean housing made only available to individuals or household families which meet the income and sale/rent qualifications respective to the applicable area median income as published annually by HUD. 
Workforce housing, solely for purposes of this article, shall mean owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 80 percent to 140 percent of area median income as published annually by HUD. 
(Ord. No. 13645, § 2, 10-27-16)  
Sec. 2-417. - City resident preference. 
(a)  Affordable housing developments. Affordable housing developments receiving any city benefits, including but not limited to financing, density bonuses, impact fee deferrals, parking waivers or reductions, building permit fee deferrals, or any funds provided by the city, regardless of the source of such funds, shall first provide city residents preference to all restricted units, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(b)  Workforce housing developments. Workforce housing developments receiving any city benefits, including but not limited to financing, density bonuses, impact fee deferrals, parking waivers or reductions, building permit fee deferrals, or any funds provided by the city, regardless of the source of funds, shall first provide city residents, or those employed within the city's boundaries. Preference to all restricted units, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 13645, § 2, 10-27-16)  
Sec. 2-418. - City sole local government lender preference. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions in this article, developments in which the city is the sole local government lender to develop affordable housing and/or workforce housing through financing, regardless of the source of said funds, shall provide city residents preference to all restricted units of the development. 
(Ord. No. 13645, § 2, 10-27-16)  
Secs. 2-419—2-435. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 2-436. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 10125, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 2-186)  
Sec. 2-437. - Appointment of director. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a director of the department of parks and recreation. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(Ord. No. 10125, § 3(a), 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 2-188)  
Sec. 2-438. - Functions, duties and responsibilities of department. 
The functions, duties and responsibilities of the department of parks and recreation shall include the following: 
(1)  Planning, development, maintenance, management and supervision of the operations of the city parks, cemetery, and golf courses, including the coordination and management of planning and development efforts at said city properties. 
(2)  Management, supervision, and provision of recreation activities and programs for all age groups within the community emphasizing educational, cultural and recreational activities. 
(3)  Such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, and the enforcement of all laws, ordinances, and regulations relative to the above powers and duties. 
(Ord. No. 10125, § 4, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 2-189)  
Secs. 2-439—2-465. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Department of finance generally, § 27 et seq. 
City Code cross references— Finance, ch. 18; local business tax receipts, ch. 31; taxation, ch. 56. 
 
Sec. 2-466. - Director as disbursing officer. 
The director of finance is hereby declared to be the disbursing officer in the paying of salaries or compensation to all employees of the city, and in addition to his/her other duties he/she shall arrange for the payment of salaries and compensation to all employees of the city through the department of finance, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32; Code 1980, § 2-218; Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 2-467. - Responsibilities of the director relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act. 
The director of finance shall be responsible for the provisions relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act, in sections 18-500 through 18-503, as follows: 
(1)  To provide monthly reports to department directors reflecting actual year-to-date and month-to-date expenditures by line item, annual budget per line item, percentage of budget used by line item and remaining balance per line item. 
(2)  To provide monthly notification in writing to the city manager and department directors of any over expenditure by line item. 
(3)  To provide monthly reports to the city manager and department directors of overtime expenditures for each department. 
(4)  To prepare portions of the monthly status report and any other requested information to the city manager and department directors. 
(5)  To implement procedures necessary to assist the departments in reducing the potential of over expending line items as it relates to the disbursing function. 
(6)  To assist and respond to questions from departments and offices as it relates to the disbursing function. 
(7)  To assist the director of management and budget with the roll forward of prior year fund balance to appropriate these funds for open encumbrances and/or purchase orders which exist at year end and payable in the following year. 
(8)  To establish a financial account structure software package in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(9)  To provide regularly scheduled accounts payable check run along with procedures to facilitate the departments in expediting the payment of obligations originated by said departments. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 3, 2-10-00)  
Secs. 2-468—2-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET DEPARTMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
City Code cross references— Finance, ch. 18; local business tax receipts, ch. 31; taxation, ch. 56. 
 
Sec. 2-491. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the management and budget department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-98; Ord. No. 8742, § 1, 1-11-78; Code 1980, § 2-226)  
Sec. 2-492. - Director—Head of department. 
The head of the management and budget department shall be known as the director of management and budget. 
(Code 1967, § 2-99; Code 1980, § 2-227)  
Sec. 2-493. - Same—Appointment; duties generally. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint the director of the management and budget department, who shall administer the affairs of such department, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(Code 1967, § 2-100; Code 1980, § 2-228)  
Sec. 2-494. - Same—Management, supervision and control of department; services provided by department generally. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the director of the management and budget department shall manage, supervise, control and administer the affairs of the department. The department shall provide revenue/grants management services, budget management services, and such other similar services as the city manager may direct. 
(Code 1967, § 2-100.1; Code 1980, § 2-229)  
Sec. 2-495. - Department organization; assistant department head and revenue administrator to head each section. 
There shall be included in the management and budget department a budget management section, and a revenue/grants management section. Each section shall be headed by an assistant department head and a revenue administrator. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-100.2, 2-100.7; Ord. No. 8742, § 1, 1-11-78; Ord. No. 9467, § 1(b), 7-22-82; Code 1980, §§ 2-230, 2-241)  
Sec. 2-496. - Duties of revenue administrator—Revenue/grants management section. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the director of the management and budget department, the revenue administrator shall forecast actual and projected revenue, identify potential new sources of revenue and perform the city's grant management function by establishing a comprehensive citywide grants management system. 
(Code 1967, § 2-100.3; Code 1980, § 2-231)  
Sec. 2-497. - Same—Budget management section. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the director of the management and budget department, the assistant department director in charge of budget services shall provide the services of a budget office, which shall include the formulation, preparation and evaluation of the city budget; the provision of budgetary control through constant monitoring of current fiscal operations, and the forecasting of future fiscal operations for all funds; and the functions which shall include: expenditure control of the financial management information system; citywide position control; monitoring all legislation authorizing appropriations through its verification of the availability of funds; undertaking special fiscal management studies as requested by the mayor, city commission and/or by the city manager; written analysis of the budgetary impact of all proposed legislation prior to consideration by the city commission; providing through the city manager to the city commission a written budget impact analysis for all "pocket" agenda items; and performing such allied duties and functions as the department director may specify. 
(Code 1967, § 2-100.4; Code 1980, § 2-232; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 2-497.1. - Responsibilities of the director of management and budget relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act. 
The director of management and budget shall be responsible for the provisions relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500 through 18-503, as follows: 
(1)  To prepare a written budgetary impact analysis for city commission review prior to adoption of a resolution presented for changes or deviations of the approved budget. 
(2)  To prepare a written budgetary impact analysis for city commission review prior to adoption of a resolution presented for ratification, approval and confirmation as a result of an emergency. 
(3)  To monitor departmental overtime budgets and provide monthly status reports to assist departments in verifying the availability of funds. 
(4)  To monitor departmental budgets and provide monthly status reports to assist departments in verifying the availability of funds. 
(5)  To notify the department director and the city manager in writing of any deficiency, the cause of the deficiency, the amount of the deficiency and the recommended remedial action to cure the deficiency. The city manager shall, within 24 hours, transmit copies to the mayor, the city commission, city clerk and city attorney. 
(6)  To submit a comprehensive monthly status report, for distribution to the mayor and members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 3, 2-10-00)  
Sec. 2-498. - Duties of computers division. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the deputy director of computers shall manage, supervise, control and administer the affairs of the computers division. The computers division shall assist and support city departments by providing and coordinating computer-based, integrated information systems, planning and development services and assist and support city departments in the monitoring of the operations of such systems. The computers division shall coordinate the acquisition of hardware and software to develop such systems and shall prepare capital budgets and administer the capital funds from whatever sources for such acquisition and administer all contracts and agreements related to such acquisitions. Coordination and review of the computers division services shall be with such persons, departments or groups as the city manager may direct. The computers division shall also provide such other allied services to support and assist city departments as the city manager may direct. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-100.8—2-100.11; Ord. No. 9467, § 1, 7-22-82; Code 1980, §§ 2-242—2-245)  
Sec. 2-499. - Service fees. 
Expenses to be incurred by the city in connection with the administration of local business tax receipts and permits have been determined and shall be reimbursed to the city through the imposition of a service charge in the amount of $3.50. This nonrefundable service charge is in addition to and shall be paid separately from any assessment, and shall be payable at the time of application or request for services provided pursuant to the following sections of the City Code: 2-207; 2-234; 2-269; 3-23; 3-29; 3-59; 18-4; 18-40; 18-293; 19-2; 19-6; 22-12; 31-50; 38-11; 38-12; 42-6; 54-3; 54-43; 54-305; and 62-156. 
(Ord. No. 11287, § 4, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10)  
Secs. 2-500—2-525. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13770, § 2, adopted June 28, 2018, repealed the former division 13, sections 2-526—2-531 in its entirety, which pertained to the office of independent auditor general, and derived from Ord. No. 12351, § 3, adopted April 10, 2003. 
 
Secs. 2-526—2-555. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
City Code cross reference— Personnel, ch. 40. 
 
Sec. 2-556. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the personnel management department. 
(Ord. No. 8526, § 1, 2-26-76; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-266)  
Sec. 2-557. - Appointment, duties of director. 
The city manager is authorized to appoint a director of the personnel management department. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(Ord. No. 8526, § 2, 2-26-76; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-267)  
Sec. 2-558. - Functions and duties of department. 
The functions and duties of the personnel management department are to: 
(1)  Provide basic personnel information and support services to all city employees. 
(2)  Identify, design and administer training courses and formal educational programs for the development of employees in their current or potential positions. 
(3)  Review and evaluate the manpower requirements necessary to perform the assigned functions of the various departments in an efficient and effective manner, assist the department directors and the civil service board to define and identify the skills needed to satisfy the requirements, perform the administrative procedures and fieldwork required to define and keep current data on position descriptions. 
(4)  Establish procedures and facilities for the creation, retrieval and preservation of employee personnel records; maintain records of all personnel actions, including, but not limited to, those related to employment or promotion processing. 
(5)  Establish and maintain medical services which shall include medical examination of employees and potential employees, a preventive medical program and liaison with the medical profession. 
(6)  In coordination and cooperation with the civil service board, establish and maintain a program to ensure recruitment of an adequate supply of qualified applicants for employment by the city. 
(7)  Develop job-related standards of efficiency for submission to the civil service board for their consideration. 
(8)  Ensure that standards of efficiency fixed by the civil service board are applied to employees and that reports of employee performance are prepared and submitted in accordance with civil service rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 8526, § 3, 2-26-76; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-268)  
Sec. 2-559. - Department not to abridge civil service board authority or interfere with civil service policies in specified areas. 
It is declared to be the legislative intent of this body that implementation of the personnel management department shall not abridge the policy-making authority of the civil service board and shall not impede, deter or interfere with civil service policies in the areas of establishing, maintaining and enforcing in-hiring standards and qualifications; preparation, administration, certification, and supervision of all in-hiring and promotional examinations; judicial review of all disciplinary actions and procedures; approval of employee performance evaluation standards, and review of all personnel actions pursuant to civil service board rules. 
(Ord. No. 8526, § 4, 2-26-76; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-269)  
Secs. 2-560—2-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND DIVERSITY PROGRAMS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13086, § 2, adopted September 10, 2009, amended division 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 15, §§ 2-581 and 2-582, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 2-235, 2-236.1, and Ord. No. 10071, §§ 2, 4(b), adopted January 23, 1986. 
 
Sec. 2-581. - Creation of the office of equal opportunity and diversity programs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, the office of equal opportunity and diversity programs is created. The management, supervision, and control of the equal opportunity function to be performed on behalf of the city shall be the responsibility of the office of equal opportunity and diversity programs. 
(b)  All funds, personnel, records, and equipment currently budgeted in the department of employee relations for the division of equal opportunity and diversity programs are transferred and assigned to the office of equal opportunity and diversity programs. 
(Ord. No. 13086, § 2, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-582. - Appointment, reporting and qualifications of the administrator. 
The equal opportunity and diversity programs administrator, shall be appointed by and report to the city manager, and the position shall be in the unclassified service. The administrator shall be responsible for the functions of the city office of equal opportunity and diversity programs and shall be qualified by education and experience in the area of equal opportunity compliance as determined by generally accepted standards within the field of practice. The equal opportunity and diversity programs administrator is also designated as the city's equal employment opportunity (EEO) officer, also known as affirmative action officer. 
(Ord. No. 13086, § 2, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-583. - Staffing. 
The office of equal opportunity and diversity programs shall be staffed by professional and support personnel as designated by the city manager and approved by the city commission in the city's budget process, as may be amended periodically by the city commission, upon recommendation by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13086, § 2, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-584. - General duties, powers and responsibilities. 
Subject to the direction of the city manager, the equal opportunity and diversity programs administrator shall: 
(1)  Represent the city manager in all matters of affirmative action, and equal opportunity in employment; 
(2)  Monitor compliance with the city's administrative policies and laws related to the prohibition of employment discrimination including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 with amendments; 
b.  Civil Rights Act of 1991; 
c.  Pregnancy Discrimination Act; 
d.  Family Medical Leave Act; 
e.  Equal Pay Act; 
f.  Age Discrimination in Employment Act; 
g.  Florida Civil Rights Act; 
h.  Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 with amendments; 
i.  Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 
(3)  Investigate complaints involving employment discrimination; 
(4)  Prepare reports to internal and external sources relevant to compliance with EEO laws, and issues involving diversity and equal employment opportunity; 
(5)  Develop and implement instructional programs relevant to equal employment opportunity and diversity issues for city employees; 
(6)  Work in direct coordination with the EEO advisory board in the preparation, conduct, review, and implementation of the city's continuing affirmative action program; 
(7)  Provide staff support to the EEO advisory board thus empowering the board to: 
a.  Review and recommend to the city commission, through the appropriate administrative channels, the adoption of, amendment and revisions to the city's affirmative action plan, for meeting present and possible future requirements; 
b.  Review employment policies and practices of the city and make recommendations to the department of employee relations that will serve to ensure the city's compliance with EEO laws, guidelines and best practices; 
c.  Conduct monthly meetings, open to the public, for discussion of the city's affirmative action program, review of specific complaints of alleged discrimination properly brought before the board, and receipt of reports from the office of equal opportunity and diversity programs. 
(Ord. No. 13086, § 2, 9-10-09)  
Secs. 2-585—2-590. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - MIAMI OFFICE OF SUSTAINABLE INITIATIVES 
 
Sec. 2-591. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department to be known as the Miami Office of Sustainable Initiatives. 
(Ord. No. 12910, § 2, 4-26-07)  
Sec. 2-592. - Appointment, duties of director. 
The city manager is authorized to appoint a director of the office of sustainable initiatives. The director shall administer the affairs of the department subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(Ord. No. 12910, § 2, 4-26-07)  
Sec. 2-593. - Functions and duties of the department. 
The functions and duties of the office of sustainable initiatives department are to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain programs that provide the city and its residents with economic and quality of life benefits such as reduced energy bills, green space preservation, air quality improvements, reduced traffic congestion, improved transportation choices, and economic development and job creation through energy conservation and new energy technologies. 
(2)  Develop and administer a baseline emissions inventory and timetable by calculating greenhouse gas emissions for a base year and a forecast year, capturing emissions levels from all municipal operations and from all community related activities. 
(3)  Propose resolutions establishing emission reduction targets for the city. 
(4)  Coordinate the cooperation of city departments to take action to reduce global warming pollution by striving to meet or exceed Kyoto Protocol targets. 
(5)  Ensure that sustainable initiatives set by this department are administered and followed by city departments. 
(6)  Facilitate communication between environmental experts and city departments for the adoption and enforcement of environmentally sustainable initiatives. 
(Ord. No. 12910, § 2, 4-26-07)  
Secs. 2-594—2-610. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference— City officers and employees prohibited from having interest in profits, etc., of contracts, jobs, etc., performed for the city, § 4(c). 
City Code cross reference— Conflicts of interest in regard to members, employees, etc., of downtown development board, § 14-62. 
Law review reference— Note as to conflicts of interest of municipal officers, 20 Miami L. Rev. 472. 
 
Sec. 2-611. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall be applicable to and binding upon every officer, official and employee of the city, including every member of any board, commission or agency of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-101; Code 1980, § 2-301)  
Sec. 2-612. - Transacting business with city; appearances before city boards; post-employment restrictions; participation in the award of certain contracts under the procurement ordinance; penalties, etc. 
(a)  No person included in section 2-611 shall enter into any contract or transact any business with the city or any person or agency acting for the city, or shall appear in representation of any third party before any board, commission or agency of which such person is a member. No employee shall appear in any capacity on behalf of any third party before any board, commission or agency of the city. Any such contract or agreement entered into or appearance made in violation of this section shall render the transaction voidable. However this section shall not apply to an employee participating in federal economic development programs, the community development block grant assisted single family rehabilitation loan program, or the various affordable housing programs assisted through the home investment partnership program and state housing initiatives partnership program administered by the department of community development provided that the employee meets all criteria of the program and provided that the city manager approves the participation of the employee and that the employee is identified as being an employee of the city in applicable documents. 
(b)  The word "person" appearing in subsection (a) of this section shall include officers, officials and employees as set forth in section 2-611 hereof and the following family members of such "person": spouse, son, daughter, parent, brother or sister. 
(c)  The prohibition upon activity which is set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall remain in effect for a period of two years after the officer, official, or employee has left city service or terminated city employment. 
(d)  The director of the department and/or his/her designee and/or the members of the selection committee who are city employees recommending a contract award of not less than $500,000.00, shall be restricted for a two-year period, after the director and/or his/her designee and/or the member has left city service or terminated city employment, from receiving compensation or employment from any contractual party when the director and/or his/her designee and/or the member participated in the award of the contract subject to the procurement ordinance of the city, including without limitation waivers, with the following conditions and definitions: 
(1)  The word "member" as used in this section shall include all city employees who are members of the selection committee which has recommended a contract award; 
(2)  The word "director" shall mean the director, or his/her designee, of any city department, division, authority, board, or office recommending a contract award, and with respect to the boards referenced in section 18-72, the executive director of such board, or his/her designee, providing, however, that this section shall not apply to the community redevelopment agency; 
(3)  The word "director" shall exclude the city manager and the chief procurement officer as defined in section 18-73; 
(4)  This section shall not preclude the member or director, or his/her designee, from working for the contractual party on an entirely unrelated contract. The phrase "contractual party" is defined in section 18-73. The employment or contractual relationship cannot relate directly to the contract that was recommended by the selection committee in which the member participated and/or that was recommended by the director or his/her designee. 
(e)  Penalties. A violation of this ordinance may be punished by imposition of the maximum fine and/or penalties allowed by law. Additionally, violations may be considered by and subject to action by the Miami-Dade County Commission on Ethics. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102; Ord. No. 9015, § 1, 11-8-79; Ord. No. 10823, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 2-302; Ord. No. 11755, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 11816, § 2, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 11908, § 2, 4-13-00; Ord. No. 12401, § 1, 9-11-03; Ord. No. 12892, § 2, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12892, § 2, adopted March 8, 2007, changed the title of § 2-612 from "Transacting business with the city; appearances before city boards, etc." to "Transacting business with city; appearances before city boards; post-employment restrictions; participation in the award of certain contracts under the procurement ordinance; penalties, etc." 
State Law reference— Doing business with one's agency, F.S. § 112.313(13), (14).  
Sec. 2-613. - Accepting gifts, etc., from persons contracting, etc., with city. 
Every officer, official or employee of the city, including every member of any board, commission or agency of the city, is expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-103; Code 1980, § 2-303)  
Sec. 2-614. - Waiver of requirements of article. 
(a)  The requirements of this article may be waived for a particular transaction or transactions only by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the city commission or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation after public hearing. Such waiver may be effected only after findings by four-fifths of the members of the city commission, or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation as follows: 
(1)  An open-to-all sealed competitive bid has been submitted by a city person as set forth in section 2-611 hereof; or 
(2)  The bid has been submitted by a person or firm offering services within the scope of practice of architecture, landscape architecture, professional engineering or registered land surveying, as defined by the laws of the state and pursuant to provisions of the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act as are now in force and as may be hereinafter enacted, and when the bid has been submitted by a city person as set forth in section 2-611 hereof; or 
(3)  The property or services to be involved in the proposed transaction are unique and the city cannot avail itself of such property or services without entering into a transaction which would violate this section but for waiver of its requirements; and 
(4)  The proposed transaction will be to the best interest of the city. 
(b)  Such findings shall be spread on the minutes of the commission. This section shall be applicable only to prospective transactions, and the commission may in no case ratify a transaction entered in violation of this section. 
(c)  This section shall be taken to be cumulative and shall not be construed to amend or repeal any other section or ordinance pertaining to the same subject matter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-104; Code 1980, § 2-304; Ord. No. 13170, § 1, 5-13-10) 
State Law reference— Consultants' competitive negotiation, F.S. § 287.055.  
Sec. 2-615. - List of real estate owned—Required of certain officials. 
(a)  All the following enumerated elective and appointive officers or employees of the city: 
Mayor; 
City commissioners; 
City attorney; 
City clerk; 
City manager; 
Civil service board; 
Retirement plan board; 
Retirement system board; 
Members of planning, zoning and appeals board; 
Members of the nuisance abatement board; 
Executive director of downtown development authority; 
Director of off-street parking department; 
Executive secretary of civil service board; 
Fire chief; 
Chief of police; 
Members of downtown development authority; 
Members of off-street parking board; 
Directors of all departments; 
shall, within 30 days from the effective date of sections 2-615 through 2-617, submit to the city clerk a complete itemized list of all real property owned by he or she, whether the title be either legal or equitable, whether owned in whole or in part, including corporate real property in which he/she has a controlling interest or is an officer of such corporation, and shall include the following information as to each parcel of land: 
(1)  The legal description and common address; 
(2)  The municipal or county zoning classification wherein the property is located; 
(3)  The manner in which the property is presently being utilized. 
(b)  The itemized list shall be verified under oath. Only those real properties that are located within the corporate limits of the city or those properties located 500 feet beyond the corporate limits of the city are required to be listed on a form provided by the city clerk. 
(c)  All the elective and appointive officers or employees enumerated in subsection (a) who are currently appointed or appointed subsequent to the effective date of amended sections 2-615 through 2-617 shall, within 30 days of their election or appointment, submit an itemized list verified under oath of real estate holdings as provided herein. 
(Code 1967, § 2-105; Ord. No. 10966, § 2, 4-2-92; Code 1980, § 2-305; Ord. No. 13245, § 1, 1-13-11; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-616. - Same—To be renewed annually. 
All those elective and appointive officers and employees as described in section 2-615 shall, between November 1 and December 1, 1967, and each succeeding year thereafter, submit new itemized lists of real estate holdings as required under section 2-615 subject to the terms and conditions as contained in section 2-615. 
(Code 1967, § 2-106; Code 1980, § 2-306)  
Sec. 2-617. - Same—Penalty for violation of sections 2-615, 2-616. 
Any elective or appointive officer or employee violating sections 2-615 and 2-616 shall be removed from office in accordance with the law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-108; Code 1980, § 2-307)  
Sec. 2-618. - Disclosure of parties in interest by persons making presentations, requests, etc., to city commission or boards. 
(a)  All parties making any presentation, formal request or petition to the city commission or any city board with respect to any real property are required to make full disclosure in writing, on a form supplied by the clerk of the city commission or secretary to the board, of all parties having a financial interest, either direct or indirect, in the subject matter of said presentation, formal request or petition. Such disclosure shall include, but not be limited to, disclosure of all natural persons having an ownership interest, direct or indirect, in the subject real property. 
(b)  The disclosure required by subsection (a) hereof must be made or updated, as may be necessary, in order to ensure that the information disclosed is accurate at the time of filing and at all times thereafter within a reasonable time after any change in the disclosure information required and is accurate as of the time of each vote by the city commission or applicable board. 
(c)  Where the disclosure required by subsection (a) hereof is not made, the city commission or applicable board shall not consider the presentation, formal request or petition nor shall such petition be accepted for filing. 
(Ord. No. 9419, §§ 1, 2, 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9798, § 1, 2-9-84; Code 1980, § 2-308)  
Sec. 2-619. - Financial disclosure. 
(a)  Reporting requirement: 
(1)  In addition to the financial disclosure requirements of state law and county Code, the mayor and city commissioners are required to provide the following information to the city clerk in writing by July 1 of each year: [17] 
a.  Description of all assets which have a value in excess of $5,000.00 including household goods. 
b.  All liabilities which exceed $5,000.00 including the name and address of all creditors including debts or money owed in excess of $5,000.00 including credit card and retail installment accounts, taxes owed, indebtedness on a life insurance policy and accrued income taxes on net unrealized appreciation. 
c.  All sources of income due a business entity in excess of ten percent of the gross income of a business entity in which the reporting person held a material interest and from which he/she received an amount which was in excess of ten percent of his/her gross income during the disclosure period and which exceeds $1,500.00. The period for computing the gross income of the business entity is the fiscal year of the business entity which ended on, or immediately prior to, the end of the preceding calendar year. 
d.  Net worth, i.e., the difference between total assets and total liabilities. 
(2)  An affidavit of the person reporting shall be executed attesting to the accuracy of the disclosures. 
(b)  As an alternative to the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above, a copy of the reporting person's filed return for the current year's federal income tax return may be provided. 
(c)  Any elected official who is a partner in a law firm or a stockholder in a professional association must disclose, in writing, to the city clerk the name of any client whose representation results in a contribution of ten percent or more of the gross income: 
(1)  To the law firm in which said official is a partner; 
(2)  To the professional association in which said official is a stockholder or has an ownership interest; or 
(3)  To the elected official directly. 
(d)  Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 10219, § 1, 2-12-87; Code 1980, § 2-309) 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Note— The reporting requirement applies to all persons serving in the designated capacities on December 31, 1986 and on December 31 of succeeding years. Information required to be reported by July 1 shall be the information in existence as of December 31 of the preceding calendar year. 
 
Secs. 2-620—2-650. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LOBBYISTS 
 
Sec. 2-651. - Applicability. 
Notwithstanding any provision in the Code of the city, as amended, to the contrary, Section 2-11.1(s) of the Code of Ordinances of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended ("County Code"), shall be applicable in the city. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 1, 3-18-86; Code 1980, § 2-311; Ord. No. 13718, § 2, 12-14-17)  
Sec. 2-652. - Penalty. 
Any person in violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 3, 3-18-86; Code 1980, § 2-312) 
City Code cross reference— General penalty, § 1-13.  
Sec. 2-653. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in Section 2-11.1(s) of the County Code shall be applicable to this article. References in Section 2-11.1 of the County Code to county personnel shall, therefore, be applicable to city personnel who serve in comparable capacities to the county personnel referred to therein. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 2(a)(1), (2), 3-18-86; Ord. No. 10181, § 1, 11-13-86; Ord. No. 10478, § 1, 9-8-88; Code 1980, § 2-313; Ord. No. 11469, § 2, 3-20-97; Ord. No. 11527, § 2, 7-24-97; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13718, § 2, 12-14-17) 
City Code cross references— Code enforcement board, § 2-812 et seq.; civil service board, § 40-66 et seq.  
Sec. 2-654. - Registration; ethics; fee; disclosure requirements; log of registered lobbyists; exemptions from payment of fee; failure to register. 
(a)  A person may not lobby a city official, a city board member, the city manager, or city staff, until such person has registered as a lobbyist with the city clerk and submitted a certificate of completion, of an ethics course provided by the Miami-Dade County Commission on Ethics Public Trust completed within 60 days after registering. Such registration shall be due within five business days of being retained as a lobbyist by a principal, prior to engaging in any type of lobbying activities, and shall be renewed on a yearly basis thereafter. The annual registration fee for each lobbyist shall be $525.00 as an initial registration fee, plus an additional fee of $105.00 for each principal represented for each issue lobbied on behalf of any one principal. The registration fees required by this section shall be deposited by the city clerk into a separate account and shall be expended for purposes of recording, transcription, administration, and/or any other associated costs incurred in maintaining these records for availability to the public. Any person who is required to pay the registration fee and who is unable to pay the registration fee without imposing an undue burden on personal resources or on resources otherwise available to him or her shall, upon written certification of such inability given under oath to the city clerk, be exempt from paying the registration fee. Regardless of the date of the initial registration, all lobbyists' registrations shall expire December 31 of each calendar year, and shall be renewed on a calendar year basis. 
(b)  Each lobbyist shall, within 60 days after registering as a lobbyist, submit to the city clerk a certificate of completion of an ethics course offered by the Miami-Dade County Commission on Ethics and Public Trust ("ethics course"). Lobbyists who have completed the initial ethics course mandated by the preceding sentence and who have continuously registered as a lobbyist thereafter shall be required to complete a refresher ethics course every two years. Each lobbyist who has completed a refresher ethics course shall submit to the city clerk a certificate of completion within 60 days after registering as a lobbyist. 
(c)  Within five business days of being retained as a lobbyist or before engaging in any lobbying activities, whichever comes first, every person required to register as a lobbyist shall: 
(1)  Register on forms prepared by the city clerk; 
(2)  Pay an initial registration fee of $525.00, plus an additional fee of $105.00 for each principal represented and for each issue the lobbyist has been retained to lobby on behalf of any one principal; and 
(3)  Disclose, under oath, the following information: 
a.  Lobbyist's name and business address; 
b.  Name and business address of each principal represented; 
c.  The specific issue on which he or she has been retained to lobby; and 
d.  If the lobbyist represents a corporation, partnership or trust, the name and business address of the chief officer, partner or beneficiary of the corporation, partnership or trust and the names and addresses of all persons holding, directly or indirectly, at least five percent ownership interest in said corporation, partnership or trust. A separate registration form shall be filed by the lobbyist and an additional fee of $105.00 shall be paid for each principal represented and for each issue the lobbyist has been retained to lobby on behalf of any one principal. Such issue shall be described with as much detail as is practical, including, though not limited to: a specific description (where applicable) of a pending request for proposals, invitation to bid, ordinance, resolution, or a given item on the agenda. The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall reject any registration statement which does not provide a clear description of the specific issue on which such lobbyist has been retained to lobby. 
(4)  Submit a certificate of completion of the ethics course as provided under subsection 2-654(b). 
(d)  In addition, every registrant shall be required to state under oath the existence of any direct or indirect business association, partnership, or financial relationship with the mayor, any member of the city commission, any member of a city board, the city manager, or a member of the city staff before whom he or she lobbies, or intends to lobby. 
(e)  The city clerk shall maintain a log, which shall be updated on a quarterly basis by April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15 of each year, reflecting the lobbyist registrations filed in accordance with this section and shall be distributed to the mayor, the city commission, and the city manager. 
(f)  The mayor, all members of the city commission, all members of city boards, the city manager, and city staff shall be diligent to ascertain that persons required to register pursuant to this section have complied, and if necessary, request a record of compliance from the city clerk. The mayor, members of the city commission, of city boards, the city manager, and city staff may not knowingly permit a person who is not registered pursuant to this section to lobby. 
(g)  Each person who withdraws as a lobbyist for a particular principal shall file an appropriate notice of withdrawal concerning representation for that principal. There shall be no fee required for filing a notice of withdrawal. 
(h)  The validity of any action or determination of the city commission or any other city board or committee shall not be affected by the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(i)  The following persons shall be required to register but will be exempt from paying the registration fee: 
(1)  A person who, pursuant to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, has been designated and is so recognized by the city as a representative of a collective bargaining unit composed of city employees; 
(2)  Those persons identified in Section 2-11.1(s) of the County Code. 
(j)  All registration forms shall be open to the public upon the filing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 2(a)(3), (b)—(d), 3-18-86; Ord. No. 10181, § 1, 11-13-86; Code 1980, § 2-314; Ord. No. 11469, § 2, 3-20-97; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13125, § 2, 1-14-10; Ord. No. 13141, § 1, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13718, § 2, 12-14-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13718, § 2, adopted December 14, 2017, changed the title of section 2-654 from "Registration; fee; disclosure requirements; log of registered lobbyists; exemptions from payment of fee; failure to register" to "Registration; ethics; fee; disclosure requirements; log of registered lobbyists; exemptions from payment of fee; failure to register." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 2-655. - Annual expenditures report. 
A lobbyist shall annually submit to the city clerk's office a signed statement under oath, as provided herein, listing all lobbying expenditures and the sources from which funds for making lobbying expenditures have come. The lobbying expenditures shall include, but not be limited to: meals, entertainment, travel, lodging, and gifts for public officers and employees for the preceding calendar year. Lobbying expenditures shall not include the lobbyist's own personal expenses for lodging, meals, travel, salary, and office expenses. Such statement of expenditures for the preceding calendar year, entitled "Annual Expenditures Report" shall be due on January 15 of each year. Such statement shall be rendered on the form provided by the city clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection. If the lobbyist had no expenditures in the preceding calendar year, then he or she shall not be required to submit an annual expenditures report. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 2(e), 3-18-86; Ord. No. 10611, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 2-316; Ord. No. 11469, § 2, 3-20-97; Ord. No. 13718, § 2, 12-14-17)  
Sec. 2-656. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  A lobbyist, when in doubt about the applicability and interpretation of this article in a particular context, shall submit in writing the facts for an advisory opinion by the city attorney. The city attorney shall render advisory opinions to any lobbyist who seeks advice as to whether the facts in a particular case would constitute a violation of this section. All advisory opinions of the city attorney shall be numbered, dated and furnished to the city clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  The city clerk's office shall keep all advisory opinions of the city attorney relating to lobbyists and lobbying activities, as well as a current list of registered lobbyists and their respective reports required under this article, all of which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 2(f), (g), 3-18-86; Code 1980, § 2-317)  
Sec. 2-657. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any lobbyist who fails to file the annual expenditures report by the January 15 deadline each calendar year shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 per day for reports filed after the due date. 
(b)  Upon verification of a lobbyist's failure to file the annual expenditures report, the city clerk shall notify the lobbyist by certified mail that the annual expenditures report must be filed within five business days following receipt of the notice. The name of any lobbyist who fails to comply with said requirement shall be automatically removed from the list of active lobbyists. Should said person wish to re-register as a lobbyist, he or she shall submit a new registration form accompanied by a $525.00 registration fee plus any and all outstanding fines accrued prior to re-registration. 
(c)  The city clerk shall submit a report to the city commission as to those lobbyists who have failed to comply with registration and/or the annual filing requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10087, § 2(h), 3-18-86; Code 1980, § 2-318; Ord. No. 11469, § 2, 3-20-97; Ord. No. 13246, § 2, 1-13-11; Ord. No. 13718, § 2, 12-14-17)  
Sec. 2-658. - Contingency fees. 
No person shall retain or employ a lobbyist for compensation based on a contingency fee, and no person shall accept any such employment or render any service for compensation based on a contingency fee. 
(Ord. No. 11469, § 2, 3-20-97)  
Secs. 2-659—2-690. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
City Code cross references— Affirmative action advisory board, § 2-976 et seq.; affirmative action plan required of bidders on city contracts, § 18-136 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-691. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the following meanings: 
Affirmative action means all actions in recruitment, hiring, upgrading and other areas which are designed to eliminate the effects of past discrimination. 
Affirmative action plan means the written plan by which the city sets forth the specific affirmative actions by which it will eliminate and remedy the underrepresentation and/or underutilization of minorities and women. The affirmative action plan shall contain goals and timetables. 
Discrimination means any act or acts which may adversely affect the employment opportunities of individuals because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or other factors that, by law, may not be considered as a basis for employment actions. 
Goals and timetable means the projections an employer makes of the numerical representation of minorities and women likely to be achieved in those positions in which they have been underutilized. 
Labor market means the standard by which the employment participation of women and minorities is measured, based upon their respective incidence in the City of Miami civilian labor force. 
Underrepresentation means the condition which exists when the participation rate of a group by number and/or percentage of an employer's work force is substantially less than the representation of said group in the relative labor market. 
Underutilization means the condition which results from the employment participation rate of a group by job category being considerably less than the availability of said group in the labor market. 
(Ord. No. 10111, § 2, 6-12-86; Code 1980, § 2-321)  
Sec. 2-692. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The City of Miami hereby adopts an affirmative action policy recognizing not only an obligation, but also an ethical and moral responsibility to provide fair and equitable consideration of applicants and employees, without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, place of birth, marital status or physical or mental handicap. 
(b)  The City of Miami hereby publicly reaffirms its commitment to a policy of nondiscrimination and affirmative action in all agencies of city government in order to enlarge and expand the employment opportunities of all qualified persons. 
(Ord. No. 10111, § 1, 6-12-86; Code 1980, § 2-322)  
Secs. 2-693, 2-694. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13086, § 2, adopted September 10, 2009, repealed the former sections 2-693 and 2-694 in their entirety, which pertained to the implementation of plan; affirmative action division established; designation of officer, and duties and powers of officer, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 2-323, 2-234; Ord. No. 10111, §§ 3, 4, adopted June 12, 1986; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, adopted October 28, 1997, and Ord. No. 11995, § 2, adopted November 16, 2000.  
Sec. 2-695. - Policy objective; promotional goals for minorities and women; clause in city contracts, lease agreements, etc. 
(a)  Until changed by ordinance, the objective of the city is to achieve as its long-term goal the participation at all levels throughout its work force of blacks, Hispanics and women approximating their respective proportions in the city's labor force as determined by the United States Bureau of the Census. 
(b)  Promotional goals shall be established for minorities and women on a departmental basis, with each department having as its yearly goals, either parity with the Miami city government work force population statistics or the percentage of minorities currently employed in the department, whichever is smaller. 
(c)  All City of Miami contracts, lease agreements, use permits or subcontractual arrangements shall contain an affirmative action clause prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, sex, national origin or handicap. 
(Ord. No. 10111, § 5, 6-12-86; Code 1980, § 2-325)  
Sec. 2-696. - Term of policy; annual review. 
The affirmative action policy established hereby shall be in effect until such time as the effects of prior discrimination against minorities and women have been compensated for, and parity achieved, at which time the goals provided for herein shall no longer be observed. There shall be a yearly review by the city commission to determine the continued need for said affirmative action policy. 
(Ord. No. 10111, § 6, 6-12-86; Code 1980, § 2-326)  
Secs. 2-697—2-725. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-726—2-745. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SAFE NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 2-746. - Creation approved. 
The creation of one or more safe neighborhood improvement districts within the city by three optional methods: a local government neighborhood improvement district per F.S. § 163.506; a property owners' association neighborhood improvement district per F.S. § 163.508; a special neighborhood improvement district per F.S. § 163.511; all in accordance with the provisions of F.S. §§ 163.501—163.522, referred to as the "Safe Neighborhood Act," as hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 10405, § 1, 11-12-88; Code 1980, § 2-346)  
Secs. 2-747—2-775. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CITY-OWNED PROPERTY[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
City Code cross references— Finance, ch. 18; sale or lease of realty, § 18-176 et seq.; public off-street parking facilities, § 35-121 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 38; city golf courses, § 38-176 et seq.; stadiums and convention centers, ch. 53. 
 
Sec. 2-776. - Rental of city-owned equipment. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to rent any city-owned equipment which may be spared from city departments, at fair and adequate rental rates, and all revenues derived from the rental of the equipment herein referred to shall be deposited in a special fund. 
(b)  All revenues derived from rental of equipment, as referred to in the preceding paragraph, are hereby appropriated for the purchase of replacements or new equipment or for repairs which may be needed from time to time by the city departments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-14; Code 1980, § 2-361)  
Sec. 2-777. - Investigation of applicants for use, lease, rental, etc., of city-owned facilities and other municipal property. 
(a)  The commission finds that in order to protect the morals, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, prior to the use of any city-owned facility or other municipal property for events, an investigation shall be made to properly determine the fitness of the event activities to be presented and of the promoters, including, but not limited to, the moral character and the type of events previously promoted or participated in, to ensure that there will be no corruption of the morals of the community and that when minors are admitted to these events no immoral, lewd or lascivious acts will be viewed. 
Prior to any person, firm, partnership or organization using any facility or property of the city for events, the applicant, lessee, designee, on an appropriate form prepared by the city manager, shall supply such information as the city manager deems in the best interest of the city to require for the protection of the morals, health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants; and the use of, license, permit, lease or contract for the facility shall be authorized and/or issued by the facility manager only after approval for such use or issuance is given by the city manager following a recommendation for the use and/or issuance to the city manager by the facility manager. To allow the city manager adequate time for careful consideration of the facts presented in the application forms submitted in requests for use of city-owned facilities or property, and to provide time for responses to the facility manager or operator of the city facility or property, application forms must be submitted to the facility manager a minimum of 20 days prior to the proposed commencement date and must be then submitted to the city manager a minimum of ten days prior to the proposed commencement date of the event or events described by the application forms. Such application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address, place of birth and date of birth of the person making the application and the name of the person, firm, corporation or organization he/she represents. 
(2)  The names, addresses, places of birth and dates of birth of the persons who are to appear at such facility for the purpose of staging such event (in the case of performers). 
(3)  The names, addresses, places of birth and dates of birth of the owners or corporate officers of the organization requesting use of the facility. 
(4)  Will solicitation of contributions be made at any time in connection with this event? 
(5)  The name of the state or states in which the corporation is chartered. 
(6)  The names and addresses of the locations where the performers have appeared for the five performances immediately prior to the performance to be booked at the city-owned facility. 
(7)  Have any of the performers or applicants ever been denied use of any other public or private facilities? If so, where, when and what were the circumstances? 
(8)  State approximately how long the performers have been engaged in such profession, and whether they operate under any other name, and if so, give the other name. 
(9)  Has the applicant, any officer of the corporation or organization represented by the applicant, or any persons either presenting or performing in the event applied for, ever been convicted in any court of record of an offense or crime involving moral turpitude or any violation, other than traffic offenses, under either the name being used in connection with this event or any other name previously used? If yes, what name or names and what crime or crimes? 
(10)  A copy of the contract between the promoter and performers shall be submitted to the city manager upon request. 
(11)  Explain briefly the nature of the event and the actions to take place in the facility for which application is being made. 
(12)  What is the estimated number of persons expected to attend each performance? State the number of performances each day, the hours at which each performance will take place, and the dates. 
(13)  Has the applicant or promoter of the event obtained a city local business tax receipt as required by City Code section 31-26? 
Yes _______ No _______ 
(14)  Has it been necessary in the past performances to provide police protection at the facility used? If so, why? Explain briefly. 
(b)  The above application shall be required prior to use of any facilities or properties of the city for events, including those facilities which are either under a long-term or short-term lease. Such form shall contain the following verbiage: 
"The permit, lease or contract for the use of the facility or other municipal property for which this application is being made shall not be effective or of any force and effect until this form is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager or his/her designee. The use of, license, permit, lease, or contract for the facility shall be authorized and/or issued by the facility manager only after approval for such use or issuance is given by the city manager following a recommendation for the use and/or issuance to the city manager by the facility manager. The decision of the city manager, or his/her designee, shall be final and conclusive." 
(c)  Such application shall be signed, and the address of the applicant, both as to his/her business and residence, shall be given, and he/she shall state that the information contained in such application is true and correct. 
(d)  The city manager, or his/her designee, may waive the requirement of completing the application if he, after necessary information is obtained from the applicant, promoter, performer, lessee, user or licensee, finds that such event applied for does not involve immoral acts and is not lewd or lascivious, nor is to be presented nor performed by any person having a prior conviction in any court of record of an offense or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(e)  Any person who falsifies the information required in subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1967, § 39-37; Code 1980, § 2-362; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
City Code cross references— Amusements, ch. 5; parks and recreation, ch. 38; application form to be completed by applicants for certain park permits, § 38-73; stadiums and convention centers, ch. 53.  
Sec. 2-778. - Affirmative action clause and minority procurement clause to be part of lease of city-owned property. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any City Code provision to the contrary, in all future leases of city-owned property to private clubs and organizations, the lease agreements shall contain the following language that mandates adoption and implementation of an affirmative action plan by such club or organization: 
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 
An affirmative action plan requires that action be taken to provide equal opportunity, as in hiring or admission, for members of previously disadvantaged groups, such as women and minorities, and often involves specific goals and timetables. 
Lessee, in furtherance of providing equal opportunity for previously disadvantaged groups such as minorities, shall institute an affirmative action plan. The minority membership of the lessee club or organization representative of the City of Miami's population shall consist of no less than ten percent of the total membership after the first year of this lease agreement. 
Lessee shall then increase its minority membership five percent per year thereafter until such time as said total club or organization membership reflects the minority percentages representative of the City of Miami's population. 
Lessee shall provide a minimum of six public service functions for minorities at the club or organization facilities, which shall include three for Hispanics and three for Blacks. Four of the six public service functions shall be scheduled during the summer months of June, July, and August of each year and shall include two for Hispanics and two for Blacks. 
(b)  There shall also be a provision in every such lease agreement referring to Ordinance No. 10062 related to minority procurement [codified as section 18-136 et seq.] and incorporating such Ordinance No. 10062 within all such agreements thereby mandating the adoption and implementation of the annual goal of 51 percent minority/women business participation in the procurement of goods and services by lessees; further, every such lease agreement shall contain a provision requiring that lessees report annually to the city's office of minority/women business affairs on the attainment of such goals. 
(Ord. No. 10540, § 1, 1-12-89; Code 1980, § 2-363) 
City Code cross reference— Discrimination by lessees of city-owned property, §§ 18-188—18-190.  
Sec. 2-779. - Outdoor advertising signs on city-owned property. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary elsewhere in the Code or the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, a permit may be obtained for the erection of outdoor advertising signs on a principal building located on certain city-owned properties identified in this section. Currently, these properties identified herein are venues for large assemblies, performances, exhibitions, or events, having a capacity in excess of 1,000 patrons, and are operated by the city or a 501(c)(3) corporation in which the revenues generated by the activities held at the venue support its operation. Subject to compliance with any applicable federal, state or county, regulations, or restriction and as may be permitted under any existing lease or management agreement, outdoor advertising signs as described in this section, shall be allowed only at the following three venues: 
(1)  The James L. Knight Center (400 Southeast 2nd Avenue, Miami, Florida); 
(2)  The Olympia Theater and Building/Gusman Center for the Performing Arts (174 East Flagler Street, Miami, Florida); and 
(3)  Miami Children's Museum (980 MacArthur Causeway, Miami, Florida). 
(b)  Definitions. 
Outdoor advertising signs: Sign where the sign copy does not pertain solely to the use of the property, a product sold, or the sale or lease of the property on which sign is displayed and which does not solely identify the place of business as purveyor of the merchandise or services advertised on the sign. 
Outdoor advertising sign operator: Entity that constructs and/or operates the outdoor advertising sign. 
Permit holder: Permit holder is the outdoor advertising sign operator and the lessee in the case of city-owned property that is subject to a leasehold interest or a licensee in the case of a city-owned property that is subject to a license agreement, or the property manager in the case of city-owned property that is subject to a management agreement. 
Sign: A sign, for purposes of this section, is any identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, that is visible from a public right-of-way or is located on city-owned property and visible to the public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business, message or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, with the exception of window displays, and any letter, numeral, character, figure, emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information. 
For purposes of this section, a sign can be an outdoor advertising sign where the sign copy does not pertain to the use of the property, a product sold, or the sale or lease of the property on which the sign is displayed and which does not identify the place of business as purveyor of the merchandise or services advertised. Any sign authorized pursuant to this section is permitted as an accessory use to a principal commercial use. 
Sign, animated: Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement, or rotation, or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
Sign face: The entire face(s) of the sign including all text, artwork, and commercial sponsorship messages incorporated into a sign. 
Sign, flashing: A sign which gives the effect of constant intermittent movement, or which changes to give more than one visual effect in less than eight seconds. 
Sign, ground or freestanding: Any non-movable sign not affixed to a building, a self-supporting sign. Ground signs shall be construed as including signs mounted on poles or posts in the ground, signs on fences, signs on walls other than the walls of buildings, signs on sign vehicles, portable signs for placement on the ground (A-frame, inverted T-frame and the like), signs on or suspended from tethered balloons or other tethered airborne devices, and signs created by landscaping. 
Sign, revolving or whirling: A revolving or whirling sign is an animated sign, which revolves and turns, or has external sign elements that revolve or turn. These signs may be power-driven or propelled by the force of wind or air. 
(c)  Criteria for approving the erection of outdoor advertising signs on city-owned property. Signs authorized under this section may be internally illuminated, but shall not be animated, revolving, whirling, or flashing signs. Moreover, any change of copy must not take place at intervals more frequent than eight seconds. The sign shall be integrated into the architecture or wall of the building, and shall not be a ground or freestanding sign or cantilever from the building. The design of the sign shall be consistent with the operation of the underlying venue, as determined by the director of planning and zoning. 
(d)  Process for obtaining an outdoor advertising sign permit for city-owned property. Locations listed in subsection (a) are appropriate for an outdoor advertising sign. If under the existing lease, management agreement or license, the lessee, property manager and/or licensee is authorized under the existing agreement to erect a sign, such permit shall be reviewed and approved and a permit issued by the director of planning and zoning, pursuant to the criteria stated herein: 
(1)  The size of any outdoor advertising sign will comply with the size limitations placed by the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended, and shall not exceed 672 square feet plus embellishment for a total of 750 square feet per sign. 
(2)  Outdoor advertising signs may be internally illuminated, but flashing, intermittent, rotating, or moving lights are prohibited. Lighting which causes glare or impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interferes with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle is prohibited. Furthermore, a sign may not be illuminated so that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(3)  Mechanically changeable and digital display panels are allowed provided the static display time is at least eight seconds, and the time to change from one message to another is no greater than two seconds. 
(4)  The specific size, configuration and location of the sign and its supporting structure must comply with all criteria set forth above and the director of planning and zoning shall also evaluate the proposed sign for compliance with the criteria set forth herein and in Article 4, Table 12, design review criteria of the zoning ordinance of the city, as applicable. 
(5)  The outdoor advertising sign operator must be a co-applicant with the lessee, manager, or licensee. 
(6)  In addition to a permit issued pursuant to this section, the permit holder must obtain all other necessary permits to construct and operate the sign in compliance with City Code and state and federal law. 
(e)  Permit fee for the erection of an outdoor advertising sign on city-owned property. 
(1)  Permit fee. Any entity that collects rent, fees, or income from a sign on city property, including, but not limited to the permit holder and the outdoor advertising sign operator, shall pay to the city the permit fee described herein. 
The annual permit fee shall be an amount equal to $7.00 per square foot of sign face multiplied by 12 months per year for each sign, provided that such annual permit fee shall be no less than the minimum $48,000.00 or greater than $63,000.00 per annum (the "permit fee"). The initial permit fee shall be due in its entirety upon the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy for the structure upon which the sign is to be erected, whichever is issued first. In any event, the annual permit fee must be paid prior to placing any advertising on the sign. In the event any permit fee is not paid in its entirety, the city may exercise any of the remedies set forth in subsection (f). Fees shall be prorated based on the date of issuance of the TCO or CO, or in any event, no later than the date of the first advertisement on the sign, calculated by calendar year. 
(2)  Renewal of permit fees. The permit holder shall pay or cause the annual permit fee to be paid in quarterly installments until such time it is paid in full. Sign permits shall be void if quarterly payments are not received within ten business days after each quarterly payment is due. The payment year shall run on a calendar year. 
Along with the first quarter permit fee each permit holder shall submit demonstration of up to date documentation of public liability insurance as approved by the department of risk management, and continued effectiveness of a bond or letter of credit in the amount of $50,000.00. Any payments made more than ten days after the date due shall be considered late and shall accrue interest at the rate of 18 percent for 45 days. If payment is not received by the 45th day, the city shall immediately rescind the sign permit. 
(3)  Revenue sharing agreements allowing for a percentage of gross revenues between the city and any lessee, manager or licensee of a city-owned property and/or the outdoor advertising sign operator must be approved by the city commission. 
(f)  Termination, revocation, or rescission of outdoor advertising sign permit. 
(1)  Any sign permit issued under this section constitutes the exercise by the city of its proprietary authority, and is subject to termination and revocation for any cause in the best interest of the city. Any sign that is permitted on city-owned property under this section which is found to be in violation of the conditions of the sign permit or any federal, state, or county regulation or restriction is subject to removal by the city at the permit holder's expense. 
(2)  The issuance of a sign permit under this section shall be conditioned upon the permit holder, or in the case of city-owned property that is subject to a management agreement, the sign company, executing a hold-harmless and indemnification, approved by the office of the city attorney, that will acknowledge that the sign permit does not confer any vested rights and hold the city and its officials, employees, contractors, agents or assigns harmless from any loss or damage to the sign if it is removed by the city. The permit holder will expressly agree as a condition of the permit that the sole recourse against the city and its officials, employees, contractors, agents or assigns will be the return of the sign, if available, in whatever condition it is found. 
(3)  If in any event the outdoor advertising sign operator fails to utilize the permitted structure for outdoor advertising for a period of more than six months, the city manager shall rescind the outdoor advertising sign permit. 
(4)  The city may immediately rescind a sign permit for noncompliance with any provisions of City Code, including, but not limited to subsection (e). 
(5)  Upon rescission of a sign permit, if the permit holder fails to remove the sign, the city may: 
a.  Remove the structure, equipment or improvements related to the sign and may draw upon the bond or letter of credit to ensure the same; or 
b.  Retain ownership of any sign or structure on the property. 
(g)  Opt-out provision. The city opts out of Chapter 33, Article 6, Division 5 of the Miami-Dade County Code of Ordinances, as amended, per Section 33-121.11 as applicable to these signs. The city has adopted the rules contained in this article, to regulate these signs in proximity to expressways. 
(Ord. No. 13321, § 2, 5-24-12; Ord. No. 13536, § 2, 7-23-15) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 2-779 by Ord. No. 13321, § 2, adopted May 24, 2012, Ord. No. 12623, § 4, adopted December 9, 2004, repealed section 2-779 in its entirety, which pertained to the property and asset review committee and derived from Ord. No. 11130, § 7, adopted March 24, 1994; the Code of 1980, § 2-364, and Ord. No. 11564, § 4, adopted October 28, 1997.  
Sec. 2-780. - Gambling prohibition required in leases of city-owned property. 
For purposes of this section, the following word shall be defined as provided herein: 
Gambling shall be the act of playing or engaging in any game of cards, keno, roulette, faro or other game of chance, at any place, by any device whatsoever, for money or any other thing of value. 
The city commission is prohibited from favorably considering any lease or proposed amendment of an existing lease of city-owned property if the lease or lease amendment does not contain language prohibiting gambling and other games of chance from occurring on the property. Nothing in this section shall be construed as altering or impairing existing leases of city-owned property that contain language contemplating the possibility of future gambling on the leased property. 
(Ord. No. 13417, § 2, 11-21-13)  
Secs. 2-781—2-810. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
County Code cross references— Code enforcement, ch. 8cc. 
State Law reference— Municipal code enforcement boards act, F.S. §§ 162.01—162.12. 
 
Sec. 2-811. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Board means any of the code enforcement boards or special master(s), when serving in lieu of the board, appointed pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code. 
Code means the provisions of technical codes in the city, including but not limited to local business tax receipts, fire, building, zoning and sign codes. "Code" also includes past and future duly adopted amendments to existing city technical codes and also includes technical codes and standards which have been or may be expressly incorporated, approved or adopted by reference in any city technical code together with all past and future duly amended provisions of such technical codes and standards. 
Code inspector means the authorized agent or employee of the city so designated in section 2-813 whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
Petitioner means the city. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found through a code enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. 
Special master(s) means a person(s) appointed by the city commission, or pursuant to city commission authorization, to preside over the code enforcement hearings in the same capacity as the code enforcement board. As many special masters as deemed necessary by the city manager shall be appointed. The special master(s) shall have the same status as an enforcement board, pursuant to Florida Statute Chapter 162. The special master(s) shall be an attorney at law admitted to the practice law in the state, a member in good standing of the Florida Bar, shall possess outstanding reputations for civic pride, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability, and have significant knowledge of the City Code enforcement matters and City Code. For purposes of this chapter, and all actions taken pursuant to its provisions, whenever a special master serves, instead of the enforcement board, including, but not limited to, holding hearings and assessing fines, costs, and liens, the terms "special master" shall be synonymous with the term "board." 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 1, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10720, § 1, 3-22-90; Code 1980, § 2-391; Ord. No. 11722, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 12902, § 2, 3-22-07)  
Sec. 2-812. - Code enforcement board composition; terms; organization; role of city attorney. 
(a)  The city commission may appoint one or more seven-member code enforcement boards. The city commission may appoint up to two alternate members for each code enforcement board to serve on the board in the absence of board members and to assure a quorum at every meeting. Members of the boards shall be residents of the city. Appointments shall be made in accordance with the City Charter on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the boards. The membership of the boards shall whenever possible consist of an architect, a businessperson, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor, and a realtor. 
(b)  The initial appointments to each code enforcement board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members appointed for a term of one year. 
(2)  Three members appointed for a term of two years. 
(3)  Two members appointed for a term of three years. 
(4)  One alternate member shall be appointed to each code enforcement board for an initial term of two years, the other alternate member shall be appointed to an initial term of one year. Thereafter all members and alternate members shall serve terms of three years each. 
Any member or alternate member may be reappointed from term to term upon approval of a majority vote of the city commission. Appointments to fill any vacancy on any code enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. If a member fails to attend three successive meetings or a total of more than four meetings within a calendar year, the member shall automatically forfeit his/her appointment. The city clerk shall inform the city commission in writing of such forfeiture, and the city commission shall promptly fill such vacancy. The members shall serve in accordance with the City Charter and may be suspended and removed by the city commission for good cause shown. An alternate member may be reappointed from term to term by a majority vote of the city commission. Any alternate may be appointed as a member of the seven member board upon the expiration of the term of a full-time member, or may be appointed to fill the remainder of the unexpired term of a full-time board member should a vacancy be created. When a vacancy is created for an alternate position, a new alternate member shall be promptly appointed to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the alternate term or for an initial term if the alternate term has expired. 
(c)  The members of the board shall elect a chairperson, who shall be a voting member, from among the members of the board. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the board, and said four members may include alternate board members. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage, and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the city commission or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  The city attorney, an assistant city attorney or the city attorney's designee acting by and through the city attorney shall represent the city by presenting cases before the board. 
(e)  No certificate of use shall be issued or renewed for a specific location or unit thereof which is the subject of an ongoing enforcement procedure pursuant to sections 2-814 and 2-823, if the subject violation is for illegal construction activity at said specific site. The certificate of use shall be withheld by the zoning administrator until such time as said violation is corrected and all attendant fines are paid in full, or the code enforcement board or special master or a court of competent jurisdiction issues an order determining that the subject construction activity is not illegal under applicable law. For purposes of this section, illegal construction activity shall mean the construction, erection, alteration, or repair of any building, structure, or property, including signage, demolition, excavation, or removal of any element thereof, without first obtaining the requisite permit therefor from the city. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 2, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10720, § 1, 3-22-90; Ord. No. 11130, § 8, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11148, § 2, 5-5-94; Code 1980, § 2-392; Ord. No. 11722, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 12230, § 1, 5-9-02; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-813. - Code inspector. 
The city manager and his/her designated agents, acting by and through him/her, are hereby authorized and it is his/her duty to ensure code compliance. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 3, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-393)  
Sec. 2-814. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the individuals designated in section 2-813 to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various code violations. Neither the board, nor any individual member of the board, nor a special master shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, if a violation of the code is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator in writing and give him or her a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall request a hearing in writing pursuant to the procedure outlined in section 2-815 hereof. If approved by the city attorney, the violation will be scheduled for a hearing and written notice shall be given to said violator as provided herein. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the board or special master, even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a violation is found to have been repeated by a violator pursuant to F.S. § 162.04(5), or who admitted to violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, the code inspector shall notify the violator that the violation must be cured immediately. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of the repeated violation, shall then notify the code enforcement board or special master by requesting an immediate hearing. The code enforcement board or special master, through its clerical staff, shall promptly schedule a hearing before the board or special master and shall provide notice pursuant to F.S. § 162.12. The case may then be presented to and sanctioned by the enforcement board or special master even if the repeated violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and notice shall so state. Upon finding that the same violation has been repeated by the same violator(s), the board or special master may order the violator(s) to pay a fine of not more than $500.00 for each day the repeated violation continues past the date set for compliance, for each time the violation has been repeated, unless the violation is of article 8.1 entitled "Tree Protection" of Ordinance No. 11000 of the zoning ordinance of the city; Article 10 entitled "Sign Regulations" of Ordinance No. 11000 of the zoning ordinance of the city; or of Chapter 62, Article 13, Section 62-601 through 62-618 regarding murals of this Code, then the fine will not exceed $5,000.00 per day per violation. 
(d)  If the code inspector has reason to believe that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the board or special master and request a hearing. The code inspector, with the approval of the city attorney, may proceed directly with the procedure outlined in section 2-815 without following the procedures of subsection (b), above. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 4, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10720, § 1, 3-22-90; Code 1980, § 2-394; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 12902, § 2, 3-22-07; Ord. No. 12984, § 2, 4-10-08; Ord. No. 13103, § 2, 10-8-09)  
Sec. 2-815. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  The chairperson of the board or special master may call hearings. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the seven-member enforcement board or by two members of the board and one alternate member or by the special master. The board or special master at any hearing may set a future hearing date. The board shall meet at least once every month, but may meet more often as the demand necessitates. The special master shall hold hearings as necessary. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings. All hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The city commission, by and through the city manager, shall provide all necessary clerical and administrative staff support to the board or special master, including space and necessary expenses which may be reasonably required by the board or special master for the proper performance of its duties. 
(b)  The chairperson of the board or special master, prior to hearing the cases on the agenda of the day shall entertain special business or announcements forthcoming from the city attorney. Announcements or special business may include a request to reopen a case over which the board or special master still retains jurisdiction, and/or a request for an extension of time on a compliance date. All special business cases presented to the board or special master shall be reviewed by the city attorney or his/her assistants prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Each case before the board or special master shall be presented by the city attorney, an assistant city attorney or the city attorney's designee acting by and through the city attorney after he/she determined that there is a legally sufficient case to be presented. If the city attorney or assistant city attorney or the city attorney's designee prevails in prosecuting the case before the board or special master, the city attorney may be entitled to recover all prosecution costs incurred and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under section 2-817. 
(d)  The board or special master shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded by a video or audio recording device. The board or special master shall take testimony from the code inspector and other witnesses necessary to the case. The alleged violator(s) and owner(s) of the subject property shall be given an opportunity to testify if desired but may not be compelled to offer testimony or any evidence whatsoever. As in any administrative hearing, formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and govern said proceedings. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board or special master shall issue findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented and made part of the record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted herein. If the hearing is before the board, the findings shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members and alternate members present and voting, except that at least four members of the board must vote in order for the action to be official, and said four members may include alternate board members. Any motion failing to obtain the above-required vote shall preclude the relief requested by the petitioner before the board as to the administrative remedies afforded in this article. If the hearing is before the special master, the special master shall issue the findings at the time of the hearing or within 15 days of the hearing. If an appeal is taken, the record shall be presented to the court on appeal and shall be subject to review. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. If the order is not complied with by said date, a certified copy of such order shall be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns that the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein are binding upon them as well as the violator and as such, constitutes a lien on said property. If an order is issued pursuant to this subsection and is complied with before or by the date specified in the order, the enforcement board or special master shall acknowledge compliance with such order and no notice shall be recorded in the public records. An affidavit acknowledging compliance shall be issued to the violator and to the board or special master. No hearing shall be required by the board or special master to acknowledge compliance. 
(f)  Once the alleged violator(s) has been properly noticed as to the hearing before the board or special master and if the violator(s) fails to appear, the board or special master may proceed with a hearing on the merits of the alleged violation. Any findings or orders resulting from such hearing are valid and binding upon said violator(s) if a violation is found to exist. 
(g)  Once the owner(s) of the property at which the alleged violation has occurred has been properly notified of the hearing before the board or special master and fails to appear, the board or special master may proceed with a hearing on the merits of the alleged violation and any findings or orders are valid and binding against said owner(s). 
(h)  If a corporation is either the violator or the owner of the property, notice as outlined herein shall be effected upon the designated registered agent. If the corporation is a foreign corporation that has failed to comply with F.S. § 48.091, notice shall be permitted to be served upon any employee at the corporation's place of business or any agent transacting business for it in this state. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 5, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10720, § 1, 3-22-90; Code 1980, § 2-395; Ord. No. 12230, § 1, 5-9-02; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 13323, § 1, 6-14-12; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-816. - Powers of the code enforcement board and special master; miscellaneous administrative directions. 
(a)  The board and the special master shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of hearings pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Subpoena witnesses and documents to appear at its hearings; notify violators to appear before the board or special master. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff of the county or the police department of the city. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(b)  At the hearing before the board or the special master, the alleged violator and owner of the subject property shall be given the opportunity to be represented by an attorney, to call witnesses, to present documentary evidence, and to otherwise properly present his/her position or defense. 
(c)  All forms, notices, etc., required by this article are to be drawn up and approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  All initial notices to violators and owners pursuant to this article shall be sequentially numbered by the clerk of the board or special master. Each department shall keep records of all cases initiated by that department. 
(e)  The board or special master shall have a clerk appointed by the city manager who shall be designated clerk of the code enforcement board or special master. Among other duties, the clerk shall be custodian of all cases and documents pertaining thereto and shall have the authority to certify orders and other documents issued by the board or special master and to issue subpoenas in the name of the board or special master for service of process. The clerk shall ensure that fines are recorded in the public record, if they are not timely paid, and shall notify the city attorney of any lien that has not been paid after the expiration of two years from the date of filing such lien. The clerk may notify the city attorney that a lien has not been paid at any time after a lien has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 6, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Code 1980, § 2-396; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-817. - Administrative costs, fines; liens. 
(a)  The board or special master, upon notification by the code inspector that an order has been complied with within the time specified in the order, shall accept such notification as acknowledgment of compliance and no fines shall be imposed. 
(b)  The board or special master, upon notification by the code inspector or city attorney that an order of the board or special master has not been complied with by the set time for compliance, may order the violator(s) to pay a fine of not more than $262.50 per day per violation that continues past the date set for compliance by the notice of violation, unless the violation is of article 8.1 entitled "Tree Protection" of Ordinance No. 11000, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami; Article 10 entitled "Sign Regulations" of Ordinance No. 11000 of the zoning ordinance of the city, or of Chapter 62, Article 13, sections 62-601 through 62-618 regarding murals of this Code, then the fine will not exceed $1,100.00 per day per violation, and not more than $5,250.00 per day per violation for a repeat violation. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the board or special master shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(d)  An enforcement board or special master may reduce a fine once a violator has complied with the order, and for good cause shown. The board or special master however, hereby authorizes the city to mitigate fines with violators, provided that the total amount of the daily fine imposed by the enforcement board or special master may only be reduced to the percentage stated in the schedule below: 
 Number of 
 Days Fine 
Outstanding 	Total Fine 
Mitigation 
(percent) 
1—30 	25 
31—60 	30 
61—90 	35 
91—120 	40 
121—150 	50 
151—180 	60 
181—210 	70 
211—240 	80 
241—270 	90 
271 and up 	100 
 
Any reduction below the percentages set forth above must be brought before the board or special master for its approval. If subject fine is reduced and violator fails to pay said reduced fine within a period of 20 days from the day the offer to settle is made, then the original fine shall be reinstated. In addition to daily fines, violators shall pay cost(s) of prosecution, if any, which have been incurred by the city with respect to such violation. 
(e)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine shall be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator and upon petition to the circuit court such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against personal property, but shall not be deemed otherwise to be a judgment of a court except for enforcement purposes. Any fine imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. After three months from filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city attorney shall be automatically authorized by the board or the special master to foreclose on the lien and the city shall make a determination within 45 days whether to proceed with foreclosure action. Once a determination to foreclose has been made, the city attorney shall promptly institute foreclosure proceedings. No lien created pursuant to F.S. ch. 162 may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. The city attorney shall report to the board or special master at each meeting with respect to any foreclosure actions that have been instituted as well as any decision not to foreclose with respect to a lien. 
(f)  No lien provided by the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act shall continue for a longer period than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien affected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(g)  The board or special master may issue an order requiring payment of such administrative costs not to exceed $52.50 when said costs are found to have been incurred as a result of necessary actions taken by the petitioner to bring about code compliance. 
(h)  (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in the Code, the city manager may authorize a subordinate lien position on loans for the finance or refinance of construction improvements, or release or satisfy any lien placed on a property by the city or by any of its agencies and instrumentalities if: 
(i)  The property is used for the development or rehabilitation of affordable homeownership or rental housing projects by a project sponsor that has been allocated funds by the city commission or the city housing and commercial loan committee for such project, or 
(ii)  The property is located in a neighborhood development zone or its equivalent as defined within the effective community development block grant program approved by the city and accepted by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as may be amended, and is used for the development or rehabilitation of affordable homeownership or rental housing projects in accordance with the city's five-year consolidated plan, as amended. 
(2)  City liens which may be subordinated, released or satisfied include but are not limited to: demolition liens, lot clearing liens, solid waste liens, code enforcement liens and nuisance abatement liens. 
(3)  (i)  The lien or liens on the property shall not be released or satisfied, but may be subordinated, unless all certificates of occupancy required for the project, or their equivalent, are issued. The lien or liens on the property shall not be subordinated, released or satisfied if, in the judgment of the city manager, circumstances relating to the project make the release or satisfaction inappropriate or unwarranted. 
(ii)  If a certificate of occupancy for an affordable housing project is not issued within 24 months of the lien or liens being subordinated, the subordination of the lien or liens shall become null and void unless the city manager approves an extension for the certificate of occupancy to be issued. 
(4)  The city shall record any subordination, release or satisfaction in the public records of the county. 
(5)  The city shall not release or satisfy any lien on a property owned by the person whose actions resulted in the lien being placed on the property. The city shall not release or forgive any lien on a property owned by an immediate family member or a firm, corporation, partnership or business entity of a person whose actions resulted in the lien being placed on the property. For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall mean any individual, business, corporation partnership, firm, organization or other type of entity or association. For purposes of this section, the term "immediate family member" shall mean spouse, child, parent, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, grandparent, grandchild or anyone having one of these relationships by law. 
(6)  Release or subordination of a lien under this section shall not prohibit the city from collecting the underlying fine/sum due by other legal means. Release of a lien pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to mean that a violation underlying the lien has been cured. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 7, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10720, § 1, 3-22-90; Ord. No. 11214, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-397; Ord. No. 12272, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12360, § 1, 5-8-03; Ord. No. 12500, § 2, 3-11-04; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 12902, § 2, 3-22-07; Ord. No. 12984, § 2, 4-10-08; Ord. No. 13103, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13225, § 1, 11-18-10)  
Sec. 2-818. - Appeal. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the board or special master to the circuit court of the eleventh judicial circuit of Florida. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the board or special master. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 8, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 9470, § 1, 7-29-82; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Code 1980, § 2-398; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-819. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this article shall be in writing and furnished by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or designated agent acting by and through the code inspector. In all cases the owner of the subject property may be notified in addition to anyone else anyone else also charged with an alleged violation occurring on the subject property. If notice is furnished by hand delivery, the notice can be left at the violator's usual place of abode with any person residing therein who is 15 years of age or older and informing that person of its contents. If the violator is a corporation, the notice can be delivered to the registered agent. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, at the option of the code enforcement board or special master, notice may also be served by publication, or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in Dade County. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50, for legal and official advertisements. 
(2)  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(3)  Proof of posting shall be verified by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. Such notice shall be posted for at least ten days in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be City Hall. 
(4)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). 
(c)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (b) hereof, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this article have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 9, 12-17-80; Ord. No. 10370, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10798, § 1, 10-18-90; Code 1980, § 2-399; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-820. - Nonexclusivity of remedy. 
The provisions of this article are not the exclusive remedy or means for enforcement of the Code of the city. The city's access to the courts of the state is neither precluded nor prohibited by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9224, § 10, 12-17-80; Code 1980, § 2-400)  
Sec. 2-821. - Civil offenses and penalties. 
The violation of any provision of any city ordinance or City Code section shall constitute a civil offense and be punishable by civil penalty in the amount as prescribed in section 2-829, or in an amount deemed appropriate by a special master upon review and a finding that the violation exists or existed. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Code 1980, § 2-401; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-822. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12547, § 2, adopted June 24, 2004, repealed § 2-822 in its entirety, which pertained to qualifications, appointment and removal of hearing officers and derived from Ord. No. 10954, § 1, adopted March 12, 1992; the Code of 1980, § 2-402, and Ord. No. 12230, § 1, adopted May 9, 2002.  
Sec. 2-823. - Civil infraction enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Code inspectors shall have the authority to initiate enforcement proceedings as listed below. No special master shall have the power to initiate such proceedings. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code inspector who after personal investigation, finds a violation of the sections of this Code as amended and/or other ordinances adopted by this Code as amended, from time to time, shall provide written notice of violation to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If the inspector has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, the code inspector does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation. 
(c)  If, upon personal investigation an inspector finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, the inspector shall issue a civil infraction notice to the violator. Service shall be effected by delivering the civil infraction notice to the violator, or his/her agents, or by leaving the civil infraction notice at the violator's usual place of abode with any person residing therein who is 15 years of age or older and informing that person of its contents, or the civil violation notice may be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. In addition to providing notice as set forth above, at the option of the inspector, notice may be served by posting. Such notice shall be posted for at least ten days in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be City Hall. Proof of posting shall be verified by affidavit of the agent who posted the notice. Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice together with proof of posting shall be sufficient that notice requirements have been met. 
(d)  The civil infraction notice shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Date and time of issuance. 
(2)  Name of code inspector and division or department issuing the notice. 
(3)  Name and address of the violator. 
(4)  Section number of the code section or city ordinance that has been violated. 
(5)  Brief description of the nature of the violation, including location, date, and time of violation. 
(6)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the violation. 
(7)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the violation. 
(8)  Instructions and due date for paying the civil fine or filing for an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the civil fine. 
(9)  Notice that failure to request an administrative hearing within ten days after service of the civil infraction notice shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing before the special master, and that such waiver shall constitute an admission of violation and that a penalty may be entered against the violator for an amount up to maximum civil penalty. 
(10)  Notice that the violator may be liable for the reasonable costs of the administrative hearing should he/she be found guilty of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-403; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-824. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Penalties for violations of the provisions of any city ordinances or City Code section, as amended, enforced by this article shall be in the amount as prescribed in the schedule of civil penalties in section 2-829 or in an amount deemed appropriate by a special master. 
(b)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the city on the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an administrative hearing before a special master, or if proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally decided adversely to the named violator. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-404; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-825. - Rights of violators; payment of fine; right to appeal; failure to pay and correct. 
(a)  A violator who has been served with a civil infraction notice shall elect either to: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the infraction notice, and correct the violation; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the determination of the inspector which resulted in the issuance of the civil infraction notice. 
(b)  An appeal for administrative hearing shall be accomplished by filing a request in writing to set the hearing for review and mailing said request to the code enforcement clerk or his/her designee or to the address indicated on the notice, not later than ten days after the service of the civil infraction. 
(c)  If the named violator, after notice, fails to pay the civil penalty and correct the violation (within the time specified), or fails to timely request an administrative hearing before a special master, such failure shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing before a special master. A waiver of the right to administrative hearing shall be treated as an admission of the violation and penalties may be assessed accordingly. 
(d)  Failure to correct the violation or file for an appeal within ten days after notice of the civil infraction has been provided will result in the case being forwarded to the code enforcement board or appropriate special master for further action. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-405; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-826. - Conduct of administrative hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing, the code enforcement clerk or his/her designee shall set the matter down for hearing on the next available regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon as possible. 
(b)  The code enforcement clerk or his/her designee shall send a notice of hearing by certified mail to the violator at his/her last known address. The notice of hearing shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Name of the inspector who issued the notice; 
(2)  Factual description of the alleged violation; 
(3)  Date of alleged violation; 
(4)  Section of the Code allegedly violated; 
(5)  Place, date and time of hearing; 
(6)  Right of violator to be represented by an attorney; 
(7)  Right of violator to present witnesses and evidence; and 
(8)  Notice that failure of violator to attend a hearing may result in civil penalty being assessed against him/her. 
(c)  The special master shall conduct hearings on a regularly scheduled monthly basis or more frequently upon request of the city manager or his/her designee. No hearing shall be set sooner than 20 days from the date of service of the civil infraction. 
(d)  All hearings before the special master shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Upon proper notice, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(e)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded electronically and/or by a stenographer, and if recorded by a stenographer, such recording may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(f)  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall provide clerical and administrative personnel to facilitate the proper issuance of civil infraction notices, processing and review of cases as may be reasonably required, and for the proper performance of clerical and special master's duties. 
(g)  Each case before a special master shall be presented by the inspector or representative of the department which issued the violation. 
(h)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with formal rules of evidence and those relating to witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the special master finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. 
(i)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him/her to testify, and to rebut the evidence against him. 
(j)  The special master shall make findings of fact based on the evidence in the record alone. In order to make a finding upholding an inspector's determination that a violation exists, the special master must find that a preponderance of the evidence indicates that the violator was legally responsible for the infraction of the relevant section of the city ordinance or City Code as cited, and that a violation does/did in fact exist. 
(k)  The prescribed time for correction of the violation given to the named violator and contained in the notice of violation shall be presumed to have been a reasonable time for correction. Upon presentation of relevant evidence by the named violator that the time for correction was not reasonable, the special master may make a redetermination as to the reasonableness of the time for correction contained in the notice of violation, if the time was less than 30 days. 
(l)  If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, he/she may be held liable for the costs of the prosecution. 
(m)  The fact-finding determination of the special master shall be limited to whether the alleged violation did in fact occur and, if so, whether the person named in the civil infraction is legally responsible for that violation. The special master shall either affirm or reverse the determination of the inspector as to the responsibility of the named violator for the correction of the city ordinance or City Code violation. If the special master reverses the determination of the inspector and finds the named violator not responsible for the alleged violation in the civil infraction, absent a successful appeal of the special master's ruling by the city, the named violator shall not be liable for the payment of any civil penalty. If the decision of the special master is to affirm the inspector's determination of violation, then the following elements shall be included in the decision. 
(1)  Amount of civil penalty; and 
(2)  Costs of prosecution. 
(3)  Verbal warning that failure to comply with date by which violation must be corrected will result in an automatic referral to the code enforcement board or appropriate special master. 
(n)  The special master shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt procedures for the conduct of hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses for hearings; subpoenas may be served by either the city police department or by the staff of the special master; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; and 
(5)  Assess and order the payment of civil penalties as provided herein. 
(o)  A special master shall not conduct a hearing if the named violator, prior to the scheduled hearing date, properly files, with a duly authorized city or county board of appropriate jurisdiction for an administration interpretation of the legal provision(s) on which the alleged violation was based. Upon exhaustion of the administrative review, finalization of the administrative order by such board or body, and the lapse of time for review of said interpretation, the special master may exercise all powers granted to him/her by this article. 
(p)  The special master shall be bound by the interpretations and decisions of the duly authorized city and county boards of appropriate jurisdiction concerning the provisions within their respective jurisdictions. In the event that such a board or body finds that the cited violation of the city ordinance or City Code has not been properly interpreted, that provision upon which the violation is based, shall prohibit a special master from proceeding with the enforcement of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-406; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-827. - Recovery of unpaid civil penalties; penalty to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-407)  
Sec. 2-828. - Appeals of orders of hearing officers. 
(a)  The violator or the city may appeal an order of a special master by filing a petition for appeal with the Dade County Court. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the issuance of the order by the special master. A violator shall have the right to a de novo appeal provided that all other administrative remedies have been exhausted. 
(b)  In the absence of reversal of a special master's ruling by an appellate court of competent jurisdiction, the findings of the special master shall be conclusive as to a determination of responsibility for the city ordinance or City Code violation, and such findings shall be admissible in any proceeding not to collect unpaid penalties. If the violation is not corrected within ten days of the final order of the Dade County Court, the case will be forwarded to the code enforcement board or appropriate special master. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its city ordinance or City Code by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-408; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04)  
Sec. 2-829. - Schedule of civil penalties. 
(a)  The table contained herein in subsection (b) lists the sections of city ordinances or the City Code, as they may be amended, from time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this article; and prescribes the dollar amount of civil penalty for the violation of these sections. For all contested tickets, an additional ten percent will be charged. 
(b)  The "descriptions of violations" below are for informational purposes only and the civil penalties attached are meant only as proposed figures not intended to limit the nature, number of or amount of fines to be imposed for the violations which may be cited in this section. To determine the exact nature of the activity prescribed or required by this Code, the relevant Code section, ordinance or treatise cited in the specific violation must be examined. 
CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS AMENDED 
Code Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
2-207 	Failure to have a valid certificate of use. 	$105.00  
2-265 	Construction in right-of-way, nonconforming with public works standards. 	210.00 
10-63 	Maintaining a vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure 	1,050.00 
17-72 	Failure to obtain permit to trim trees located in the public right-of-way. 	52.50 
17-72 	Failure to obtain required permit for removal of trees located in the public right-of-way. 	525.00 
17-73 	Failure to obtain permit to break, deface, cut, disturb, or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree, shrub, or vine in a public highway or park. 	210.00 
17-76 	Failure to place guards around all nearby trees, shrubs or vines in a public highway or park during construction of a building. 	210.00 
17-77 	Placing injurious substances on or near tree roots. 	525.00 
19-2.1 	Failure to have valid fire safety permit. 	105.00 
19-3 	Failure to obtain public assembly permit. 	105.00 
19-4 	Obstructing a required means of egress. 	105.00 
19-5 	Failure to obtain flammable combustible liquids permit. 	105.00 
19-5(d) 	Failure to obtain required inspection of flammable liquids tanks/devices. 	105.00 
19-6 	Failure to obtain explosives permit. 	105.00 
19-7 	Failure to obtain fireworks permit. 	105.00 
19-26 	Violation orders not corrected. 	105.00 
22-19 	Failure by multi-family residential establishment having up to 25 units to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-19. 	300.00 
22-19 	Failure by multi-family residential establishment having between 26 units and 100 units to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-19. 	650.00 
22-19 	Failure by multi-family residential establishment having 101 or more units to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-19. 	950.00 
22-20 	Failure by commercial establishment having up to and including 3,000 square feet to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-20. 	300.00 
22-20 	Failure by commercial establishment having more than 3,000 and less than 10,000 square feet to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-20. 	650.00 
22-20 	Failure by commercial establishment having more than 10,000 square feet to provide a recycling program in compliance with the requirements of section 22-20. 	950.00 
22-116, 22-117 	Failure to maintain lot in a safe, clean condition not allowing accumulation of debris, trash or a dense growth of grass. 	210.00 
22-146 	Abandoned property on private property in the city. 	525.00 
29-1 	Landfill—Permit required. 	210.00 
29-1 	Failure to obtain fill permit prior to obtainment of building permit. 	210.00 
29-1 	Filling land with unsuitable material. 	525.00 
29-4 	Failure to level stockpiled material within a reasonable period of time. 	210.00 
29-4 	Failure to protect against excess erosion of filling material. 	210.00 
29-4 	Filling dedicated or undedicated public right-of-way with unsuitable material. 	525.00 
29-5 	Failure to notify resilience and public works department 24 hours prior to start of filling operation. 	210.00 
29-53 	Failure to obtain mandatory inspections for filling land in Biscayne Bay. 	210.00 
29-53 	Failure to obtain final inspection for filling land in Biscayne Bay. 	525.00 
29-54 	Filling in Biscayne Bay in violation of the provisions of this article. 	210.00 
29-83 	Failure to obtain waterfront improvement permit. 	210.00 
29-93 and 29-94 	Failure to obtain required inspections for waterfront improvements. 	210.00 
29-95 	Failure to maintain waterfront improvements. 	525.00 
31-26 	Failure to have a valid local business tax receipt. 	262.50 
35-10 	Parking for certain purposes prohibited: 	
	(a) 	No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or within the public right-of-way for the unlawful purposes as per subsections (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5). 	210.00 
	(b) 	No person shall park a commercial vehicle, bus, trailer or semi-trailer upon any street or within the public right-of-way in any zoned residential district. 	105.00 
	(c) 	No person shall park upon any street or within the public right-of-way in any zoned residential district of the city a truck of unlawful size. 	105.00 
	(d) 	Unlawful parking of construction equipment such as earth moving machines, excavators, cranes and the like within the public right-of-way in any zoned residential district. 	105.00 
	(e) 	Unlawful parking of major recreational equipment such as travel trailers, pickup campers, tents, boats and boat trailers, combination thereof and other similar equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not upon any street or within the public right-of-way. 	105.00 
35-25 et seq. 	Violation of the dangerous intersection safety article: 	
	First offense. 	$131.25 
	Second offense. 	$262.50 
	Each additional offense. 	$525.00 
49-2 	Unlawful discharge of petroleum products into storm or sanitary sewers. 	$210.00 
49-3 	Unlawful discharge of human excreta. 	525.00 
49-4 	Unlawful discharge of wastewater from construction excavation into city storm sewer. 	210.00 
49-5 	Discharge or dumping of septic tank contents into city storm or sanitary sewers. 	525.00 
54-3 	Failure to obtain permit to obstruct street, or sidewalk or impede traffic or failure to pay usage fee. Daily usage fee will be required to be paid in addition to payment of the applicable penalty 	262.50 
54-3 	Failure to comply with conditions set forth by such permit, each violation. 	262.50 
54-8 	Unlawful use of street or sidewalk for advertising or display purposes. 	262.50 
54-8 	Failure to obtain permit for lawful advertising or display in the public right-of-way. 	262.50 
54-9 	Placing signs on street or sidewalk surface. 	262.50 
54-12 	Placing glass or other injurious substances on streets. 	52.50 
54-14 	Failure to remove utility facilities to permit improvement of streets. 	52.50 
54-41 	Failure to notify public works 24 hours prior to commencing construction. 	52.50 
54-42 	Disturbing, cutting, digging or excavating any portion of the public right-of-way without a permit. 	210.00 
54-44 	Failure to construct sidewalk with standard material. 	52.50 
54-47 	Failure to obtain approval of location and construction of driveway. 	52.50 
54-48 	Refusing to allow inspection. 	105.00 
54-48 	Failure to comply with stop work order. 	210.00 
54-51 	Failure to obtain proper street grade and lines. 	52.50 
54-52 	Failure to lay sewers, water and gas mains, telephone and electrical conduits prior to street improvements. 	210.00 
54-54 	Allowing sidewalks to remain in dangerous condition. 	52.50 
54-56 	Failure to construct, reconstruct, or repair the street improvements. 	262.50 
54-57 	Obstructing streets or sidewalks with trash lumber or other obstructions. 	52.50 
54-86 	Failure to obtain proper permits or authorization for placement of a bench or a shelter upon public right-of-way. 	52.50 
54-91 	Failure to maintain proper clearances for placement of a bus bench or shelter. 	52.50 
54-92 	Failure to properly maintain a bench and/or shelter. 	52.50 
54-93 	Failure to comply with bench and/or shelter size requirements. 	52.50 
54-94 	Failure to properly display name/address, and local telephone number of bench and/or shelter company. 	52.50 
54-132 	Failure to properly affix numbering to building as required. 	105.00 
54-134 	Unlawful placement of any sign designating street, avenue or other public place by a different name than by which it is generally and legally known. 	52.50 
54-135 	Defacing or removal of any street signs posted in the city. 	52.50 
54-193 	Unlawful construction or installation of an encroachment within the dedicated right-of-way or within the undedicated right-of-way. 	210.00 
54-221 	Operating a sidewalk cafe without a permit. 	525.00 
54-263 	Placing, maintaining, or operating newsrack on any public right-of-way without a permit. 	52.50 
54-266 	Installation, use and/or maintenance of nonconforming newsracks. 	52.50 
54-268 	Allowing a newsrack to remain in a state of abandonment. 	52.50 
54-300 	Failure to obtain telecommunications permit agreement. 	525.00 
54-309 	Failure to notify resilience and public works department in writing ten days prior to commencement of construction of a telecommunications system. 	52.50 
 
SOUTH FLORIDA FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
5-207(a) 	Blocking/parking in emergency access/fire lane(s). 	$105.00 
5-208 	Required address number missing. 	105.00 
5-301(a) 	Fire extinguisher(s) missing. 	105.00 
5-302(a)(b) 	Fire suppression systems need service. 	105.00 
5-302(c) 	Fire extinguisher needs service. 	105.00 
6.201 	Excessive combustible trash exterior of building. 	105.00 
6.401(a) 	Nonconforming extension cord. 	105.00 
8.110(a) 	Room capacity is not posted. 	105.00 
8.110(b) 	Number of occupants exceeds approved capacity. 	210.00 
14-62 	Refusal to allow inspector to make inspection. 	105.00 
42.101 	Elevator key box missing. 	105.00 
42.101 	"Do not use elevator" sign missing. 	105.00 
42.101 	Electric rooms missing door signs. 	105.00 
42.101 	LP gas meter not identified. 	105.00 
42.101 	LP gas shutoff valve damaged/missing. 	105.00 
42.101 	LP gas container and/or gas meter not protected. 	105.00 
42.101 	Electric meters not identified. 	105.00 
42.101 	Violations of dangerous or hazardous conditions not corrected. 	105.00 
42.101 	Nonconforming spray finish operation. 	210.00 
42.101(c) 	Excess combustible trash interior of building. 	105.00 
42.101(f) 	Second means of escape obstructed. 	210.00 
 
AUTOMOTIVE AND MARINE SERVICE STATIONS 
AUTOMOTIVE AND MARINE SERVICE STATION CODE—NFPA #30A—1984 EDITION 
Chapter/ 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
Chapter 2 	Nonconforming storage of flammable and combustible liquids. 	$210.00 
2-3.5.1 	Nonconforming vent pipes. 	210.00 
4-1.2 	Emergency shutoff for all dispensers is not remote. 	210.00 
4-2.5 	Dispensing units are not protected. 	210.00 
4-2.6 	Dispenser hose exceeds approved length. 	210.00 
4-2.6 	Nonconforming dispenser hose. 	210.00 
4-2.6 	Automatic hose retractors not operable. 	210.00 
4-3.6 	Emergency shutoff valve needs annual test. 	105.00 
8-1.1 	Nonconforming hose nozzle valve. 	105.00 
8-4.8 	Warning signs not posted. 	105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #80—1985 EDITION 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
2-8.8.1 	Required self-closers/latching devices missing. 	$105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #101—1985 EDITION 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
5-2.1.4.1 	Stairway/exit doors do not swing in the way of exit travel. 	$105.00 
5-2.1.5.3 	Nonconforming locking device on exit doors. 	105.00 
5-2.1.8 	Stairway/exit doors are secured in the open position. 	105.00 
5-2.2.3.4 	Nonconforming storage room under interior stairs. 	105.00 
5-2.2.5.2 	Exit doors locked from stairway side. 	105.00 
5-10.3.1 	Exit signs are not properly illuminated. 	105.00 
7-5.2 	Laundry chute is not properly self-closing and latching. 	105.00 
7-5.2 	Laundry chute room door is not properly self-closing and latching. 	105.00 
7-5.2 	Rubbish chute is not properly self-closing and latching. 	105.00 
7-5.2 	Waste chute room door is not properly self-closing and latching. 	105.00 
9-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits (class A). 	105.00 
9-2.4.2 	Inadequate number of exits (class B). 	105.00 
9-2.4.3 	Inadequate number of exits (class C). 	105.00 
9-2.5.1 	Required exits are not remote from each other. 	105.00 
9-2.5.5.9 	Width of required aisles is not properly maintained. 	105.00 
9-2.6 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	105.00 
9-2.7.1 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	105.00 
9-2.8.1 	Lighting inadequate for means of egress. 	105.00 
9-2.9 	Emergency lighting is not provided. 	105.00 
9-2.10 	Required exit signs are not provided. 	105.00 
9-2.11.1 	Panic hardware not provided. 	105.00 
9-3.1 	Vertical opening is not protected or enclosed. 	105.00 
11-1.7.1 	Occupant load exceeds approved capacity. 	105.00 
11-2.3.3.1 	Exit access corridor width is nonconforming. 	210.00 
11-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
11-2.6 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	105.00 
11-2.7 	Exit discharge is nonconforming. 	105.00 
11-2.8 	Exit lighting inadequate. 	105.00 
11-2.11.5 	Emergency rescue or ventilation window not provided. 	210.00 
11-2.11.5 	Window from classroom is not provided (12 or more clients). 	210.00 
11-3.1.1 	Vertical openings are not enclosed or protected. 	210.00 
11-3.3.1 	Interior finish is not conforming. 	210.00 
11-3.4 	No fire alarm system. 	210.00 
11-3.6.1 	Nonconforming interior corridor. 	210.00 
11-3.6.1 	Inadequate fire rating of exit corridor (12 or more clients). 	210.00 
11-7.1.2 	Nonconforming separation between day care and other occupancy. 	210.00 
11-7.2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
11-7.2.6.2 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	210.00 
11-7.2.9 	Emergency lighting is not provided (12 or more clients). 	105.00 
11-7.2.10 	Exit signs are not provided (12 or more clients). 	105.00 
11-7.2.11.1 	Nonconforming latch on closet door. 	105.00 
11-7.2.11.2 	Nonconforming lock on bathroom door. 	105.00 
11-7.3.1 	Vertical openings are not protected. 	210.00 
11-7.3.2 	Hazardous areas are not properly protected (12 or more clients). 	105.00 
11-7.3.3.1 	Interior finish is not conforming. 	210.00 
11-7.3.4.1 	Fire alarm system missing/nonconforming. 	210.00 
11-7.5.1.2 	Protective covers for electrical receptacles are not provided. 	105.00 
11-8.3.4.1 	Smoke detectors are not provided (7—12 clients). 	105.00 
11-8.3.4.2 	No smoke detection system in corridors (7—12 clients). 	105.00 
17-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
17-2.7.1 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
17-2.7.2 	Exit discharges through interior of building. 	210.00 
17-3.1.1 	Vertical opening is not enclosed or protected. 	210.00 
17-3.2.2 	Hazardous areas are not properly protected. 	105.00 
17-3.4.4 	Single station smoke detectors required in guestrooms. 	105.00 
17-3.6.2 	Nonconforming door between guestroom and interior corridor. 	210.00 
17-3.6.3 	Doors between guestrooms and corridors are not self-closing. 	105.00 
19-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
19-2.7.1 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
19-2.7.2 	Nonconforming exit (buildings three stories or less). 	210.00 
19-2.7.2 	Nonconforming exit (buildings four stories or less). 	210.00 
19-2.9.1 	Emergency lighting is not provided. 	105.00 
19-2.10.1 	Exit signs are not provided. 	105.00 
19-3.1.1 	Vertical opening not protected (buildings four stories or more). 	210.00 
19-3.1.1 	Vertical opening not protected (buildings three stories or less). 	210.00 
19-3.2.1 	Hazardous area not protected or separated. 	210.00 
19-3.4.1 	Fire alarm system required. 	210.00 
19-3.4.4.1 	Single station smoke detectors required in all living units. 	210.00 
19-3.6.1 	Exit access corridor not protected. 	210.00 
19-3.6.2 	Doors between living units and corridors not self-closing and latching. 	210.00 
19-3.6.3 	Doors between living units and corridors not fire rated. 	210.00 
19-3.7.1 	Smoke barrier in exit access corridor not provided. 	210.00 
19-26 	Violation orders not corrected. 	105.00 
20-2.1.2 	No second means of escape or alternate protection. 	210.00 
20-3.1.1 	Vertical opening not enclosed or protected. 	210.00 
20-3.3.2 	No fire alarm system. 	210.00 
20-3.3.4 	No single or multiple station smoke detectors. 	210.00 
20-3.4 	Transfer grills, transoms, louvers in exit corridors. 	105.00 
20-3.4 	Guestroom doors to corridors not self-closing and latching. 	105.00 
25-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits for class A and class B stores. 	210.00 
25-2.4.2 	Inadequate number of exits from class C stores. 	210.00 
25-2.5.5 	Required aisle width inadequate. 	105.00 
25-2.5.6 	Inadequate aisle width for class A store. 	105.00 
25-2.5.6 	No automatic sprinkler system. 	525.00 
25-2.6 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	210.00 
25-2.7 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
25-2.8 	Exit illumination is inadequate. 	105.00 
25-2.9 	Emergency lighting is not provided for class A and class B stores. 	105.00 
25-2.10 	Exit signs are not provided. 	105.00 
25-3.1 	Vertical openings are not protected or enclosed. 	210.00 
25-3.2.1 	Hazardous area is not protected or separated. 	105.00 
27-2.4 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
27-2.5.2 	Common path of travel or dead-end corridor exceeds 50 feet. 	105.00 
27-2.6 	Nonconforming travel distances. 	210.00 
27-2.7.1 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
27-2.7.2 	Exit discharges through interior of building. 	210.00 
27-2.8 	Exit lighting is inadequate. 	105.00 
27-2.9.1 	Emergency lighting is not provided. 	105.00 
27-2.10 	Exit sign is not provided. 	105.00 
27-3.1.1 	Vertical opening is not protected or enclosed. 	210.00 
27-3.2.1 	Hazardous area is not protected or separated. 	105.00 
27-3.4.1 	Fire alarm system required. 	210.00 
27-4.2.1 	No approved sprinkler system for building over 75 feet. 	525.00 
28-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
28-2.6.1 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	210.00 
28-2.7 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
28-2.7.2 	Exit discharges through interior of building. 	210.00 
28-2.9.1 	Emergency lighting is not provided. 	105.00 
28-2.10.1 	Exit signs are not provided. 	105.00 
28-3.1.1 	Vertical openings are not protected or enclosed. 	210.00 
29-2.4.1 	Inadequate number of exits. 	210.00 
29-2.6.1 	Nonconforming travel distance. 	210.00 
29-2.7 	Nonconforming exit discharge. 	210.00 
29-2.7.2 	Exit discharges through interior of building. 	210.00 
29-2.8.1 	Exit lighting is inadequate. 	105.00 
29-2.9.1 	Emergency lighting is not provided. 	105.00 
29-2.10 	Exit signs are not provided. 	105.00 
29-3.1.1 	Vertical opening is not enclosed or protected. 	210.00 
31-1.2.1 	Means of egress is obstructed. 	105.00 
31-1.3.1 	Single/multiple station smoke detector needs servicing/replacing. 	105.00 
31-1.3.1 	Emergency lighting is not operable. 	105.00 
31-1.3.1 	Required self-closers/latching devices inoperative. 	105.00 
31-1.3.1 	Fire escape stairs need maintenance. 	105.00 
31-1.6 	Excessive storage of flammable liquids. 	105.00 
31-1.6 	Improper storage of flammable liquids. 	105.00 
31-3.1.2 	Fire drills not conducted. 	105.00 
31-3.4.4 	Wastebaskets/waste containers are nonconforming. 	105.00 
31-6.4.1 	Emergency exit diagram missing. 	105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #13—1989 EDITION 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
4-2.5.1 	Inadequate clearance below sprinkler heads. 	$105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #33—1989 EDITION 
Chapter/Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
Chapter 8 	Dangerous accumulation of combustible residue inside spray booth. 	$210.00 
8-6 	Metal waste cans required. 	105.00 
8-11 	"No smoking" signs missing. 	105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #14—1990 EDITION 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
4-1 	Department of fire-rescue connections obstructed/need caps. 	$105.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #30—1990 EDITION 
Chapter/Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
Chapter 2 	Nonconforming storage of flammable and combustible liquids. 	$210.00 
 
LIFE SAFETY CODE—NFPA #96—1991 EDITION 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
8-2.1 	Extinguishing system for kitchen hood not serviced. 	$105.00 
 
STATE FIRE MARSHAL UNIFORM RULE 
TRANSIENT PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
4A-36.102 	Inadequate staffing ratio. 	$210.00 
4A-36.103(13) 	Number of occupants exceeds approved capacity. 	210.00 
4A-36.302(11) 	Nonconforming locks. 	105.00 
4A-36.302(12) 	Fire evacuation plans and fire drills are not provided. 	105.00 
4A-36.302(13) 	Day care located on a floor above the height permitted for the type of construction. 	210.00 
4A-43.010 	No sprinkler system. 	525.00 
4A-43.011 	No standpipe and hose system. 	525.00 
4A-43-009 	No automatic smoke detection. 	525.00 
4A-48 	Electrically supervised fire alarm system needs service. 	105.00 
 
CONVENIENCE STORES 
FLORIDA STATUTES—CHAPTER 812 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
90-346 	Drop safe or cash management device missing. 	$105.00 
90-346 	Parking area lighting report required. 	105.00 
90-346 	Cash limitations sign missing. 	105.00 
90-346 	Excessive window signage. 	105.00 
90-346 	Excessive window tinting. 	105.00 
90-346 	No height marker at entrance. 	105.00 
 
ZONING ORDINANCE 11000 OR EQUIVALENT UNDER MIAMI 21 CODE 
Article 	Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
9 	917.12 	Parking/storage of inoperable vehicles. 	$ 52.50 
9 	920.3 	Illegal parking of commercial vehicles in residential zone. 	105.00 
21 	2102 	Working without a permit, building and/or roofing, etc. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Illegal mechanical repairs prohibited. 	210.00 
4 	401 	Outside sales not permitted. 	210.00 
9 	917.3 	Parking on unimproved surfaces. 	52.50 
9 	917.12 	Outside storage of miscellaneous materials, equipment and/or debris. 	210.00 
9 	908.11 	Provide vision clearance. 	525.00 
21 	2103.1 	No certificate of use. 	525.00 
9 	925.2 	No sign permit. 	525.00 
9 	920.2.2 	Boat in front yard and/or major recreational vehicle. 	105.00 
4 	401 	Illegal units. 	525.00 
9 	917.3 	Removal of required landscape or failure to maintain required landscaping. 	210.00 
9 	906.5, 
2103.3 	Use of home as office without certificate of use. 	525.00 
9 	401 	Use of home as a business prohibited. 	525.00 
4 	401 	More than three unrelated adults in one dwelling unit. 	525.00 
9 	920.2.3 	Recreational vehicle used as living quarters. 	210.00 
9 	920.4 	Parking/storage of construction equipment prohibited in residential zone. 	105.00 
9 	908.8 	Hedge/fence higher than eight feet in residential zone other than with required visibility triangle. 	210.00 
9 	908.5, 908.6 	Carport, awning and/or canopy without permit. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Encroaching in required yards/open space. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Tree removal without permit (environmental). 	525.00 
4 	401 	Tree removal without permit (nonenvironmental). 	525.00 
4 	401 	Keeping vacant—Unsecured structure which is considered a "public nuisance." 	525.00 
6 	612 	Failure to provide six-foot high C.B.S. wall. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Schedule of district regulations—Illegal roominghouse. 	525.00 
_____ 	62-624— 
62-630 	Illegal garage sale. 	50.00 
4 	401 	Occupying a live-aboard vessel (houseboat or housebarge). 	525.00 
4 	908.8 	Barbed wire adjacent to residential. 	210.00 
9 	925.3.12 	Temporary political campaign signs. 	105.00 
9 	937.1 
937.3 	Adult entertainment closer than 600 feet to residential zoned property. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Adult entertainment not permitted in C-1 zoned property. 	525.00 
9 	920.1 	Mobile homes parking prohibited. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Illegal mixed use. 	210.00 
9 	_____ 	Parking truck(s) used as storage space. 	210.00 
9 	917.12 	No required off-street parking to be used as storage of materials or supplies. 	210.00 
4 	401 	Illegal C.B.R.F. without certificate of use. 	525.00 
4 	401 	Illegal shed. 	210.00 
4 	401 	Illegal roominghouse without a certificate of use. 	525.00 
9 	917.13 	Eliminating or reducing off-street parking spaces. 	210.00 
9 	917.1 	Failure to provide required off-street parking. 	525.00 
9 	920.1.2 	Illegal office trailer. 	525.00 
9 	917.3 	Removal of handicapped sign. 	210.00 
9 	908.8 	Improperly located fence, wall or hedge. 	52.50 
4 	401 	Unlawfully establishing an unusual or new use without prior approval at public hearing. 	78.75 
9 	917.12 	Illegally maintaining or depositing junk or trash. 	52.50 
9 	920.2.3 	Improperly using recreational vehicle or camping equipment. 	105.00 
4 	401 	Maintaining a structure encroaching in required setbacks. 	52.50 
9 	925.2 	Erection, construction, posting, etc., of a sign without a permit. 	105.00 
9 	926.5.2 	Illegally maintaining blinking or flashing lights, streamer lights, pennants, etc. 	105.00 
9 	926.6 	Illegal revolving or rotating sign. 	105.00 
9 	926.5 	Illegal use of sign which uses word "stop" or "danger." 	105.00 
4 	401 	Illegal neon sign. 	105.00 
4 	401 	Failure to provide adequate number of off-street parking spaces. 	105.00 
9 	917.3 	Failure to provide proper surface for parking area. 	105.00 
4 	401 	Improper use of parking area as commercial parking lot. 	105.00 
4 	401 	Illegally operating a business in a residential zone. 	262.50 
_____ 	_____ 	Illegal sale of fruit or merchandise from open stands or vacant lots. 	262.50 
4 	401 	Failure to conduct a business from a completely enclosed building. 	262.50 
4 	401 	Illegal storage of materials or products or illegal storage of materials above the height of a wall or fence. 	262.50 
9 	905.2 	Failure to maintain the wall required to separate business from residential property. 	262.50 
 
SOUTH FLORIDA BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS 
Section 	Description of Violation 	Civil Penalty 
105.1(A) 	Failure to maintain a building or structure in a safe condition; failure to maintain devices or safeguards in good working order. 	$105.00 
105.2 	Failure to remove debris equipment, materials, or sheds. 	105.00 
105.3, 305.5, 
3324 	Failure to secure buildings and equipment. 	525.00 
201.1(e), 
201.3(e) 	Failure to comply with lawful work stop order. 	525.00 
304.1 	Failure to display permit card. 	52.50 
305.2 	Failure to obtain mandatory inspection. 	262.50 
307.5 	Unlawfully connecting utility service. 	525.00 
515 	Failure to provide required handicapped accessibility. 	52.50 
3302.2 	(a) 	Exceeding allowable obstruction of the public right-of-way with construction and/or demolition. 	52.50 
	(b) 	Allowing materials to obstruct fire hydrant, fire alarm box, manhole, catchbasin and restriction of water flow to gutters. 	52.50 
3302.3 	Failure to provide temporary sidewalk which is properly guarded and not less than five feet wide 	52.50 
3302.4 	Illegal obstruction of an alley or portion thereof in connection with construction or demolition. 	52.50 
3302.5 	Failure to protect sidewalks and pavements from damage incidental to construction work. 	52.50 
3306.1 	Sidewalk shed—Failure to provide sidewalk shed per S.F.B.C.—Subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d). 	52.50 
3306.2 	Failure to provide construction fence per S.F.B.C. 	52.50 
3318.8 	Failure to prevent the falling of paint or debris over public sidewalks or other places of public use. 	52.50 
4601 	It shall be unlawful to allow sewer or any sanitary waste to be discharged onto the ground creating a nuisance and/or health hazard 	105.00 
4611.1 			
(a) 	Unlawful discharge of rainwater or other liquid wastes or allowing same to be disposed onto or across adjoining private or public property or sidewalk. 	52.50 
8-1       301 	Failure of contractor to get permit. 	262.50 
8-1       301 	Failure of homeowner to get permit. 	210.00 
8-1 	All other South Florida Building Code violations 	210.00 
 
(c)  Any violation of the code that is not specified within this section, or any other section of the code or zoning ordinance, shall be assessed a civil penalty of $262.50. 
(Ord. No. 10954, § 1, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 11166, § 1, 7-14-94; Ord. No. 11213, § 2, 2-9-95; Code 1980, § 2-409; Ord. No. 11434, § 2, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 12547, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 12974, § 3, 2-28-08; Ord. No. 12977, § 2, 3-13-08; Ord. No. 13032, § 3, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13142, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13194, § 3, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13449, § 2, 4-24-14; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18) 
_____ 
Secs. 2-830—2-860. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13774, § 2, adopted July 12, 2018, repealed the former section 2-830 in its entirety, which pertained to alternate code enforcement system created, and derived from Ord. No. 12547, § 2, adopted June 24, 2004.  
ARTICLE XI. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-861. - Administrative support services to be provided by the office of the city clerk. 
The office of the city clerk shall provide administrative services to boards, committees, and commissions ("boards") at varying levels of support as set forth, delineated and categorized hereinbelow. The assignment of the specific category for each board, committee, and commission shall be determined and designated by resolution of the city commission based upon the level of services required. 
(1)  Support services to be provided by the city clerk for "Category A" designated boards: 
Post action reports of all meetings; audio record meeting proceedings, set-up communication equipment, provide meeting proceedings support, including audio tape inventory, verbatim transcripts, proofreading and corrections for same, maintain attendance logs, provide for public notices and financial reporting, mark and number official actions, and prepare special transcripts upon request. 
(2)  Support services to be provided by the city clerk for "Category B" designated boards: 
Coordinate and assist with the conduct of board elections, election manual document preparation, etc. for advisory boards only; provide for public notices, provide record keeping (filing of bond indenture requirement, if legally imposed), maintain attendance logs and minutes book; verify residency status, monitor address/telephone confidentiality status of certain board members, advise members of appropriate requirements for each board (financial disclosures pursuant to state law, Sunshine Law, dual office prohibitions, oaths, residency and/or employment requirements), serve as custodian of records for filing of said forms (including statement of financial interest, source of income, corporate real property, real property disclosures), provide notary services, provide filing and applicable rules and regulations governing Government in the Sunshine, and pertinent advisory legal opinions affecting appointed officials, notify the commission of vacancies, administer required "oaths of office," and update the state commission on ethics regarding boards' status, and prepare minority composition. 
(3)  Support services to be provided by the city clerk for "Category C" designated boards: 
Public notices for meetings, provide record keeping services (filing of bond indenture requirement, if legally imposed), maintain attendance logs and minutes book, verify residency status, monitor address/telephone confidentiality status of certain board members, advise members of appropriate requirements of each board (financial disclosures pursuant to state law, Sunshine Law, dual office prohibitions, oaths, residency and/or employment requirements), serve as custodian of records for filing of said forms (including Statement of financial interest, source of income, corporate real property, real property disclosures), provide notary services, provide filing and applicable rules and regulations governing Government in the Sunshine, and pertinent advisory legal opinions affecting appointed officials, administer required "oaths of office", update the state commission on ethics regarding boards' status and prepare minority composition reports. 
(Ord. No. 11915, § 2, 4-13-00)  
Sec. 2-862. - Funding; revenue-producing boards, committees and commissions. 
(a)  Funding. A portion of revenues generated by revenue-producing boards, committees, and commissions shall be dedicated to the general operating budget of the office of the city clerk to defray operational expenses for the provision of administrative support to boards, committees and commissions as designated in section 2-861 herein, in an amount not to exceed the cost of providing such administrative support. 
(b)  Definitions. The term "revenue-producing boards, committees, and commissions" shall mean every agency, advisory board, regulatory board, quasi judicial board, or semi-autonomous entity committee that derives, directly or indirectly, any and all revenue from any source determined according to general accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 11915, § 2, 4-13-00)  
Secs. 2-863—2-880. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR CREATION AND REVIEW OF BOARDS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-881. - Requirements. 
All of the requirements contained in this division shall apply to all boards of the City of Miami unless there is any statutory or City Charter provision to the contrary, or unless otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11188, § 2, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 2-425; Ord. No. 11538, § 2, 9-9-97) 
City attorney's note— As of the effective date of Ord. No. 11188 (30 days from Oct. 27, 1994), the following city boards are governed by City Charter or statutory provisions; therefore, application of the standards contained in this article shall be limited by said provisions: 
1. 
Civil service board. 
2. 
Off-street parking board of the City of Miami. 
3. 
Code enforcement board. 
4. 
Planning advisory board. 
5. 
Zoning board.  
Sec. 2-882. - Definition of board. 
The term "board" is defined to include every agency, authority, advisory board, regulatory board, quasijudicial board, semiautonomous instrumentality, committee, task force or any other citizens' group created and funded in whole or in part by the city commission. The foregoing notwithstanding, this division shall not apply to citizen groups created for specific advisory purposes where such group's existence is limited to a period of less than one year nor to the firefighters' and police officers' retirement trust or the general employees' and sanitation employees' retirement trust boards. Except as otherwise provided herein or in the City Charter, city boards and citizens' advisory groups shall only be created by action of the city commission, and only the city commission, as a body, may appoint the members to such boards and groups. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-426)  
Sec. 2-883. - Creation of new boards. 
(a)  All city boards created after the effective date of this division shall be created by ordinance or resolution. Such ordinance or resolution shall set forth the board's purpose, function, power, responsibility, jurisdiction, membership requirements and restrictions, terms and conditions of appointment to or removal from the board, and the specific staff support, if any, to be provided to the board. The ordinance or resolution shall also provide for an annual report, either oral or written, to the city commission. 
(b)  After passage on first reading of an ordinance creating a new board and prior to the second reading of said ordinance, or prior to the presentation of a resolution creating a board to the city commission, the city manager shall submit to the city commission a report setting forth the following information concerning the proposed new board: 
(1)  For boards other than advisory boards, whether the establishment of the board will create sufficient betterment to the community to justify the city commission's delegation of a portion of its authority. 
(2)  Whether another board or agency, either public or private, which is already in existence could serve the same purpose. 
(3)  The costs, both direct and indirect, of establishing and maintaining the board. 
(4)  Whether the board is necessary to enable the city to obtain state or federal grants or other financing. 
(5)  For boards other than advisory boards, whether the board should have bonding authority. 
(6)  For boards other than advisory boards, whether the board should have the final authority to enter into contracts and spend city funds, or whether its contracts and expenditures must be ratified by the city commission. 
(7)  Whether the creation of a new board is the best method of achieving the benefit desired. 
For boards created by ordinance, the second reading shall be held no earlier than 15 days after passage on first reading of the ordinance creating said board. 
(d)  All boards existing prior to the effective date of this amendment, and which meet the definition of a board in section 2-882, regardless of the manner in which said board was created, shall continue to be a city board under this division. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-427; Ord. No. 13502, § 1, 3-12-15)  
Sec. 2-884. - Membership on boards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in the Charter or the Code, all members of city boards shall be permanent residents of the city, or own real property in the city, or work or maintain a business in the city, and shall have good reputations for integrity and community service. In addition, all board members should have demonstrated an interest in the field, activity or sphere covered by the board. Each board shall include at least one member whose livelihood does not depend on the area regulated, administered or dealt with by the board. 
(b)  Unless the city commission by four-fifths vote of its membership or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation waives the requirement that board members either reside in the city, own real property in the city or maintain a business in the city, any member of a city board who ceases to be a resident of the city and/or ceases to work, own real property or maintain a business in the city during the term of his or her office shall immediately advise the city clerk. The city clerk shall inform the city commission whenever a board member has ceased to be in compliance with said eligibility requirements for board membership and said board member shall be automatically removed from the board. The city clerk shall then inform the city commission in writing that the position has been declared vacant. Upon being advised by the city clerk of such circumstances, the city commission shall promptly fill the vacant position. 
(c)  The primary consideration in appointing board members shall be to provide the board with the needed technical, professional, financial, business or administrative expertise. The membership of each board should be representative of the community at large and should reflect the racial, ethnic and cultural makeup of the community. 
(d)  No member of any city board shall become a candidate for elective political office during his or her term. Should any member of a city board become a candidate for elective political office, as detailed in subsections (1), (2), or (3), below, such action shall be deemed a tender of resignation from such board. The board member's resignation shall be effective upon whichever occurs first: 
(1)  At the time such board member receives contributions or makes expenditures, or gives his or her consent for any other person to receive contributions or make expenditures, with a view to bringing about his or her nomination or election to public office; 
(2)  At the time such board member appoints a campaign treasurer and designates a primary depository; or 
(3)  At the time such board member files qualification papers and subscribes to a candidate's oath as required by law. 
However, any individual that is required to resign from a city board under the circumstances described above may be reappointed to his or her city board position by a simple majority vote of the city commission. 
None of the above provisions in subsection 2-884(d), relating to resignation from city boards upon candidacy for elective office, shall apply to a sitting city commissioner or mayor. 
When a sitting city commissioner or mayor becomes a candidate for office, and is, therefore, required to resign from his or her presently held seat under state law, if the city commission appoints that individual to serve the remainder of the term for his or her presently held seat until the election, then that individual shall also automatically be deemed reappointed to his or her position(s) on any city board. If, however, that individual is not appointed by the city commission to serve the remainder of his or her presently held seat until the election, then that individual's resignation from his or her presently held seat shall be deemed a tender of resignation for his or her position(s) on any and all city boards. 
The provisions of subsection 2-884(d), as detailed above, shall not apply in the event of any conflict with state law. 
(e)  Except for the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) Advisory Board (HAB), or as otherwise specifically provided in the Charter or the Code, an employee of Miami-Dade County, Florida, or any municipality therein other than a city employee, shall not serve on or be appointed to any board of the city, unless the city commission waives this restriction by a four-fifths affirmative vote of its membership and the employee is a resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11188, § 3, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 2-428; Ord. No. 11538, § 2, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 11581, § 1, 12-30-97; Ord. No. 11619, § 1, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 12059, § 1, 5-10-01; Ord. No. 12906, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 13170, § 1, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 13618, § 1, 7-14-16)  
Sec. 2-885. - Terms of office; term limit waiver. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in the charter or the Code, the terms of office of the members of each board shall be: 
(1)  One year; 
(2)  Until the nominating commissioner leaves office; or 
(3)  Until recommended for removal, at the will of the nominating commissioner, voted upon by the members of the city commission, whichever occurs first. When the nominating commissioner leaves office the board member's term shall expire. Vacancies on boards shall be filled by the commission for the unexpired term. Board members shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the downtown development authority. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in the Charter or the Code, no board member shall serve more than eight consecutive years on any one board. The provisions of this section shall be applied prospectively to current board members. Nothing set forth in the subsection above shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed to a city board after a hiatus of two years. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in the Charter or the Code, the eight-consecutive-years limitation contained in subsection (b) of this section may be waived for a particular board member who has completed eight consecutive years to permit such board member to be reconsidered annually for an additional one-year term by a unanimous vote of the members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-429; Ord. No. 11373, § 5, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 11538, § 2, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 12016, § 1, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 12378, § 2, 6-12-03; Ord. No. 12695, § 1, 6-9-05; Ord. No. 12906, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12378, § 2, adopted June 12, 2003, changed the title of § 2-885 from "Terms of office" to "Terms of office; term limit waiver." The historical notation has been retained for reference purposes.  
Sec. 2-886. - Attendance requirement. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any board member shall be automatically removed if, in a given calendar year: 
(1)  He or she is absent from three consecutive meetings; 
(2)  He or she is absent from four of the board's meetings; or 
(3)  Provided that regardless of their compliance with subsection (a)(1) and (2) 
hereinabove, members must attend at least 50 percent of all the board meetings held during a year. 
(b)  A member of a city board shall be deemed absent from a meeting when he or she is not present at the meeting at least 75 percent of its duration. 
(c)  The provisions of this section may only be waived once by a four-fifths vote of the members of the full city commission. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to municipal board members, as defined in F.S. § 112.501, as amended, and to those individuals who are members of city boards and who are: 
(1)  Reservists in the United States Armed Forces or members of the Florida National Guard, and have been ordered to active military duty for national, state, or homeland defense and due to such duty cannot attend board meetings; 
(2)  Employees of agencies whose services are considered essential for national, state, or homeland defense and due to such services cannot attend board meetings; 
(3)  Employees who have taken a leave of absence from their employment pursuant to the terms of the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA); or 
(4)  Granted an absence waiver by a super-majority of the municipal board members present at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-430; Ord. No. 12201, § 1, 3-14-02; Ord. No. 12906, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 13608, § 1, 5-12-16)  
Sec. 2-887. - Quorum requirements; exceptions. 
(a)  Except for those boards listed in subsection (b) hereinbelow, a quorum for all boards' meetings, shall consist of fifty percent (50%) plus one of the board's total membership. The decision of a majority of the board members present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the decision of the board. 
(b)  The following boards are subject to quorum requirements as provided for elsewhere in this Code. 
Audit Advisory Committee 
Bayfront Park Management Trust 
Downtown Development Authority 
Equal Opportunity Advisory Board 
Mayor's International Council 
Miami Commission on the Status of Women 
Miami Forever Bond Program Citizens' Oversight Board 
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board 
Street Codesignation Review Committee 
Urban Development Review Board 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-431; Ord. No. 11348, § 2, 3-14-96; Ord. No. 11801, § 2, 6-8-99, Ord. No. 11833, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 11850, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00; Ord. No. 11995, § 2, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 12179, § 1, 1-10-02; Ord. No. 12364, § 1, 5-8-03; Ord. No. 12386, § 2, 7-17-03; Ord. No. 12471, § 2, 1-8-04; Ord. No. 12519, § 2, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 12623, § 7, 12-9-04; Ord. No. 12743, § 2, 11-17-05; Ord. No. 12906, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 12967, § 3, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13172, § 1, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 13517, § 3, 5-14-15; Ord. No. 13752, § 2, 3-22-18; Ord. No. 13801, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-888. - Notice to city clerk of board meetings. 
All city boards shall provide the city clerk written notice of their meetings at least seven days prior to such meetings, except in the case of emergency meetings. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-432)  
Sec. 2-889. - City clerk to keep records of boards. 
The city clerk or his/her designee shall serve as liaison between the city commission and all city boards. He/she shall prepare a standard form to be used by all boards to report their members' attendance to their meetings. All city boards shall submit copies of the minutes of their meetings and records of their members' attendance to said meetings to the city clerk within five days after each meeting. The city clerk shall inform the city commission whenever a board member has resigned from a board or has exceeded the number of permissible absences and said board member will be automatically removed from the board. The city clerk shall then inform the city commission in writing that the position has been declared vacant and a successor member must be promptly appointed to fill the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11188, § 4, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 2-433)  
Sec. 2-890. - Annual report. 
Commencing with the year 1995, each city board and committee shall report in the following manner: By January 15, 1995, and thereafter by January 15 of each subsequent year, its chairperson shall submit a report, approved by the board, to the city manager setting forth the following information concerning the board: 
(1)  Whether the board is serving the purpose for which it was created. 
(2)  Whether the board is serving current community needs. 
(3)  A list of the board's major accomplishments. 
(4)  Whether there is any other board, either public or private, which would better serve the function of the board. 
(5)  Whether the ordinance creating the board should be amended to better enable the board to serve the purpose for which it was created. 
(6)  Whether the board's membership requirements should be modified. 
(7)  The cost, both direct and indirect, of maintaining the board. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-434)  
Sec. 2-891. - NET administrator as liaison to boards. 
Each NET (neighborhood enhancement team) administrator of the city shall be a city administration's liaison to boards which operate within his/her geographical area of responsibility. This provision does not preclude the appointment as liaison of any other person which the city commission or the city administration may wish to appoint to serve in said capacity. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11188, § 5, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 2-435)  
Sec. 2-892. - "Sunset" review of boards. 
Commencing with the year 1995, each city board shall be reviewed in the following manner: 
(1)  By February 15 of the year in which a board is to be reviewed, the city manager shall deliver to the city commission the report submitted by the chairperson of each board pursuant to section 2-890 hereinabove, together with any recommendation or comments the city manager desires to submit. 
(2)  During the month of March of each year in which a board is to be reviewed, the chairperson shall make an oral presentation to the city commission. Said presentation shall be based on the report set forth in section 2-890 above. At the conclusion of the oral presentation by the board's chairperson, any individual commissioner may request the formation of a special purpose board, (hereinafter referred to as the "SPB"), consisting of five members appointed by the city commission. The SPB shall evaluate the chairperson's report, the city manager's recommendations and any other information it deems relevant to determine whether the board being reviewed shall continue in its present form. The SPB shall make a report to the full commission within 90 days. 
(3)  At the conclusion of this review process, the city commission shall determine whether to abolish, continue, consolidate or modify the board for the ensuing four years thereafter. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the abolition, consolidation or modification of any multijurisdictional board. 
(4)  The following boards shall initially be reviewed in the following years and shall be reviewed every four years thereafter: 
a.  1995: 
1.  Bayfront Park management trust. 
2.  Citywide community development advisory board. 
3.  Civil service board. 
4.  Code enforcement boards. 
5.  Equal opportunity advisory board. 
b.  1996: 
1.  Committee on ecology and beautification. 
c.  1997: 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Audit advisory committee. 
3.  Urban development review board. 
4.  Nuisance abatement board. 
d.  1998: 
1.  Historical and environmental preservation board. 
2.  Waterfront advisory board. 
3.  Community relations board. 
e.  1999: 
1.  Little Havana Special Events District. 
2.  Commercial solid waste management advisory committee. 
f.  2000: 
1.  Commission on the status of women. 
2.  Virginia Key Beach Park trust. 
g.  2002: 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  City of Miami arts and entertainment council. 
h.  Reserved. 
i.  2003: 
1.  Mayor's International Council. 
j.  Reserved. 
k.  Reserved. 
l.  2010: 
1.  Overtown Advisory Board/Overtown Community Oversight Board. 
2.  Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust. 
3.  Education advisory board. 
4.  Planning, zoning, and appeals board. 
m.  2011: 
Parks and recreation advisory board. 
n.  Reserved. 
o.  2013: 
1.  Housing and commercial loan committee. 
p.  2016: 
1.  Stars of Calle Ocho Walk of Fame celebrity and community recognition advisory committee. 
q.  2019: 
1.  Senior citizens' advisory board. 
(5)  All boards created after the effective date of this division shall be placed in the appropriate area under subsection (4) hereinabove, and shall be reviewed in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 11130, § 5, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-436; Ord. No. 11722, § 3, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11716, § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 11710, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 11735, § 2, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 11742, § 2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 11797, § 2, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 11800, § 2, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 11833, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 11849, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 11857, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00; Ord. No. 11995, § 2, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 11998, § 3, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 12003, § 2, 12-14-00; Ord. No. 12077, § 2, 6-14-01; Ord. No. 12082, § 2, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 12086, § 2, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 12177, § 2, 1-10-02; Ord. No. 12192, § 4, 3-7-02; Ord. No. 12227, § 1, 5-9-02; Ord. No. 12234.1, § 2, 6-13-02; Ord. No. 12235, § 2, 6-13-02; Ord. No. 12356, § 2, 4-10-03; Ord. No. 12386, § 2, 7-17-03; Ord. No. 12404, § 3, 9-11-03; Ord. No. 12408, § 2, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 12564, § 1, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 12623, § 7, 12-9-04; Ord. No. 12698, § 1, 6-23-05; Ord. No. 12748, § 2, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 12858, § 3, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 12859, § 3, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 12938, § 2, 8-1-07; Ord. No. 12967, § 4, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 12982, § 2, 4-10-08; Ord. No. 12994, § 2, 5-8-08; Ord. No. 13012, § 2, 7-24-08; Ord. No. 13030, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13066, § 3, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 13296, § 1, 12-15-11; Ord. No. 13322, § 1, 6-14-12; Ord. No. 13376, § 2, 4-11-13; Ord. No. 13419, § 1, 12-12-13; Ord. No. 13476, § 3, 9-11-14; Ord. No. 13497, § 2, 2-26-15; Ord. No. 13517, § 4, 5-14-15; Ord. No. 13534, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13801, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 2-893. - Oath of office. 
All members of the city boards who receive remuneration from the city shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, that he or she will support, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 11356, § 2(2-437), 4-25-96)  
Secs. 2-894—2-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MAYOR'S INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12386, § 3, adopted July 17, 2003, repealed division 3 in its entirety, and § 4 of said ordinance enacted a new division 3 to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 3 pertained to the international trade board and derived from Ord. No. 11574, § 2, adopted November 26, 1997; Ord. No. 11940, § 2, adopted July 20, 2000; Ord. No. 12019, § 2, adopted February 8, 2001. 
 
Sec. 2-921. - Mayor's International council created. 
A limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "Mayor's International Council" is hereby created and established. Use of the term "council" in this article shall mean the mayor's international council. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-922. - Purpose; powers and duties. 
(a)  Purpose. The council shall: 
(1)  Plan and implement the city's national and international trade promotion policies for the purposes of stimulating commercial and residential development and expanding the city's tax base through the promotion of trade and local investment in accordance with the bylaws adopted by the council; 
(2)  Plan, implement, and coordinate the city sister cities program, execute all sister city agreements for the same, and oversee the city's national and international, professional, and technical educational and cultural exchanges, promotion and policies to create and stimulate friendly and meaningful relationships; and 
(3)  Coordinate protocol requirements for national and international events and dignitaries pursuant to the standard and practices adopted by the council. 
(b)  Powers and duties. Subject to reasonable notice to the city commission, the council shall: 
(1)  Encourage the fullest and most active participation and cooperation of private enterprise by actively soliciting contributions and financial support from private business interests and any other governmental authorities for national and international trade promotion and business development; 
(2)  Establish independent city line items in the budget for deposit of revenues generated by the council and for disbursement of council expenses; 
(3)  Purchase and sell services for national and international trade promotion and business development and the ability to create council-sponsored conferences, trade shows and trade missions on behalf of the city; 
(4)  Maintain a separate, non-profit 501(c)(3) corporation for the purpose of seeking funding from outside sources if it so chooses; 
(5)  Approve designation of national or international cities and geographic locations as sister cities to the city; 
(6)  Form a committee for each sister city that will have a president with significant cultural and business ties to the sister city, said president to be appointed by the council; 
a.  The sister cities committee president shall recruit members from the community at-large with membership criteria emphasizing significant cultural and business ties to the sister cities having a sister city relationship with the city. 
b.  Local consul general of the country of individual foreign sister cities will be afforded the opportunity to appoint an individual to the sister cities committee; thereby, assigning an ex officio member from the consul general's staff to be a liaison between the consulate and the committee. 
(7)  Maintain an affiliation policy and direction of sister city committees established for each sister city of the city; and 
(8)  Create, coordinate and manage policies and procedures for events related to the council's purpose and dignitaries visiting the city. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the council shall exercise only such powers as are granted pursuant to this article. The city commission or the mayor's international council upon reasonable notice to the city commission may rescind any sister city relationship. 
(d)  All sister city relationships existing prior to the effective date of this amendment, and which are consistent with the provisions herein, regardless of the manner in which said sister city relationship was created, shall continue to be deemed a sister city of the city pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03; Ord. No. 13147, § 2, 3-11-10; Ord. No. 13532, § 2, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 2-923. - Governing body: composition and appointments; terms of office and vacancies; membership eligibility requirements; oath; quorum and voting; meetings; attendance requirements; parliamentary authority and rules of procedure; and indemnification. 
(a)  Composition and appointments, term of office. The council shall consist of 15 members who shall serve as set forth herein. All members, shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in official duties. The governing body shall consist of: 
(1)  The mayor shall serve as chairperson of the council and shall serve in accordance with the provisions of section 2-35 or until the mayor leaves office; 
(2)  Seven individuals appointed by the mayor who shall serve for a term of one year or until the mayor leaves office, whichever occurs first; and 
(3)  Seven individuals appointed by the city commission who shall serve for a term of four years, staggered with four individuals whose terms expire in 2005 and three in 2006. 
(b)  Vacancies. Any person appointed by the mayor to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation or removal of any member of the council shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. No mayor-appointed member shall serve more than eight consecutive years on the council. Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed after a hiatus of two years. 
(c)  Membership eligibility requirements. 
(1)  Each member of the council shall reside, work, own real property or maintain a business in the city and shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and commitment to serving the community. Appointed members are expected to participate actively in the functioning of the council. The chairperson of the council shall have the power to appoint all members serving on the various committees which the council shall establish from time to time. 
(2)  No member of the council shall become a candidate for elective political office during his or her term. Should any member of the council qualify as a candidate for elective political office, such qualification shall be deemed a tender of resignation from the council. 
(3)  No employee of Miami-Dade County, Florida, or any municipality therein other than city employees, shall serve on or be appointed to the council. 
(d)  Oath. Upon the effective date of appointment, or as soon thereafter as practicable, each member of the council shall assume the duties of a member of the council, but before doing so, shall take the oath prescribed by section 41(e) and (f) of the City Charter. 
(e)  Officers. The chairperson shall appoint all members serving on the various committees which shall be established from time to time. The chairperson shall appoint a vice-chairperson from among the council's members. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. The council shall designate a secretary and such other officers as may be deemed necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(f)  Quorum and voting. At all meetings of the council, the members present shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and each member shall have one vote on every issue submitted to a vote of the council. The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the council. The members of the council shall make and adopt bylaws and rules and regulations. 
(g)  Meetings. The council shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. All meetings of the council shall be public. Written minutes of the proceedings of all actions taken at the meeting of the council shall be maintained by the council and shall be promptly and properly recorded and submitted to the city clerk. 
(h)  Attendance requirements. The provisions contained in section 2-886 of this article shall be applicable to the members of the council. 
(i)  Parliamentary authority and rules of procedure. The parliamentary authority of the council shall be Robert's Rules of Order (current edition), unless the council adopts its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all council meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners and the city manager. 
(j)  Indemnification. The council shall maintain officers and directors liability insurance coverage at all times, in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the city's insurance manager. To the extent such coverage does not apply, the city shall indemnify the members in the same manner and to the same extent that it indemnifies all other city advisory boards. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to affect the laws relating to sovereign immunity. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03; Ord. No. 12520, § 1, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 12743, § 2, 11-17-05; Ord. No. 13147, § 2, 3-11-10)  
Sec. 2-924. - Executive director; appointment, term, qualifications, compensation, general powers and responsibilities. 
There shall be an executive director who shall be appointed by the council subject to city commission approval. Additionally, each successor executive director shall be similarly appointed and approved. After hiring an executive director, the council shall submit monthly written reports and one annual oral presentation on the status of the council's operations and expenses to the city commission. The executive director shall be a person of good moral character and have an excellent reputation for integrity, responsibility, and business ability, but no council member shall be eligible for appointment as executive director. The executive director shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the council, and approved by the city commission. The executive director shall take an oath before assuming any duties. The executive director shall act as the chief executive officer of the council. Subject to the policy directives of the council, the executive director shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the management and operation of all council properties, activities, and facilities. The executive director shall execute all contracts on behalf of the council after approval by the council. The executive director shall attend all meetings of the council, shall furnish the council a quarterly report with respect to the management, operation, and financial condition of the council, and shall from time to time have prepared and shall furnish such reports, audits and other information relating to the council as may be required by the council or the city. In the event that the executive director is for any reason temporarily incapable of exercising the powers and performing the duties and functions of the office, the council, with the consent of the city commission, may appoint an acting executive director to exercise such powers and to perform such functions and duties until such incapacity of the executive director ceases. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-925. - Employment of assistants. 
Subject to the policy directives of the council and budget limitations, the executive director may employ such assistants as are necessary to provide for the efficient operation of the council. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-926. - Counsel. 
The city attorney's office shall provide legal services to the council as may be necessary and requested by the council. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-927. - Approval of budget. 
(a)  Effective immediately, the council shall establish a fiscal year which coincides with that of the city. The council shall submit to the city commission, in a form acceptable to the city manager, and no later than April 1 preceding the commencement of each fiscal year, a council budget request pertaining to management, operation, maintenance and capital expenditures and delineating the financial responsibility of the city for certain categories including but not limited to: insurance, security, utilities, capital improvements and maintenance. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the council from submitting a supplemental budget to the commission for approval. 
(b)  No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the city commission of the council budget for that year and all expenditure shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  In conjunction with the submission of the budget, the council shall submit a master plan reflecting the proposed operations, activities, improvements, and maintenance plans for the forthcoming fiscal year. The city commission may review and deny any item contained in the master plan within 30 days from the date of its submission by the council. 
(d)  No provision contained in this article shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500 through 18-503 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-928. - Annual report and audit. 
(a)  The council shall submit to the mayor and city commission an annual report and an annual audit. The audit shall be performed by an external auditor who is a certified public accountant. 
(b)  Additionally, the city shall have the right to audit any books, accounts, expenditures, receivables, and contracts of the council at any time. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 2-929. - Abolition of council. 
The city commission, by an affirmative vote of three commissioners, may abolish the council, at which time the powers and duties of the council shall revert to the city and the city shall resume responsibility for the maintenance, operation and management of powers and duties of the council. 
(Ord. No. 12386, § 4, 7-17-03)  
Secs. 2-930—2-945. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - AUDIT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
County Code cross reference— Audit review committee to work with Miami-Dade Water and Sewer Authority Department, § 2-346. 
 
Sec. 2-946. - Created; number of members; function. 
A Miami audit advisory committee is hereby created consisting of five persons. The basic function of the committee is to assist the mayor, city commission and the city manager in fulfilling their fiduciary responsibilities relating to accounting, auditing and financial reporting. The committee shall: 
(1)  Review the annual audit of city accounts performed by the independent auditor. 
(2)  Review the annual management letter developed by the independent auditor. 
(3)  Review the system of internal control utilized by the city. 
(4)  Review the city's compliance with the GASB (Government Accounting Standards Board) guidelines and requirements. 
(5)  Review internal audit reports where it is felt by the internal auditor that fraud or criminal conduct may be involved, to the extent that it does not compromise criminal investigations. 
(6)  Review the city manager's recommendation for selection of an independent auditor if requested by or directed by the city commission. 
(7)  Review such other financial matters as requested by the city manager or as directed by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 1, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 3-18-83; Ord. No. 9699, § 2, 10-25-83; Code 1980, § 2-237; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 11979, § 2, 10-12-00)  
Sec. 2-947. - Composition; terms. 
(a)  The composition of the Miami audit advisory committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each city commissioner shall recommend one member subject to appointment by the city commission. 
(2)  All members appointed by the city commission shall serve for a period of one year or until the nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  The internal city auditor and the director of finance shall not be members of the committee but shall be informed of and invited to attend each committee meeting. 
(4)  All members shall be qualified and distinguished by their education, experience and attainments in the accounting profession, the practice of law, banking or business management. Members of the committee shall be selected from among the following: 
a.  A controller or chief financial officer of a large commercial enterprise (with size measured by dollar sales/revenue volume). 
b.  A commercial or investment banker associated with a large financial institution. 
c.  A practicing certified public accountant (if not a certified public accountant, then an accountant who shall have managed an accounting practice employing at least ten individuals). 
(b)  All committee members shall continue to serve until their successors are duly appointed. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 2, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 3-18-83; Ord. No. 9699, § 2, 10-25-83; Ord. No. 11130, § 6, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-238; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-27-96)  
Sec. 2-948. - Organization; quorum. 
(a)  The committee shall be convened for its first organizational meeting by the city manager as soon as is practical after designation of its members by the city commission. At that meeting, the committee shall: 
(1)  Elect a chairperson for a two-year term from the date of such election. 
(2)  Establish operating procedures to govern the committee's operations and deliberations. 
(3)  Establish an annual work program and schedule of actions to be accomplished. 
(4)  Conduct such other business as is deemed necessary to carry out the committee's duties and obligations. 
Subsequent annual organizational meetings shall be convened by the chairperson, for the above purposes, prior to the expiration of his or her term as chairperson. 
(b)  The committee shall elect its own chairperson who shall: 
(1)  Call and conduct all meetings. 
(2)  Be responsible to ensure that notes of all meetings are maintained. 
(3)  Be responsible that the notes of all meetings are forwarded to the mayor, the city commission and the city manager in a timely fashion. 
(c)  Quorum. Three members constitute a quorum to convene a meeting of the audit advisory committee. An affirmative vote of the majority of the members present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 3, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 3-18-83; Ord. No. 9699, § 2, 10-25-83; Code 1980, § 2-239; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 12471, § 2, 1-8-04)  
Sec. 2-949. - Liaison and support services. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide liaison with the committee and support service from the administration. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 4, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 3-18-83; Ord. No. 9699, § 2, 10-25-83; Code 1980, § 2-239.1)  
Sec. 2-950. - Duties. 
The duties of the committee shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Recommending to the mayor and city commission specifications and performance standards to be utilized in issuing invitations to qualified independent auditors to perform annual independent audit services for the city. 
(2)  Seeking responses from qualified independent auditors to perform annual independent audit services for the city based upon specifications and performance standards as approved or revised by the city commission. Such responses may be sought for a period of more than one year if, in the opinion of the committee and of the city commission, such extended period is in the best interests of the city and if provision to discontinue the audit services in the event of unsatisfactory services is maintained in the agreement. 
(3)  Recommending selection of an independent auditor to the city commission. Such selection shall be based upon a review and analysis of responses to invitations issued by the committee on behalf of the city. Review and analysis by the committee shall consist of such measures as are considered appropriate by the committee including, but not limited to, interviews, negotiations and investigation of prior audit engagements. 
(4)  Maintaining liaison with the selected independent auditor including, but not limited to, monitoring of the independent auditor's work progress, and reviewing preliminary and final reports issued by the independent auditor. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 5, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 3-18-83; Ord. No. 9699, § 2, 10-25-83; Code 1980, § 2-239.2; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 2-951. - Factors for consideration in decisions. 
In its deliberations and actions, the committee shall be guided by the following: 
(1)  The requirements of the statutes of the state as they now, or in the future may, pertain to annual audit services for the city. 
(2)  Accounting and auditing standards as they are now, or in the future may be, issued by the National Council on Governmental Accounting and by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. 
(3)  Quarterly closings of the city's financial books and records. 
(4)  Quarterly audit reviews by the independent auditor. 
(Ord. No. 9245, § 6, 2-26-81; Code 1980, § 2-239.3)  
Secs. 2-952—2-975. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ADVISORY BOARD[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Note— Ord. No. 11995, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 2000, changed the title from Affirmative Action Advisory Board to Equal Opportunity Advisory Board. 
 
Sec. 2-976. - Established; members, terms of office. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board to be known as the city equal opportunity advisory board, hereinafter called the "board." The board shall consist of 14 members, ten members to be appointed by the city commission, and four members, one each, to be selected by each certified bargaining representative of city employees, as follows: 
(1)  Fraternal Order of Police, Miami Lodge No. 20. 
(2)  International Association of Firefighters, Local No. 587. 
(3)  Laborers' International Union of North America, Local No. 800. 
(4)  Miami General Employees, American Federation of State and County Municipal Employees, Local No. 1907. 
(b)  Persons so selected shall become members of the board when confirmed by the city commission. 
(c)  The terms of the board members shall be of one year or until the nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  The city commission may remove any member of the board for cause, upon stating in writing the reasons for removal, allowing him or her to be heard by the city commission in his or her own defense. 
(e)  Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the commission for the unexpired term; provided, however, that members of the board shall continue to serve until their successors have been selected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(1), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(1), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 11130, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 2-276; Ord. No. 11373, § 3, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 11995, § 2, 11-16-00)  
Sec. 2-977. - Election of officers; establishment, availability of rules of procedure. 
(a)  The board shall choose from among themselves a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve for terms of one year each, and shall choose other officers as they deem appropriate. 
(b)  The board shall establish rules of procedure for governing and conducting its affairs. These rules should be available in writing upon request from the public. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(4), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(4), 7-24-80; Code 1980, § 2-277)  
Sec. 2-978. - Designation of executive secretary. 
The director of equal opportunity diversity programs, hereinafter referred to as "director" in this division, shall be the executive secretary for the board. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(5), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(5), 7-24-80; Code 1980, § 2-278)  
Sec. 2-979. - Meetings—Generally. 
(a)  Scheduling. The board shall hold at least one regularly scheduled meeting each month, except during the month of August, on days to be determined by the board. Upon ten days' notice, the chairperson of the board may cancel and/or reschedule any meeting. Other meetings may be scheduled by the board or be held at the call of the chairperson; however, ten days' written notice to each member is required, except where the city manager and board chairperson agree to call an emergency meeting. The board, its established committees, and specially appointed officers shall have the power to take testimony under oath. 
(b)  Minutes. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member, or his or her absence or failure to vote. 
(c)  Quorum, majority vote requirement. A majority of the members present shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting of the board. A majority vote of those present and voting shall decide any question properly brought before the board. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(6)—(8), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(6)—(8), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 10160, § 1, 10-7-86; Code 1980, § 2-279; Ord. No. 11801, § 2, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 2-980. - Same—Authority to require attendance of department representatives. 
Upon a minimum of ten days' notice from the executive secretary of the board, a city department head requested to attend a meeting of the board shall so attend or may appoint and direct a representative of that department to attend. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(10), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(10), 7-24-80; Code 1980, § 2-280)  
Sec. 2-981. - Disqualification of members. 
(a)  Residency. With the exception of those board members selected by certified bargaining representatives of city employees, all board members shall be permanent residents of the city in order to serve on the board. 
(b)  Conflicts of interest. Board members shall not vote on matters which involve their personal or private interests. If a majority of the other board members sitting vote to disqualify a member from voting on a given matter because they determine that a conflict of interest exists, that member shall not be permitted to vote. No board member shall be permitted to represent any other person before the board or the city commission in any matter concerning employment or affirmative action. 
(c)  Nonattendance of meetings. Failure of a board member to attend three consecutive meetings, as determined and recorded by the chairperson, shall automatically disqualify said member from holding office. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(9), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(9), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 9348, § 1, 11-12-81; Code 1980, § 2-281)  
Sec. 2-982. - Duties generally. 
The board shall provide advice and recommendations regarding affirmative action. The director or his or her designee shall represent the city manager in all matters of affirmative action and shall provide all staff support to the board. With the assistance of the director, the board shall perform the following duties and functions: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the mayor and the city commission the adoption of amendments and revisions to the city's affirmative action program plan, for meeting present and possible future requirements. 
(2)  Review employment policies and practices of the city and make recommendations to the personnel management department through the director. 
(3)  Conduct monthly meetings, open to the public, for discussion of the city's affirmative action program, review of specific complaints of alleged discrimination properly brought before the board, and receipt of reports from the director. 
(4)  Recommend to the mayor and city commission ordinances, resolutions, and other proposals relating to the affirmative action program. 
(5)  Serve with the director and the personnel management department as an instrument for informing the mayor, city commission, city departments and agencies and the public of the continuing affirmative action program and its purposes. 
(6)  Make recommendations or reports to the mayor and city commission directly as deemed appropriate by the board. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(3), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(3), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-282; Ord. No. 11564, § 4, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 2-983. - Formulation, adoption of affirmative action plan. 
(a)  Coordination by director. Under the authority of the city manager, the director shall work in direct coordination with the board and other city boards and departments in the preparation, conduct, review, and implementation of the continuing affirmative action program. 
(b)  Review, submission by board for commission approval. The board shall review any plan relating to the city's affirmative action program as prepared and submitted by the director. This review shall be conducted in meetings open to the public and in full compliance with F.S. ch. 286, the government-in-the-sunshine law. Upon completion of public hearings and review by the board, the board shall submit to the commission through the director and the city manager its comments and recommendations concerning the plan or modifications to the plan. The civil service board of the city shall receive a copy of the plan and the board's recommendations at the same time they are submitted to the city manager. 
(c)  Consideration by city commission. The city commission, upon receiving the proposed affirmative action plan or any changes thereto, shall set a date for a public hearing, said date not being less than 30 days from the date the commission received the report from the board through appropriate administrative channels. At the conclusion of this public hearing, the city commission may adopt, reject or modify the plan or any portion thereof. No affirmative action program or plan shall become effective until its adoption by the city commission. The city commission's adoption of the plan or modifications to the plan shall take the form of a resolution wherein the 
commission resolves to concur with the city manager's adoption of the plan and/or modifications thereto. The city commission may, from time to time, resolve to concur with or support statements of policy formulated by the board and/or the city administration. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(11)—(13), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(11)—(13), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 10076, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 2-283)  
Sec. 2-984. - Periodic review of affirmative action plan. 
The board shall review and make comments or recommendations annually, or as directed by the city commission, concerning the city's affirmative action plans and programs. These comments and recommendations shall be presented to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(14), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(14), 7-24-80; Code 1980, § 2-284)  
Sec. 2-985. - Hearing and review of discrimination complaints. 
(a)  The board may hear or review grievances concerning alleged discrimination in employment policies and practices of the city when a specific grievance or complaint is referred by the director to the board. 
(b)  Following such referral by the director, the board may appoint a committee or a single hearing officer to hear these complaints and to report findings and make recommendations to the full board. 
(Ord. No. 8725, § 1(2), 11-10-77; Ord. No. 9139, § 1(2), 7-24-80; Ord. No. 9348, § 2, 11-12-81; Code 1980, § 2-285)  
Secs. 2-986—2-1010. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13801, § 3, adopted October 25, 2018, repealed the former division 6, sections 2-1011—2-1023 in its entirety, which pertained to the sports and exhibition authority. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 2-1011—2-1050. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - OVERTOWN ADVISORY BOARD/OVERTOWN COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT BOARD[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12858, § 2, adopted October 12, 2006, amended division 7, §§ 2-1051—2-1056, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 7 pertained to the Overtown Advisory Board and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 2-451—2-456; Ord. No. 11211, §§ 1—6, adopted January 12, 1995; Ord. No. 11326, § 2, adopted November 16, 1995; Ord. No. 11403, § 2, adopted October 10, 1996; Ord. No. 11605, § 2, adopted February 10, 1998; Ord. No. 11681, § 2, adopted July 14, 1998. 
Cross reference— Historic preservation, ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 2-1051. - Establishment and purpose. 
There is hereby created and established the Overtown Advisory Board/Overtown Community Oversight Board, to be known as the Overtown Community Oversight Board, to encourage and support housing, job creation, economic and business development, educational opportunities and historic and cultural preservation. The board shall provide written recommendations to the city commission regarding activities, developments and improvements within, or substantially impacting the residents of, the Overtown Area. As used herein, the "Overtown area" is that area approximately bounded on the north by Northwest 20th Street from Florida East Coast Railroad to Northwest 3rd Avenue to Northwest 5th Avenue; on the west by I-95 Expressway from Northwest 21st Terrace to 836 Expressway and State Road 836 (East-West) Expressway from I-95 to the Miami River; on the south by Northwest 3rd Street from Florida East Coast Railroad to Northwest 7th Avenue and the Miami River from Northwest 7th Avenue to 836 Expressway; and on the east by Florida East Coast Railroad right-of-way. (Note: All boundaries are to be construed expansively, incorporating the breadth of described streets, avenues, expressways, and railroad property.) 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 2-1052. - Membership. 
(a)  Generally. The Overtown Community Oversight Board shall consist of 11 members (other than youth board members), five of whom shall be elected and six of whom shall be appointed, as hereinafter set forth. In addition, there shall be two youth members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board, one to be appointed by the commissioner representing district five and one to be appointed by the Overtown Community Oversight Board. 
(b)  Qualifications. Members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall be persons of knowledge, experience, mature judgment and background, having ability and desire to act in the public interest in order to make informed and equitable decisions concerning the Overtown area. 
(1)  Each person seeking membership on the Overtown Community Oversight Board who is not seeking appointment as a youth board member shall be deemed qualified if he/she is 18 years of age or older, and: 
a.  Resides in the Overtown area; 
b.  Owns property in the Overtown area; 
c.  Is an employee or board member of a community based organization or community development corporation located in or providing services to the Overtown area; or 
d.  Owns or is an employee of a business in the Overtown area. 
(2)  Each person seeking membership on the Overtown Community Oversight Board who is seeking appointment as a youth board member shall be deemed qualified if he/she is more than 14 and less than 19 years of age; and 
a.  Resides in the Overtown area, and 
b.  Attends an accredited educational institution in the Overtown area. 
(c)  Procedure for election. 
(1)  Nomination procedure; voter eligibility. 
a.  All persons nominated must be qualified voters in the Overtown area and shall be required to provide proof of such qualifications at a meeting scheduled by the city manager or his/her designee. Nominations can be made by the person or by any other person qualified to vote. 
b.  In the event, for reasonable cause, a potential nominee cannot be present at the meeting, he/she can be considered for nomination if he/she notifies the city manager or his/her designee in writing, at least five working days prior to the election of the reason for his/her absence. 
c.  To be eligible to vote for members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board, the elector must be 18 years of age or older, and: 
1.  Reside in the Overtown area; 
2.  Own property or operate a business in the Overtown area, 
3.  Be an employee or board member of a community development corporation or community based organization located in and providing services to the Overtown area, or 
4.  Operate or be an employee of a business in the Overtown area. 
(2)  Election procedure. 
a.  The time and place of the election shall be set by the city manager or his/her designee. The election shall be widely publicized at least two weeks in advance in the Overtown Area and in the media. Voting shall be by secret ballot and the election shall be supervised by city staff. 
b.  Voting by proxy or absentee ballot shall not be permitted. 
c.  Certified ballots shall be used and appropriate interpreters shall be present at all elections, if there is a substantial number of non-English speaking residents. The voter shall place his/her ballot in a sealed ballot box. 
d.  At the close of voting, the ballot box shall be opened and the ballots tabulated by city staff to determine winners of the election. 
e.  The candidates, their representatives, and the public may witness the tally of the ballots at the election site. The candidates receiving the most votes shall be elected to the Overtown Community Oversight Board. 
f.  The winners shall be certified by the city clerk and officially ratified at the first scheduled city commission meeting immediately following the election. 
g.  Proof of qualification as an eligible voter or candidate as to identity, place of residence, and/or employment may be by voter's registration card, driver's license, pay stub, birth certificate, or any reasonable written proof, including a notarized affidavit. Deeds, mortgages, or homestead exemption receipts shall serve as proof of ownership of property within the community. Proof of business ownership and operation shall be by city local business tax receipts with corresponding corporate documents, including partnership agreements, articles of incorporation, etc. 
(d)  Procedure for appointment of members. 
(1)  The district five city commissioner shall appoint five members to the Overtown Community Oversight Board, and the mayor of the city shall appoint one member. In addition, the district five city commissioner shall appoint one youth board member and the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall appoint one youth board member. 
(2)  No appointment shall be made by the district five city commissioner, the mayor of the city or the Overtown Community Oversight Board until notice has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the appointments to be made to the Overtown Community Oversight Board at least 30 days prior to the making of an appointment, which shall have solicited and encouraged the public and professional or citizen organizations within the Overtown area having interest in and knowledge of the Overtown area to submit names of persons and their qualifications for consideration as prospective appointees of the Overtown Community Oversight Board. At least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, the district five city commissioner, the mayor and the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall cause to have available to the public, and shall publicly make announcement that the list of names thus submitted, together with a short statement of the qualifications of each person, is prepared and available for public inspection and consideration. In reaching decision on appointments, the district five city commissioner, the mayor and the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall give due consideration to the names thus submitted. 
(3)  In addition, the district five city commissioner, the mayor and the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall, at least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, cause to have available to the public, and shall publicly make announcement that the names of prospective appointees submitted by the district five city commissioner, the mayor and the Overtown Community Oversight Board and a short statement of qualifications of such persons are available for public inspection and consideration. No person shall be appointed to membership on the Overtown Community Oversight Board whose name and qualifications have not been made publicly available in the manner set out herein. 
(e)  Terms of office. The members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall serve for two-year terms, expiring during the month of September. Notwithstanding the above, members of the board may serve until the city commission's ratification of the results of the election of new board members held following the expiration of a term. 
(f)  Vacancies. Vacancies in the membership of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall be filled by the district five city commissioner in the manner set forth in subsection (d) for appointed members or may be filled at the discretion of the district five city commissioner by any person who meets the qualifications set forth in subsection (b)(1) herein. 
(g)  Removal. Members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board may be removed for cause by vote of not less than three members of the city commission upon written charges after a public hearing, unless the member charged waives such public hearing in writing. However, whenever any member has had within a calendar year, three consecutive absences or four absences within a calendar year from the regularly scheduled meetings, the chairperson of the board shall certify same to the city clerk. The city clerk shall then inform the district five city commissioner and the mayor in writing that the position has been declared vacant and a successor member must be appointed to fill the vacancy, by the district five city commissioner. 
(h)  Disqualification of members. If any member has a conflict of interest on a particular matter coming before the Overtown Community Oversight Board, he/she shall, prior to the opening of the discussion on the matter, disqualify himself/herself from all participation whatsoever in the cause; or he/she may be disqualified by a vote of not less than a majority of the membership of the Overtown Community Oversight Board present, not including the member about whom the question for disqualification has been raised. 
(i)  Assignment of tasks. The city manager shall provide for necessary staffing to assist the Overtown Community Oversight Board. Such staff shall. 
(1)  Provide and perform necessary administrative duties including providing assistance to the Overtown Community Oversight Board regarding the scheduling of meetings of the Overtown Community Oversight Board, preparing agendas, and ensuring that proper notice is provided for such meetings. 
(2)  Work with other city departments, public agencies, and private groups, as required, to provide information to the Overtown Community Oversight Board on activities, developments, or improvements in, or substantially impacting the residents of, the Overtown Area. 
(3)  Submit the adopted minutes of each Overtown Community Oversight Board meeting to the city clerk and the district five city commissioner. 
(4)  Prepare summary reports of board actions for review by the board prior to delivery of the same to the city manager or his/her designee for delivery to the city commission. 
(5)  Review the board's budgets. 
(6)  Coordinate the research, development and preparation of reports and policies for projects initiated by the Overtown Community Oversight Board. 
(7)  Serve as the community liaison between the city, the Overtown Community Oversight Board and the residents of the Overtown area. 
(8)  Channel the issues and concerns of Overtown area residents, businesses and community groups to the attention of the Overtown Community Oversight Board or the appropriate city department for resolution, or to the appropriate public or private agency for action. 
(9)  Reestablish and maintain the Overtown resource directory. 
(10)  Follow through with the implementation of all decisions and actions approved by the Overtown Community Oversight Board. 
(11)  Share information with community organizations and receive input regarding ongoing or proposed projects and activities in the Overtown area. 
(12)  Schedule the use of the Overtown Community Oversight Board facilities by community organizations. 
(13)  Reestablish and coordinate publication and distribution of the Overtown newsletter. 
(14)  Coordinate projects of the Overtown Community Oversight Board with other community organizations and governmental agencies. 
(15)  Coordinate with the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community redevelopment agency to relate its activities to the community and community organizations, public agencies and the private business sector. 
(16)  Coordinate his/her activities and the activities of the Overtown Community Oversight Board with the activities of the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community redevelopment agency and the Overtown NET administrator/NET office. 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13273, § 1, 6-9-11; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-1053. - Proceedings. 
(a)  Officers. The Overtown Community Oversight Board shall select a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members to serve for a one-year term and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary or desirable. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. The Overtown Community Oversight Board shall establish rules of procedure necessary to its governing and the conduct of its affairs, in keeping with the applicable provisions of the City Charter, ordinances and resolutions. Such rules of procedure shall be available in written form to persons appearing before the board and to the public upon request. 
(c)  Meetings. A regular meeting of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall convene at least once per month, except during the month of August. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Voting; quorum. At all meetings of the Overtown Community Oversight Board, a majority of the membership (excluding vacancies) shall constitute a quorum. All recommendations of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall require a concurring vote of a majority of the members present. In case of a tie vote such vote shall be construed as a denial. 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 2-1054. - Compensation. 
Members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to the prior approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 2-1055. - Financial disclosure. 
All members of the Overtown Community Oversight Board shall file annual financial disclosure reports pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 2-1056. - Functions, powers and duties generally. 
The Overtown Community Oversight Board is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the city commission approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of activities, developments, or improvements in, or substantially impacting the residents of, the Overtown area. 
(2)  Require submission to the Overtown Community Oversight Board of any information requested for the Overtown Community Oversight Board to evaluate activities, developments, or improvements, including eminent domain, in, or substantially impacting the residents of, the Overtown area. 
(3)  Recommend from time to time to the city commission and the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Agency, modifications and/or amendments to the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Plan. 
(4)  Recommend to the Community Development Citywide Advisory Board activities, developments, or improvements for the Overtown area. 
(5)  Adopt and amend its rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 12858, § 2, 10-12-06)  
Secs. 2-1057—2-1100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - MIAMI COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Div. 8 by Ord. 11982, Ord. No. 11753, § 2, adopted Feb. 9, 1999, repealed Div. 8, §§ 2-1081—2-1096, which pertained to the housing opportunities for persons with AIDS advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 11379, §§ 1—15, adopted July 11, 1996. 
 
Sec. 2-1101. - Established. 
There is hereby established a limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "Miami Commission on the Status of Women" (hereinafter known as the "MCSW"). 
(Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00)  
Sec. 2-1102. - Purpose, powers and duties. 
The purpose, powers and duties of the MCSW are: 
(1)  To serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission, including advising on any possible barrier which may impede the participation of women in city-sponsored programs and activities; 
(2)  To support legislation granting women equal rights and equal opportunities; 
(3)  To inspire in women the desire for self-improvement and pride of being, regardless of age, marital status, race, color or creed; 
(4)  To seek for every woman the opportunities equal to her potential and responsibility; 
(5)  To seek opportunities for and to encourage the active involvement of women in matters relating to community progress; and 
(6)  To encourage capable women in roles of leadership. 
(Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00)  
Sec. 2-1103. - Membership; term of office; vacancies; officers; rules of procedure; meetings; quorum; attendance requirements. 
(a)  Membership. The MCSW shall consist of 11 members appointed by the city commission, with the mayor appointing one member and each commissioner nominating two members. Such membership shall represent the racial, ethnic, economic and social diversity of the women in the city. 
(b)  Term of office. A member of the MCSW shall be appointed for a term of one year or until the mayor or nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first. A member may be reappointed for seven additional one-year terms; however, no member shall serve more than eight consecutive one-year terms. 
(c)  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs, such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner as provided for in subsection (b) hereinabove. 
(d)  Officers. The members shall elect and from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and designate a secretary and such other officers deemed necessary. A member elected as either chairperson or vice-chairperson shall not serve more than two years in each office. 
(e)  Rules of procedure. The MCSW may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all MCSW meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners, and city manager. 
(f)  Meetings. All meetings of the MCSW shall be open to the public. A regular meeting shall convene at least once each month, except during the month of August. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson, as deemed necessary. 
(g)  Voting; quorum. The members present shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening a meeting. A majority of those present and voting is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(h)  Attendance requirements. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this Code shall apply to all members of the MCSW. 
(Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00)  
Sec. 2-1104. - Counsel. 
The city attorney shall provide legal services to the MCSW. 
(Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00)  
Sec. 2-1105. - Liaison to board; assignment of staff. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this Code, the city manager shall designate the administration's liaison to the board. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide administrative support to the board, which shall include the services of an individual to keep minutes of meetings, maintain committee correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports and perform all other necessary support functions. 
(Ord. No. 11982, § 2, 10-26-00)  
Secs. 2-1106—2-1120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ELEVATE MIAMI[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 9 by Ord. No. 13184, Ord. No. 12623, § 1, adopted December 9, 2004, repealed division 9, §§ 2-1121—2-1134 in its entirety, which pertained to the Brownfields advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 11652, §§ 2—14, and Ord. No. 11850, § 2, adopted October 26, 1999. 
 
Sec. 2-1121. - Created; number of members; function. 
The city "Advisory Committee on Elevate Miami" is created, consisting of nine persons. The basic function of the committee is to assist the mayor, city commission and the city manager in establishing a comprehensive and wide-ranging initiative known as Elevate Miami which includes four components: 
(1)  Digital literacy; 
(2)  ACCESS Miami; 
(3)  The Education Compact; and 
(4)  Community outreach. 
This initiative is meant to better prepare the citizens of the city to participate and compete in the new digital society and digital economy by assisting them in becoming more comfortable with and adaptable to new technologies. 
(Ord. No. 13184, § 2, 6-24-10)  
Sec. 2-1122. - Composition; terms. 
(a)  The composition of the advisory committee on Elevate Miami shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each city commissioner shall nominate one member subject to appointment by the city commission. 
(2)  One at-large member nominated by any city commissioner subject to appointment by the city commission. 
(3)  The mayor shall nominate three members subject to appointment by the city commission. 
(4)  All members shall serve for a period of one year or until the nominating party leaves office, whichever occurs first. 
(5)  The city's chief information officer shall not be a member of the committee but shall be informed of and invited to attend each committee meeting. 
(6)  All members shall be qualified and distinguished by their education, experience and attainments in the information technology profession, education profession, business management, or similar background. 
(b)  All committee members shall continue to serve until their successors are duly appointed. 
(Ord. No. 13184, § 2, 6-24-10)  
Sec. 2-1123. - Organization; quorum. 
(a)  The committee shall be convened for its first organizational meeting by the city manager as soon as is practical after designation of its members by the city commission. At that meeting, the committee shall: 
(1)  Elect a chairperson for a one-year term from the date of such election. 
(2)  Establish operating procedures to govern the committee's operations and deliberations. 
(3)  Establish an annual work program and schedule of actions to be accomplished. 
(4)  Conduct such other business as is deemed necessary to carry out the committee's duties and obligations. 
Subsequent annual organizational meetings shall be convened by the chairperson, for the above purposes, prior to the expiration of his or her term as chairperson. 
(b)  The chairperson shall: 
(1)  Call and conduct all meetings. 
(2)  Be responsible to ensure that notes of all meetings are maintained. 
(3)  Be responsible that the notes of all meetings are forwarded to the mayor, the city commission, and the city manager in a timely fashion. 
(c)  Quorum. Five members constitute a quorum to convene a meeting of the committee. An affirmative vote of the majority of the members present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(Ord. No. 13184, § 2, 6-24-10)  
Sec. 2-1124. - Liaison and support services. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide liaison with the committee and support service from the administration. 
(Ord. No. 13184, § 2, 6-24-10)  
Sec. 2-1125. - Duties. 
The duties of the committee shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Promote the comprehensive and wide-ranging initiative known as Elevate Miami. 
(2)  Assist in obtaining funding and sponsorships from the private and public sector for Elevate Miami. Any funding obtained for the purpose of Elevate Miami shall be deposited into a special account and such funds shall be used solely for Elevate Miami. 
(3)  Supervise the development and mission of the Elevate Miami initiative. 
(4)  Make recommendations to the city commission regarding funding from the general fund for Elevate Miami. 
(5)  Make an annual report to the city commission concerning the status of Elevate Miami. The format of the report shall include: 
a.  An overview of the committee's accomplishments during the year. 
b.  Planned activities and goals for the following year, if any. 
c.  A financial report concerning the budget of Elevate Miami, which shall include schedules of activity expenditures, a budget for the following year, and an explanation of any expenditures that vary by more than ten percent from the budget. 
d.  Certification by the committee that the reported actual expenditures are true and correct and that, to the best of the members' knowledge, all grant money and other distributions were used in a manner consistent with all federal, state, and local rules, regulations, ordinances, and statutes. 
e.  An inventory list of all donated items, by month, that includes the name of each donor and a brief description of the item donated. 
(6)  Make and adopt any other rules and regulations necessary to carry out the duties described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 13184, § 2, 6-24-10)  
Secs. 2-1126—2-1139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CITY OF MIAMI ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT COUNCIL[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12192, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 7, 2002, repealed and reenacted div. 10 to read as herein set out. Formerly, div. 10 pertained to the cultural and fine arts board and derived from Ord. No. 11716, § 3, adopted October 27, 1998. 
 
Sec. 2-1140. - Created and established. 
A limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "City of Miami Arts and Entertainment Council ("council") is created and established. 
(Ord. No. 12192, § 3, 3-7-02)  
Sec. 2-1141. - Purpose, powers and duties. 
The purpose, powers and duties of the council are: 
(1)  To serve in an advisory capacity and make recommendations and guide the mayor, city commission and city manager regarding endorsement or support of specific art and entertainment special events, performance and productions. 
(2)  To make recommendations and guide the mayor, city commission and city manager in their determinations as to whether any specific art shall be accepted or acquired by the city by: 
a.  Evaluating the appropriateness of the design of proposed art; 
b.  Determining a proper location for such art; 
c.  Evaluating the costs for erection, construction, or installation and annual maintenance costs of such art; 
d.  Determining responsibility for provision of indemnification and acquisition of permits for erection, construction, installation and maintenance; 
e.  Providing information to those making donations of the technical standards and types of permits required by the city for the erection, construction, or installation of such art; 
f.  Recommending acquisition of works of art by the city to be used and made available for the cultural betterment of the city; and 
g.  Coordinating activities with programs and support of museums in the city. 
(3)  To coordinate with city departments, as appropriate; 
(4)  To coordinate and originate cultural and entertainment activities within the city; 
(5)  To qualify community events as being officially recognized; 
(6)  To advocate, seek and encourage public participation in all cultural, fine arts and entertainment events; 
(7)  To maintain a separate, non-profit 501(c)(3) corporation for the purpose of seeking funding from outside sources to support major arts and entertainment special events; 
(8)  To appoint artists, entertainers or other knowledgeable individuals as honorary council members, who shall advise and assist the council in the furtherance of its duties. 
(9)  To serve as the city's official liaison with major arts and entertainment facilities and organizations to attract art and entertainment programs of other governmental, private or public agencies to the city, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Gusman Center for the Performing Arts 
b.  James L. Knight Center 
c.  Tower Theater 
d.  Manuel Artime Center 
e.  Coconut Grove Playhouse 
f.  New World School of the Arts 
g.  Miami Film Festival 
h.  Performing Arts Center 
i.  Miami City Ballet 
j.  Florida Philharmonic 
k.  New World Symphony 
l.  Florida Grand Opera 
(Ord. No. 12192, § 3, 3-7-02; Ord. No. 12976, § 2, 3-13-08; Ord. No. 13309, § 2, 2-9-12)  
Sec. 2-1142. - Membership and appointments; qualifications; officers; terms of office and vacancies. 
(a)  Membership and appointments. The council shall consist of 11 members who shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in official duties, as may be determined and approved by the city commission, composed as follows: 
(1)  Six members appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  Five members appointed by each city commissioner. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  The provisions set forth in section 2-884 of this article shall apply to all members of the council. 
(2)  In addition, each member of the council must possess some specific knowledge, experience, training or teaching in the field of art or entertainment; and 
(c)  Officers. The mayor may appoint the council's chairperson. If the mayor does not appoint the chairperson, the chairperson of the city commission shall make such appointment. A chairperson of the council shall not serve more than four years as council chairperson. The chairperson of the city commission shall select and designate a vice-chairperson from among the council's members. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson of the council during the chairperson's absence. Other officers as deemed necessary shall be designated and serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(d)  Terms of office and vacancies. The provisions set forth in section 2-885 of this article shall apply to all members of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 12192, § 3, 3-7-02; Ord. No. 12976, § 2, 3-13-08)  
Sec. 2-1143. - Meetings; quorum and voting; attendance requirements; parliamentary authority; rules of procedure; minutes; assignment of staff; legal counsel; and notices and filing of records. 
(a)  Meetings. The council shall hold at least one regularly scheduled meeting each month, except during the month of August. Other meetings of the council may be scheduled at the call of the council's chairperson. All meetings shall be open to the public and are subject to the Florida Sunshine Law or Florida Public Records Law. The meetings shall be held at City Hall, located at 3500 Pan American Drive, Miami, Florida, unless the council elects to hold a meeting at another location and such location has been duly noticed. 
(b)  Quorum and voting. The provisions set forth in section 2-887 of this article shall apply to all meetings of the council. 
(c)  Attendance requirements. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this article shall apply to all members of the council. 
(d)  Parliamentary authority; rules of procedure. The council shall use Roberts Rules of Order (current edition) as its parliamentary authority, or may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  Minutes. Copies of minutes of all council meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners and the city manager. 
(f)  Assignment of staff. It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide administrative support to the council, which shall include the services of an individual to keep minutes of meetings, maintain council correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports and perform all other necessary support functions. 
(g)  Legal counsel. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the council. 
(h)  Notices and filing of records. The provisions set forth in section 2-888 of the City Code shall apply to the council. Notice of meetings shall be posted by the city clerk at city hall and other appropriate locations after being apprised by the council of an upcoming meeting(s). Advertised public notice of meetings are not required. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to comply with applicable laws related to filing of records and section 2-889 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 12192, § 3, 3-7-02)  
Sec. 2-1144. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 11 by Ord. No. 12967, Ord. No. 12938, § 1, adopted August 1, 2007, repealed division 11 in its entirety. Formerly, division 11 pertained to the parks advisor board, and derived from Ord. No. 11833, § 3, adopted September 21, 1999, and Ord. No. 12313, § 2, adopted January 23, 2003. 
 
Sec. 2-1144.1. - Established. 
There is hereby established an advisory committee of the city to be known as the "Parks and Recreation Advisory Board" which shall be hereinafter referred to as the "board." 
(Ord. No. 12967, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1144.2. - Purpose, powers and duties. 
The purpose, powers and duties of the board are to: 
(1)  Serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission, mayor, and city manager on citywide parks and recreation policy matters, park and recreation needs and priorities, and as stewards of the parks and recreation master plan(s); 
(2)  Provide periodic review of physical improvements as needed for all city park and recreational facilities; 
(3)  Provide a review of the parks, recreation, playground, after school, weekend, and summer camp programs and other activities and services provided throughout all parks, and make recommendations to the director of the department of parks and recreation; 
(4)  Review the use of city park, playground, and recreation facilities to assess whether such uses meet the recreational needs of the neighborhood and community in which each facility is located; 
(5)  Review the operations and maintenance needs of the parks department's operations division and provide recommendations on needs required to effectively address citywide park and recreation facilities maintenance issues; 
(6)  Provide recommendations on the expansion of existing and development of new undeveloped park land; 
(7)  Review the city's implementation of the recommendations contained within the parks and recreation master plan(s); 
(8)  Participate in charettes and other public forums to obtain comments and suggestions with respect to the city's park and recreation system; 
(9)  Work with existing and future city public trusts and/or agencies that have responsibility over the operations and maintenance of city park land; 
(10)  Discuss, conduct a recorded vote on the board's recommendations, and include such recorded vote(s) and written recommendation(s) in the city commission agenda package for any item upon which the board is making a recommendation to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12967, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1144.3. - Membership; qualifications; terms of office; vacancies; officers. 
(a)  Membership. The board shall consist of at least 11 members who shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in official duties, as may be determined and approved by the commission, and shall be composed as follows: 
(1)  Eleven regular members, all of whom shall be entitled to vote, shall be appointed as follows: 
a.  Five members appointed by the members of the commission, with each commissioner nominating one individual who must reside within his or her commission district of the city; 
b.  Two members who are residents of the city at-large nominated by the mayor and appointed by the commission; 
c.  Four members nominated by the city manager and appointed by the commission as follows: 
1.  One representative who is an existing park program user; 
2.  Two city resident community activists or representatives from city neighborhood community organizations; and 
3.  One individual with an expertise in sports/recreational activities. 
(2)  There shall be no no-voting ex-officio members of the board. 
(b)  Qualifications. In addition to the specific qualifications set forth in subsection (a), the general provisions set forth in section 2-884 shall apply to all members of the board. 
(c)  Terms of office; vacancies. 
(1)  The terms of office of the members of the board shall be as follows: 
a.  Two years; 
b.  Until the nominating commissioner, nominating mayor, or nominating city manager leaves office; or 
c.  Upon recommendation for removal by the nominating commissioner, nominating mayor, or nominating city manager, as applicable, and voted upon by the members of the commission, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  When the nominating commissioner, nominating mayor, or nominating city manager leaves office, the board member's term shall expire. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by nomination by the specific district commissioner, the mayor, or the city manager, as applicable, and appointment by the commission for the unexpired term. Board members shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(3)  No board member shall serve more than four consecutive terms. Nothing set forth in the subsection above shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed to a city board after a hiatus of two years. 
(d)  Officers. The members of the board shall elect from its members a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, and such other officers as may be deemed necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. No chairperson shall serve more than two years in office. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. The secretary shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 12967, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1144.4. - Meetings; quorum; attendance requirements; rules of procedure. 
(a)  Meetings; quorum. All meetings of said board shall be open to the public. A majority of the board's appointed and qualified members at such time shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent plus one of the members present and voting at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. The board shall meet at a minimum on a quarterly basis. 
(b)  Attendance requirements. 
(1)  A member shall be automatically removed if: 
a.  In a given calendar year he or she is absent from three consecutive meetings, or 
b.  He or she is absent from four properly noticed meetings within a 12-month period without an excused absence; 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to those individuals who are members of city boards and who are: 
a.  Reservists in the United States Armed Forces or members of the Florida National Guard, and have been ordered to active military duty for national, state, or homeland defense and due to such duty cannot attend board meetings, or 
b.  Employees of agencies whose services are considered essential for national, state, or homeland defense and due to such services cannot attend board meetings. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The board may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all board meetings shall be furnished to the commissioners, mayor, city manager, and director of the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 12967, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1144.5. - Assignment of staff; liaison(s). 
The director of the parks and recreation department or his/her designee shall serve as board's general liaison to the city manager and other city departments and shall provide services of an individual to keep minutes of meetings, maintain advisory board correspondence, post meetings public notices, file reports and perform all other necessary support functions, and attend all meetings of the board. The city manager may appoint other liaisons to assist for particular projects or purposes from the planning department, department of resilience and public works, department of capital improvements, and such other departments as the city manager deems necessary from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12967, § 2, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 2-1145—2-1149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - COMMUNITY RELATIONS BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1150. - Established. 
There is hereby established a limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "community relations board" and shall be hereinafter referred to as the "board". 
(Ord. No. 11742, § 3, 1-12-99)  
Sec. 2-1151. - Purpose, powers and duties. 
The purpose, powers and duties of the community relations board are: 
(1)  To serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission; 
(2)  To foster mutual understanding, tolerance, and respect among all economic, social, religious and ethnic groups in the city; 
(3)  To make studies in the field of human relations. The board is vested with the power and authority and charged with the duty and responsibility; 
(4)  To attempt to act as conciliator in controversies involving community relations; 
(5)  To cooperate with federal, state, county, and municipal agencies in developing harmonious community relations; 
(6)  To cooperate in the development of educational programs dedicated to the improvement of community relations with, and to enlist the support of, civic leaders; civic, religious, veterans, labor, industrial, commercial and eleemosynary groups; and private agencies engaged in the inculcation of ideals of tolerance, cultural and understanding; 
(7)  To prepare studies, and have studies made, in the field of community relations, and to prepare and disseminate reports of such studies; 
(8)  To recommend to the mayor, commissioners, and the city manager such ordinances to carry out the purposes of the provisions set forth herein; 
(9)  To submit an annual report to the mayor, commissioners, and the city manager; and 
(10)  To make recommendations regarding grants and donations on behalf of the city from foundations and others for the purpose of carrying out the above listed functions, subject to approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 11742, § 3, 1-12-99)  
Sec. 2-1152. - Membership; qualifications; terms of office; vacancies; officers; rules of procedure; meetings; quorum; attendance requirements. 
(a)  Membership. The community relations board members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in official duties, as may be determined and approved by the city commission, and shall be composed as follows: 
(1)  A 13-member advisory board, all of whom shall be entitled to vote, comprised of three members appointed by the mayor and ten members appointed by the members of the commission, with each commissioner nominating two individuals; 
(2)  Ex officio members, consisting of former chairpersons of the board, who are not current members of the board, and representatives from community organizations determined by the city commission, who shall not vote on any matter before the board, and shall not be required to attend meetings of the board. 
(b)  Qualifications; board. The members of the board shall be broadly representative of the social, racial, religious, linguistic, cultural, and economic groups comprising the population of the city. Each member shall be a resident of the city, with an outstanding reputation for community pride, interest, integrity, responsibility, and business or professional ability. 
(c)  Terms of office. The provisions set forth in section 2-885 of this article shall apply to all members of the community relations board. 
(d)  Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur on the board, such vacancy shall be filled by the mayor or city commission after nomination by the commissioner who nominated the member whose position has become vacant. Such appointment shall be effective for the remainder of the unexpired term or until the mayor or the nominating commissioner leaves offices. 
(e)  Officers. The members of the board shall select and designate from its members a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, and such other officers as may be deemed necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. No chairperson shall serve more than two years in office. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. 
(f)  Rules of procedure. The board may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all board meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners and the city manager. 
(g)  Meetings; quorum. All meetings of said board shall be open to the public. A quorum is necessary for the conduct of business by the board and shall consist of five members of the board. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent of the members present and voting at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(h)  Attendance requirements. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this article shall apply to all members of the community relations board. 
(Ord. No. 11742, § 3, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 11999, § 2, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 12016, § 1, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 12434, § 1, 11-13-03; Ord. No. 12970, § 2, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13626, § 2, 9-8-16)  
Sec. 2-1153. - Creation of the office of community relations; assignment of a community relations coordinator and staff. 
There shall be created an "office of community relations" to consist of a community relations coordinator and staff. It shall be the duty of the city manager to designate the community relations coordinator. The community relations coordinator shall provide administrative support to the board to facilitate the board's purposes, powers, and duties, attend all meetings of the board, keep minutes of meetings, prepare reports and documents, maintain board correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports and perform all other necessary support functions required by the board. 
(Ord. No. 12198, § 2, 3-7-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12198, § 2, adopted March 7, 2002, amended § 2-1153 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 2-1153 pertained to the assignment of staff and derived from Ord. No. 11742, § 3, adopted January 12, 1999.  
Secs. 2-1154—2-1174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - CITY OF MIAMI BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 13 by Ord. No. 13557, § 2, adopted September 24, 2015, Ord. No. 12408, § 1, adopted September 25, 2003, repealed division 13 in its entirety, which pertained to the City of Miami district two historic preservation advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 12086, § 2, adopted July 10, 2001. 
 
Sec. 2-1175. - Established. 
There is hereby established a limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "City of Miami Beautification Committee" which shall be hereinafter referred to as the "committee". 
(Ord. No. 13557, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Sec. 2-1176. - Purpose, powers, and duties. 
The purpose, powers, and duties of the committee are: 
(1)  To review projects, contracts, and proposals of various city departments, including, but not limited to, the parks and recreation department, resilience and public works department, and capital improvements and transportation programs, and offer input as to selection or design of landscaping, tree canopy, median maintenance, traffic circle maintenance, swale maintenance or other such factors that may affect the aesthetic quality of the project or proposal; 
(2)  To hold public hearings to receive public input on beautification efforts pertaining to specific projects or in general; 
(3)  To issue recommendations to the city manager or designee on any actions taken by the city as it pertains to beautification and aesthetic enhancement; 
(4)  To serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission and recommend, in writing, any proposed policy changes that would enhance the beautification and aesthetic appeal of the city; and 
(5)  To exercise all powers in subsections (1)—(4) above, provided that the exercise of the same does not unduly or unreasonably delay city projects. 
(Ord. No. 13557, § 2, 9-24-15; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-1177. - Membership; term of office; vacancies; officers; rules of procedure; meetings; quorum; attendance requirements. 
(a)  Composition, appointment, and qualifications. The committee shall consist of nine regular voting members. All voting members shall be invested in the city and serve without compensation. Each member shall have an interest in, or experience relating to, landscaping, landscape architecture, gardening, construction, the natural environment, or beautification. Members shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Each of the five city commissioners shall appoint one person to serve as voting members of the committee. Any such voting member shall be a city resident, work in the city, or own real property in the city; 
(2)  One person shall be appointed by the mayor, who shall be a city resident, work in the city, or own real property in the city; and 
(3)  One person shall be appointed by the city manager who shall be a city resident, work in the city, or own real property in the city; 
(4)  One person shall be appointed by Miami Neighborhoods United (MNU); and 
(5)  One person shall be appointed by the Downtown Development Authority (DDA); and 
(6)  No alternates shall be appointed. 
(b)  Terms of office. The terms of office of the members of the committee shall be: 
(1)  One year; 
(2)  Until the nominating commissioner, manager, or mayor leaves office; or 
(3)  Until recommended for removal, at the will of the nominating commissioner, mayor, or city manager, voted upon by the members of the city commission, whichever occurs first. When the nominating commissioner, mayor, or city manager leaves office, the committee member's term shall expire. 
(c)  Minimum attendance requirements. It is expected that appointed members of the beautification committee attend each meeting. Any member of the committee who is absent from more than three consecutive meetings shall automatically be deemed to have vacated his or her position. 
(d)  Removal. The city commission shall have the power to remove any member, for cause, as articulated by the city commission, by four-fifths (?ths) vote of its membership or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation. 
(e)  Vacancies. In the event a vacancy occurs on the committee, whether automatically, by vote of the city commission, or by resignation of the member, the mayor, the city manager, or city commissioner who appointed the vacating member, may, subject to ratification by the city commission, appoint a qualified person to fill the remaining term of the vacant position. The appointment may be made at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission or as soon as practicable thereafter. Such appointment shall be consistent with the membership requirements stated in subsection 2-1177(a) of the City Code. If a vacancy occurs pursuant to a nominating commissioner, manager, or mayor's departure, then the vacancy shall be filled by nomination of the successor. 
(f)  Waiver. The city commission shall have the power to waive any of the requirements of subsection 2-1177(a) of the City Code by four-fifths (?ths) vote of its membership or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation. 
(g)  Officers. The committee shall have its first meeting within 30 days of the final appointment of all committee members. At the initial organizational meeting, the members of the committee shall select and designate a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the members of the committee who shall serve at the pleasure of the committee. 
(h)  Meetings and quorum. All meetings of the committee shall be noticed and open to the public. A minimum of 50 percent plus one of the committee's total members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent plus one of the members present and voting at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(i)  Rules of procedure. The committee may adopt its own rules of procedure governing its meetings which shall be filed with the city clerk. The committee shall comply with all requirements of F.S. ch. 119 (Public Records) and F.S. ch. 286 (Sunshine Law), of the Florida Statutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be promptly made available by the city clerk and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 13557, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Sec. 2-1178. - Legal counsel. 
The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the committee and shall provide legal advice on all matters considered by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 13557, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Sec. 2-1179. - City manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide full cooperation and sufficient personnel for administrative necessary support to the committee, including assignment of a particular person to act as liaison and secretary to the committee. The city manager or designee may participate in deliberations of the committee and may give technical and policy advice to the committee as requested. 
(Ord. No. 13557, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Secs. 2-1180—2-1189. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13.5. - VIRGINIA KEY ADVISORY BOARD[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 13.5 by Ord. No. 13583, § 2, adopted January 14, 2016, Ord. No. 12408, § 1, adopted September 25, 2003, repealed division 13.5 in its entirety, which pertained to the City of Miami district five historic preservation advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 12077, § 2, adopted June 14, 2001. 
 
Sec. 2-1190. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board to be known as the "Virginia Key Advisory Board" which shall be hereinafter referred to as the "board." 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Sec. 2-1191. - Membership, composition, appointments, qualifications, minimum attendance requirements, removal, appointment to fill vacancies, and term. 
(a)  Membership, composition, appointment, and qualifications. The board shall consist of 13 members as follows: 
(1)  The city commissioner of District 2 shall appoint one person to serve. Such person shall be a city resident, work in the city, or own real property in the city. 
(2)  One person shall be designated by the mayor. Such person shall be a city resident, work in the city, or own real property in the city. 
(3)  One person shall be the director of the department of real estate and asset management. 
(4)  One person shall be the director of the department parks and recreation. 
(5)  One person shall be designated by the Village of Key Biscayne Village Council. 
(6)  One person shall be designated by the Miami-Dade County Commissioner for District 7. 
(7)  One person shall be designated by the Dade Heritage Trust. 
(8)  One person shall be designated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation. 
(9)  One person shall be appointed by the city commission at-large. In addition to the membership criteria in subsection 2-1191(a), such person shall have a demonstrable interest or expertise in recreational boating. 
(10)  One person shall be designated by the Urban Environment League of Greater Miami. 
(11)  One person shall be designated by the Tropical Audubon Society. 
(12)  One person shall be designated by the Sierra Club. 
(13)  One person shall be designated by the Historic Virginia Key Beach Park Trust. 
All members, with the exception of those members appointed pursuant to subsections 2-1191(a)(3) and (4), shall be voting members and be invested or interested in the city and in Virginia Key and serve without compensation. With the exception of those members appointed pursuant to subsections 2-1191(a)(3) and (4), persons so selected shall become members of the board when confirmed by the city commission. Those enumerated city employee members in subsections 2-1191(a)(3) and (4) shall serve in an ex-officio capacity. No alternates shall be appointed. 
(b)  Minimum attendance requirements. It is expected that all members of the board shall attend every meeting. Absences and attendance requirements for city appointees shall be governed by section 2-886. The board shall meet every other month unless required to meet on a more frequent basis to fulfill the requirements of subsections 2-1192(i) or (j). 
(c)  Removal. The city commission shall have the power to remove any member by majority vote without a finding of cause. 
(d)  Vacancies. Any vacancy that occurs on the board, whether automatically, by vote of the city commission, or by resignation of the member, shall be filled pursuant to the terms of section 2-1191(a). 
(e)  Waiver. The city commission shall have the power to waive any of the requirements of section 2-1191 of this Code, as amended, by four-fifths vote of its membership or a unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation. 
(f)  Term. With the exception of the director of the department of real estate and asset management and the director of the department of parks and recreation, all members shall serve a term of two years. Board members shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Sec. 2-1192. - Purpose, powers, and duties. 
The purpose, powers, and duties of the board, relative to the entirety of Virginia Key, are: 
(1)  To review any and consider all available information pertaining to the best mode of governance for Virginia Key; 
(2)  To review and consider what the short and long term vision will be for the Marine Stadium as to its restoration, development, function, use, role and contribution to the city and the community in general; 
(3)  To oversee and guide all island wide land in relation to recreation , thematic integration, sustainable transportation, impact of climate change, as well as natural and manmade features following the 2010 Master Plan; 
(4)  To review and consider the best business model for the Marine Stadium to operate in a manner which enriches the city and the community in the arts, recreation, culture, sports and education while operating sustainably and generating sufficient revenues over expenses so that it will function like an enterprise fund which will not need to access the general operating budget of the city on a recurring basis; 
(5)  To review and consider the planning, maintenance, and operational challenges for Virginia Key in terms of the kinds of open spaces, events, shows, features, goals, objectives and promotions that are consistent with the 2010 Master Plan; 
(6)  To hold public hearings, public meetings or public workshops to receive and to discuss public input, and to formulate any recommendations, findings or recommendations of the board; 
(7)  To issue a written report that is made available to the public and make a presentation before the city commission by the board's chairperson at least once per year making recommendations regarding all or any of the foregoing matters and related issues and concerns; 
(8)  To serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission and recommend any changes to city laws, rules, regulations, practices, policies, or to help the city better promote the restoration, reopening, and success of Marine Stadium and Virginia Key; 
(9)  To review and recommend to the director of the planning and zoning department for approval or disapproval of applications for any zoning change or future land use plan ("FLUM") amendment to the comprehensive plan on Virginia Key; and 
(10)  Notwithstanding anything contrary in chapter 18 of the City Code, to review and recommend to the city manager for approval or disapproval of any procurement, as defined in section 18-73, as amended, that exclusively affects Virginia Key. 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Sec. 2-1193. - Officers; rules of procedure; meeting; quorum; and public notice. 
(a)  At the initial organizational meeting, the members of the board shall select and designate a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the members of the board who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The chairperson shall reserve the right to appoint an executive committee and to delegate tasks to various subcommittees of the whole. 
(b)  The board shall use Robert's Rules of Order as the rules for the conduct of their official business, provided, that in addition, the Board may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and take actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure, if adopted, shall be filed with the city clerk. The board and any executive committee or subcommittee, if applicable, shall comply with all requirements of F.S. ch. 119 (Public Records) and F.S. ch. 286 (Sunshine Law). The minutes of each meeting shall be promptly made available by the city clerk and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  All meetings of the board shall be noticed and open to the public. The public shall be encouraged to submit oral and written comments to the board. At all meetings, a minimum of 50 percent plus one of the members who are present shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting or conducting any business. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent plus one of the members present at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Sec. 2-1194. - Legal counsel. 
The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the board and shall provide legal advice on all matters considered by the board. 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Sec. 2-1195. - City manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide full cooperation and sufficient personnel for administrative necessary support to the board, including assignment of a particular person to act as liaison and secretary to the board. The city manager may participate in deliberations of the board and may give technical and policy advice to the board as requested. 
(Ord. No. 13583, § 2, 1-14-16)  
Secs. 2-1196—2-1200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - RESERVED[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13517, § 2, adopted May 14, 2015, repealed the former division 14, §§ 2-1201—2-1207 in its entirety, which pertained to the homeland defense/neighborhood improvement bond program oversight board, and derived from Ord. No. 12177, § 3, adopted January 10, 2002; Ord. No. 12299, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 19, 2002; Ord. No. 12739, § 2, adopted November 3, 2005, and Ord. No. 13172, § 1, adopted May 13, 2010. 
 
Secs. 2-1201—2-1214. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - RESERVED[33] 

Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12408, § 1, adopted September 25, 2003, repealed division 15 in its entirety, which pertained to the City of Miami district three historic preservation advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 12234.1, § 2, adopted June 13, 2002. 
 
Secs. 2-1215—2-1230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - RESERVED[34] 

Footnotes: 
--- (34) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12386, § 3, adopted July 17, 2003, repealed division 16 in its entirety, which pertained to the sister cities coordinating council and derived from Ord. No. 12251, § 3, adopted July 9, 2002. 
 
Secs. 2-1231—2-1249. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - COCONUT GROVE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD (BID BOARD)[35] 

Footnotes: 
--- (35) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13059, § 2, adopted March 12, 2009, repealed and reenacted division 17 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 17, §§ 2-1250—2-1256, pertained to the Coconut Grove Business Improvement Committee (BIC), and derived from Ord. No. 12564, § 4, adopted July 22, 2004; Ord. No. 12781, § 1, adopted March 9, 2006; Ord. No. 12908, § 1, adopted April 12, 2007, and Ord. No. 12931, § 1, adopted July 10, 2007. 
 
Sec. 2-1250. - Establishment and purpose. 
The "Coconut Grove Business Improvement District Board" of the city ("BID board") is re-established to stabilize and improve retail and other business in the areas described in sections 35-221 and 54-341 of the Code of the City of Miami, as amended ("Code"), and the assessed area known as the BID more particularly described in Resolution No. 18-0294 adopted on July 12, 2018, and later confirmed in Resolution No. 19-0024 adopted on January 10, 2019, through promotion, management, marketing, and other similar services, including but not limited to, coordination, funding, implementation and maintenance of infrastructure improvements, and other projects. These areas shall collectively be described herein as the "area." 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1251. - Composition; appointment and terms of office of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The BID board shall have nine voting members appointed as follows: 
(1)  The commissioner for district 2 shall be a voting member who shall not require confirmation. 
(2)  The chief executive officer of the Miami Parking Authority, or his/her designee, shall be a voting member who shall not require confirmation. 
(3)  One voting member shall be nominated by the owners of the property located at CocoWalk, 3015 Grand Avenue, Coconut Grove, FL 33133 and submitted to the district 2 commissioner for appointment and confirmation. 
(4)  One voting member shall be nominated by the owners of the property located at Mayfair in the Grove, 3390 Mary Street, Coconut Grove, FL 33133 and submitted to the district 2 commissioner for appointment and confirmation. 
(5)  The remaining five voting members will be seated through the following elective process enumerated in subsection (6). The remaining five voting members shall, to the extent practical, represent an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail, or property owner. 
(6)  The five voting members cited in subsection (5) above, will in accordance with the BID board by-laws, be selected for a slate created by the nominating committee of the board, then confirmed by the board by a 51 percent vote of approval, then elected by more than 50 percent of votes cast by the property owners of the BID for approval of the slate. Subsequent to election, the commissioner of district 2 will confirm the five new voting members. 
(7)  The commissioner for district 2 may appoint non-voting members as may be necessary from time to time, at the discretion of the district 2 commissioner, who shall not require confirmation. 
(8)  Nomination of initial members of the re-established BID board. The district 2 commissioner shall appoint a BID board nominating committee to solicit and screen applications, interview candidates and submit nominations to the district 2 commissioner for appointment to the initial term of the re-established BID board. 
(9)  Initial terms. The initial nine voting members shall serve terms as follows: 
1 Commissioner district 2 ..... 	No Term Limit 
2 MPA Chief Executive Officer or designee ..... 	No Term Limit 
3 CocoWalk representative ..... 	3 years 
4 Mayfair representative ..... 	2 years 
5 Representative of an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail property, or property owner(s) ..... 	1 year 
6 Representative of an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail property, or property owner(s) ..... 	3 years 
7 Representative of an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail property, or property owner(s) ..... 	2 years 
8 Representative of an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail property, or property owner(s) ..... 	1 year 
9 Representative of an area hotel, restaurant, office, retail property, or property owner(s) ..... 	3 years 
 
(b)  After the initial term as identified in subsection (a)(9) above, members shall serve terms of three years expiring on August 31 of the third year following their appointment. Members shall serve a maximum of nine consecutive years, provided that upon the unanimous vote of the BID board, the city commission may, by unanimous vote, extend the term of a member for one additional period of three years. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the initial nine voting members, or anyone appointed to fill a vacancy of a voting member during the initial term, shall not have their initial term, as identified in subsection (a)(9) above, counted against the maximum nine consecutive years. Members shall continue to serve until their successors have been nominated and appointed. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term only. This subsection shall be inapplicable to the members identified in subsections 2-1251(a)(1) and (2). 
(c)  Quorum shall consist of a majority of the then appointed/elected voting members. 
(d)  The chairperson of the BID board shall have the power to appoint the members to the various committees which the chairperson shall have the power to establish from time to time. 
(e)  Protection from personal liability. The BID board shall maintain officers and director's liability insurance coverage at all times, in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the city's director of risk management. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit or waive sovereign immunity. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13171, § 2, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 13255, § 2, 3-10-11; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1252. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members of the BID board shall: 
(1)  Reside; 
(2)  Work; 
(3)  Own (or be the designated representative of the owner of) a business; or 
(4)  Own (or be the designated representative of the owner of) real property in the city. 
For purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to "own real property" where the person is the owner of the fee simple title, or owns the leasehold interest on the property under a lease having an original term of at least 30 years. All members of the BID board shall be individuals of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability and acumen. No officer or employee of the city, other than the district 2 commissioner, shall be a member of the BID board. 
(b)  Before assuming the duties of the office, each member shall take and subscribe to the oath of office required of officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Sec. 2-1253. - Meetings; parliamentary authority, rules and regulations; compensation of members. 
The parliamentary authority of the BID board shall be Robert's Rules of Order (current edition) unless the BID board adopts its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. The BID board shall hold regular meetings no less often than once each quarter. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules of the BID board. All meetings of the BID board shall be open to the public. Each member of the BID board shall serve without remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Sec. 2-1254. - Removal of members. 
Notwithstanding anything in the Code to the contrary, by resolution specifying facts sufficient to advise a BID board member as to the basis for his or her removal and after reasonable notice to the BID board member and an opportunity for the member to be heard, the BID board, by a 51 percent vote of the board, may remove a board member: 
(1)  For cause as defined in F.S. ch. 112; 
(2)  If the member ceases to meet the qualification criteria set forth in section 2-1252 or any additional qualifications set forth in the current BID board by-laws; or 
(3)  As otherwise provided by law. 
For purposes of this section, being absent from three consecutive regular BID board meetings or committee meetings or from four regular BID board meetings or committee meetings during a calendar year shall constitute good cause for removal. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13171, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 2-1255. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The BID board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Subject to city commission approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, appoint an executive director and fix the terms of engagement and compensation of the executive director, which shall be paid from funds available to the BID board. 
(2)  Prepare an annual budget to be presented to the city commission for approval. 
(3)  Plan, propose, and implement programs and services for the purpose of stabilizing and improving the BID through promotion, management, marketing, and other similar services, such as streetscape improvements. 
(4)  Plan and propose to the city and the city commission, within the area, public improvements, including but not limited to renovation, repair, remodeling, reconstruction or other changes in existing buildings and streetscape which in the opinion of the BID board will aid in the economic growth of the area. 
(5)  Recommend to the city commission or the department of off-street parking, the acquisition by purchase or otherwise, of any land and any other property, real or personal, or any rights or interests therein, which it may determine is reasonably necessary for any project or purpose of this article. 
(6)  Cooperate with any governmental agency or public body for the purposes authorized herein. 
(7)  Determine the appropriate expenditures from the Coconut Grove business district improvement trust fund as defined in section 35-221 of the City Code. 
(8)  Review special event applications in the Coconut Grove special events district and approve or reject such applications as set forth in section 54-341 of the City Code. 
(9)  Solicit and accept grants in cooperation with the city office of grants administration. The BID board shall contact the office of grants administration for assistance in project planning, proposal writing, application assembly, and monitoring financial and budgetary compliance with grantor agency guidelines. All grant applications shall be submitted to the office of grants administration for review and coordination prior to submission. The BID board shall be responsible for implementing and managing all of its grants. Any and all other contributions and financial support from individuals, private business interests, the general public, governmental entities, corporations and organizations, foundations and other philanthropic entities shall follow the approvals established by the city. 
(10)  Exercise all powers incidental to the effective and expedient exercise of the foregoing powers to the extent not in conflict or inconsistent herewith. 
(b)  The city manager retains sole authority to execute contracts and agreements subject to the limitations of chapter 18, article III, of the City Code. However, the city manager may delegate to the executive director the authority to execute contracts consistent with the provisions of chapter 18, article III, of the City Code, subject to BID board approval. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1256. - Employees generally. 
(a)  Executive director. The executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the BID board and shall be a person of good moral character and have a reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability. No member of the BID board shall be eligible to hold the position of executive director. Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, the executive director shall take and subscribe to the oath as required of members of the BID board. He/she shall be the chief executive officer of the BID board and shall not, while serving as executive director, actively engage in any other business or profession. Subject to the approval of the BID board, and direction by it when necessary, he/she shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the preparation of plans and the performance of the functions of the BID board in the manner authorized in this article. He/she shall attend all meetings of the BID board and shall render to the BID board and the city manager a monthly report covering the activities and financial condition of the BID board. In the temporary absence or disability of the executive director, the BID board may designate a qualified person to perform the duties of the office as acting executive director. The executive director shall furnish the BID board with such information or reports governing the operation of the BID board as the board may from time to time require. At the time of the re-establishment of the BID, the executive director of the BID shall continue to be the individual the city commission approved in Resolution No. 18-0323 with the salary and benefits currently provided. The executive director shall have no civil service rights or privileges. 
(b)  Staff. Subject to the policy directives of the BID board and budget limitations, the executive director may engage such staff members as are necessary for the efficient operation of the BID board. Staff members shall have no civil service rights or privileges. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1257. - Annual budget; source of funds. 
(a)  The city commission approved the fiscal year 2018-2019 BID budget in Resolution No. R-18-0392 adopted on September 13, 2018. Commencing fiscal year 2019-2020, consistent with the city's budget process, the BID Board shall submit to the city manager a BID budget request pertaining to management, operation, and maintenance expenditures and delineating the financial responsibility of the city for certain categories including but not limited to insurance, security, utilities, and maintenance to be approved by the city commission. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the BID board from submitting a supplemental budget to the city commission for approval. 
(b)  No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the city commission of the BID board budget for that year and all expenditure shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  In conjunction with the submission of the budget, the BID board shall submit a plan reflecting the proposed operations, activities, improvements, and maintenance plans for the forthcoming fiscal year. The city commission may review and deny any item contained in the plan within 30 days from the date of its submission by the BID board. 
(d)  No provision contained in this division shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500—18-503 of the City Code. 
(e)  The operations of the BID board shall be principally financed from the following sources and such other sources as may be approved by the city commission: 
(1)  Contributions, gifts, and/or donations to the BID board for the performance of its functions. 
(2)  Proceeds of a special assessment as authorized by Resolution No. 18-0294, adopted July 12, 2018, and later confirmed in Resolution No. 19-0024, adopted on January 10, 2019. 
(3)  Parking waiver fees as authorized by section 35-224 of the City Code. 
(4)  Parking surcharge fees as authorized by section 35-342 of the City Code. 
(5)  Sidewalk cafe fees as authorized by section 54-223 of the City Code. 
(6)  Event supplemental fees as authorized by section 54-343 of the City Code. 
(7)  Banner fees as authorized by section 54-344 of the City Code. 
(8)  Grant proceeds. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1258. - Annual report and audit. 
(a)  The BID board shall submit to the mayor and city commission an annual report and an annual audit. The audit shall be performed by an external auditor who is a certified public accountant. 
(b)  Additionally, the city shall have the right to audit any books, accounts, expenditures, receivables, and contracts of the BID board at any time. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Sec. 2-1259. - Notices and filing of records. 
The provisions set forth in section 2-888 of the City Code shall apply to the BID board. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1260. - Participation in BID programs. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the members of the BID board and any of its committees shall have the right to participate in programs intended to comply with the requirements, purposes and reasons for the special assessment, including but not limited to cooperative advertising opportunities in the same way as may be available to their commercial peers in the Coconut Grove business community. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Sec. 2-1261. - Inapplicability of sunset provision. 
The BID board shall not be subject to the provisions of section 2-892 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09; Ord. No. 13833, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1262. - Transfer of assets. 
Any and all personalty under the control of the Coconut Grove business improvement committee, shall transfer upon the creation of the BID board, to the BID board. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Sec. 2-1263. - Counsel. 
The office of the city attorney shall provide legal services to the BID board as may be necessary and requested by the BID board. 
(Ord. No. 13059, § 2, 3-12-09)  
Secs. 2-1264—2-1270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - SEA LEVEL RISE COMMITTEE[36] 

Footnotes: 
--- (36) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 18 by Ord. No. 13640, § 2, adopted October 13, 2016, Ord. No. 13476, § 2, adopted September 11, 2014, repealed the former division 18, §§ 2-1271—2-1284 in its entirety, which pertained to the community technology advisory board, and derived from Ord. No. 12748, § 3, adopted December 15, 2005. 
 
Sec. 2-1271. - Establishment and purpose. 
The "Sea Level Rise Committee" ("committee") is established to serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission. The committee shall recommend changes to the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended ("City Code") and any City of Miami ("city") policies necessary to help the City and its residents adapt to and prepare for the adverse impacts of sea level rise, including impacts related to storm surges, flood damage prevention, infrastructure, public health, water supply and quality, housing, and socioeconomics. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1272. - Composition; appointment and terms of office of members; filling of vacancies. 
Committee members originally appointed pursuant to Resolution No. 16-0254 shall remain on the committee, subject to the terms contained herein. 
(a)  Composition and qualifications. The committee shall consist of nine voting members who shall be city residents, work in the city, own a business in the city, or own real property in the city. All voting members shall be invested in the city and serve without compensation. In addition: 
(1)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in civil engineering or architecture with a focus on infrastructure; 
(2)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in community and real estate development; 
(3)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in one or more of the following areas: climatology, geophysics, coastal management, oceanography, or coastal ocean science; 
(4)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in emergency management; 
(5)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in economics; and 
(6)  At least one member shall possess an expertise in advocating for vulnerable low-income communities. 
(b)  Appointment of voting members. The nine members shall be appointed to the committee as follows: 
(1)  Each of the five city commissioners shall appoint one voting member to be ratified by majority vote of the city commission; 
(2)  The mayor shall appoint one voting member to be ratified by majority vote of the city commission; 
(3)  The city manager shall appoint one voting member to be ratified by majority vote of the city commission; 
(4)  The city commission at-large shall appoint two members; and 
(5)  No alternates shall be appointed. 
(c)  Automatic waiver for special counsel to the city and local government employees. Any appointee contemplated in subsection (b) above (appointment of voting members) who may be currently serving as special counsel to the city by performing basic non-litigation legal services for the city may continue to do so and receive an automatic waiver from the commission to sit on the committee and continue assisting the city pursuant to City Code sections 2-612 and 2-614, as amended. Similarly, any appointee contemplated in subsection (b) above (appointment of voting members) who may be currently employed by Miami-Dade County, Florida, or any municipality therein, may receive an automatic waiver from the commission to sit on the committee and continue his or her government employment pursuant to section 2-884 of the City Code, as amended. 
(d)  Term of voting members. The voting members shall serve for a two-year term, but may continue to serve beyond the two-year term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Membership shall be limited to three full, consecutive terms; however, this limitation shall not prohibit any individual from being reappointed to the committee after a hiatus of two years. Likewise, the limitation of membership to three full, consecutive terms may be waived for a particular voting member by a unanimous vote of the members of the city commission to permit the voting member to be reconsidered annually for an additional one-year term. 
(e)  Minimum attendance requirements. Voting members should attend each meeting. Any voting member who is absent from more than three meetings in a given calendar year shall automatically be deemed to have vacated his or her position, except that absences allowed pursuant to subsection 2-886(d) of the City Code shall not be counted. A voting member shall be deemed absent from a meeting when the member is not present at the meeting at least 75 percent of its duration. Nevertheless, the provisions of this subsection may be waived by a four-fifths vote of the members of the full city commission pursuant to subsection 2-886(c). 
(f)  Removal. The city commission shall have the power to remove any member by majority vote without a finding of cause. The voting members appointed by the mayor and the city manager may also be removed by the appointing official without a finding of cause subject to ratification by majority vote of the city commission. 
(g)  Resignation. Voting members may resign by submitting a signed letter of resignation to the city clerk. The city clerk shall immediately notify the appointing official of the vacancy. It shall be the obligation of each voting member to notify the city clerk if the member ceases to meet the qualification criteria set forth in subsection (a) above (composition and qualifications). 
(h)  Vacancies. In the event a vacancy occurs on the committee, whether automatically, by vote of the city commission, or by resignation of the member, the city commission may, by majority vote, appoint a qualified person to fill the remaining term of the vacant position. The appointment may be made at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission or as soon as practicable thereafter. All such appointments shall be consistent with the membership requirements stated in subsection (a) above (composition and qualifications). 
(i)  Waiver. The city commission shall have the power to waive any of the requirements of subsection (a) above (composition and qualifications) by four-fifths vote of the members of the full city commission, or a unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1273. - Officers and subcommittees. 
(a)  At the initial organizational meeting, the members of the committee shall select and designate a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the members of the committee who shall serve at the pleasure of the committee. The chairperson shall reserve the right to appoint an executive committee and to delegate tasks to various subcommittees of the whole. 
(b)  Subcommittees. The chairperson may establish subcommittees from time to time. Decisions of all subcommittees are subject to ratification by majority vote of the full committee, or a unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from removal, resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1274. - Meetings, parliamentary authority, rules and regulations. 
(a)  Procedure. The committee shall adopt its own order of business, rules of procedure, and bylaws to govern its meetings and actions not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which shall be filed with the city clerk. Until the committee adopts its own rules of procedure, it shall follow Robert's Rules of Order (current edition) except that the provisions set forth herein shall control in case of conflict. 
(b)  Notice and public participation. All meetings and workshops of the committee and any of its subcommittees shall be noticed and open to the public as required by the state's Sunshine Law. In addition, the public shall be encouraged to submit oral and written comments to the committee. 
(c)  Minutes. The minutes of each meeting and workshop shall be taken by applicable staff and promptly made available by the city clerk. Such records shall be open to public inspection. 
Copies of minutes of all committee meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, city commissioners, city attorney, and city manager. 
(d)  Quorum. A minimum of 50 percent plus one of the Committee's total voting members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent plus one of the voting members present at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1275. - Powers. 
(a)  The committee shall have the power to: 
(1)  Hold public hearings to receive public and expert input; 
(2)  Review any and all available information pertaining to sea level rise, including but not limited to its adverse impacts related to storm surges, flood damage prevention, infrastructure, public health, water supply and quality, housing, and socioeconomics; 
(3)  Request reports regarding the above from city departments through the city manager's office or designee; 
(4)  Comment on and request reports from city departments through the city manager's office or designee regarding updates to city infrastructure that may relate to the city's ability to adapt to sea level rise and its adverse impacts, including but not limited to roads, transportation, solid waste facilities, storm water facilities, and buildings; 
(5)  Comment on and request reports from city departments through the city manager's office or designee concerning changes to the city's zoning ordinance and other land development regulations, flood damage prevention, or historic or environmental preservation regulations that may relate to the city's ability to adapt to sea level rise and its adverse impacts; 
(6)  Inventory city infrastructure, including but not limited to roads, transportation, solid waste facilities, storm water facilities, buildings, and communities and residencies most at risk from sea level rise and its adverse impacts; 
(7)  Identify areas of the city most at risk from sea level rise and its adverse impacts; 
(8)  Identify applicable resilient design standards and best practices for adaptation, mitigation, and other considerations related to sea level rise and its adverse impacts; 
(9)  Recommend appropriate sea level rise projections to be used in city infrastructure projects and planning; 
(10)  Recommend, from time to time, matters pertaining to the city's ability to adapt to sea level rise and its adverse impacts to be considered by the city's planning, zoning and appeals board; the city's historic and environmental preservation board; or other relevant city boards, committees, or commissions; 
(11)  Recommend any changes to the City Code, policies, guides, and standards, including but not limited to the matters listed herein, necessary to help the city and its residents adapt to and prepare for the adverse impacts of sea level rise; 
(12)  Undertake joint investigations or alliances regarding the above with educational, academic, not-for-profit, and other governmental entities and offices; 
(13)  Subject to city commission approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, engage experts who, as independent contractors, will provide analyses, reports, recommendations, and other resources, which shall be paid from funds available to the committee; and 
(14)  Prepare an annual budget to be presented to the city commission for approval. 
(b)  The city manager shall retain sole authority to execute contracts and agreements subject to the limitations of City Charter and City Code. However, the city manager may delegate to the city's office of sustainable initiatives the authority to execute contracts on behalf of the committee consistent with the limitations of City Charter and City Code, subject to committee approval. 
(c)  Any resolution of the committee recommending changes to city policy to the city commission shall be placed on the next feasible city commission agenda as a discussion item. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1276. - Annual budget. 
(a)  Procedure. Upon the effective date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this division derives, the committee shall establish a fiscal year which coincides with that of the city. Within 60 calendar days following the effective date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this division derives, the committee shall submit to the city commission, in a form acceptable to the city manager, a mandatory annual budget for adoption and ratification by majority vote of the city commission. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the committee from submitting a supplemental budget to the city commission for approval. All expenditures shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(b)  Expenditures. No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the city commission of the committee budget for that year. In addition, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Expenditures shall primarily be made for the engagement of experts and consultants to provide analyses, reports, recommendations, and other resources or to implement programs to help the city and its residents adapt to and prepare for the adverse impacts related to sea level rise. 
(2)  No more than ten percent of the committee's budget shall be used to reimburse voting members or city employees for attendance at various conferences, seminars, and events. Voting members of the committee shall comply with the state's Sunshine Law when attending such conferences, seminars, and events. 
(c)  No conflicts of interest. Voting members of the committee shall comply with the conflict of interest provisions of the City Code, the conflict of interest and ethics ordinance of Miami-Dade County, and all other laws that may apply when preparing the annual budget and expenditures of the committee. 
(d)  No deficiencies. No provision contained in this division shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500—18-503 of the City Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1277. - Annual and quarterly reports. 
(a)  Annual report. The chairperson shall submit an annual report to the city manager on January 15 of each year pursuant to section 2-890 of the City Code, as amended. 
(b)  Quarterly report. The committee shall submit reports to the city commission and present the findings and recommendations of said reports at a meeting of the city commission on at least a quarterly basis. 
(c)  Copies. Copies of the committee's reports shall be made available online. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1278. - Legal counsel. 
The office of the city attorney shall provide an attorney to serve as legal counsel to the committee and shall provide legal advice on all matters considered by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1279. - Liaison(s) to committee and assignment of staff. 
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this Code, the city manager shall designate the administration's liaison(s) to the committee, at least one of which shall be from the city's office of sustainable initiatives. It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide administrative support to the committee, which shall include the services of an individual to maintain committee correspondence, post meeting notices with the city clerk, file reports, and perform all other necessary support functions. In addition to any administration liaison(s) assigned to the committee, the city manager shall designate representatives from the departments of public works, building, planning and zoning, and the office of capital improvements to attend committee meetings. Upon the committee's request, the city manager may also participate in deliberations of the committee and may offer technical and policy advice. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 2-1280. - Inapplicability of sunset provision. 
The committee shall not be subject to the provisions of section 2-892 of the City Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13640, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Secs. 2-1281—2-1300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - HOUSING AND COMMERCIAL LOAN COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-1301. - Establishment and purpose. 
There is hereby created and established a board, to be known as the housing and commercial loan committee, for the following purposes: 
(1)  Serving as the affordable housing advisory committee required by the Florida SHIP Program; 
(2)  Approving or disapproving housing and commercial loans and grants to be provided by the city through any funds administered by the department of community development; 
(3)  Providing oversight and ongoing recommendations on affordable housing issues; and 
(4)  Performing such other duties and responsibilities relative to affordable housing and small business development as may be set forth herein or incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1302. - Functions, powers and duties generally. 
The housing and commercial loan committee is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Approve or disapprove housing and commercial loans and grants to be provided by the city through any funds administered by the department of community development. Those funds include, but are not limited to, the following: Community Development Block Grant ("CDBG"), HOME Investment Partnerships ("HOME"), Housing Opportunities for People with AIDS ("HOPWA"), Florida State Housing Initiatives Partnership ("SHIP"), and the Affordable Housing Trust Fund ("AHTF"). 
(2)  Establish housing related and commercial loan policies. 
(3)  Approve the local affordable housing incentive strategy recommendations by affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the board. 
(4)  Triennially, review established policies, procedures, ordinances, land development regulations, and the adopted comprehensive plan and recommend, if necessary, specific actions or initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing. 
(5)  Triennially submit a report to the city commission which includes recommendations and evaluates the implementation of affordable housing incentives in the following areas, if applicable: 
a.  Expediting the approval process for development permits for affordable housing to a greater degree than other projects; 
b.  Modification of impact-fee requirements, including reduction or waiver of fees and alternative methods of fee payment for affordable housing; 
c.  The allowance of flexibility in densities for affordable housing; 
d.  The reservation of infrastructure capacity for housing for very-low-income persons, low-income persons, and moderate-income persons; 
e.  The allowance of affordable accessory residential units in residential zoning districts; 
f.  The reduction of parking and setback requirements for affordable housing; 
g.  The allowance of flexible lot configurations, including zero-lot-line configurations for affordable housing; 
h.  The modification of street requirements for affordable housing; 
i.  The establishment of a process by which the city considers, before adoption, policies, procedures, ordinances, regulations, or plan provisions that increase the cost of housing; 
j.  The preparation of a printed inventory of locally owned public lands suitable for affordable housing; 
k.  The support of development near transportation hubs and major employment centers and mixed-use developments; 
l.  Other affordable housing incentives identified by the board. 
In addition to the authority granted to the housing and commercial loan committee in subsection (1) of this section 2-1302 to approve, disapprove and restructure housing and commercial loans and grants, the city manager is also authorized to approve or disapprove housing loans and grants, and subordination agreements, restructuring plans and repayment plans for loans and grants, provided under the city's single family rehabilitation and homebuyers financing programs. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13124, § 2, 1-14-10)  
Sec. 2-1303. - Governing body-composition and appointments; terms of office and vacancies; membership qualifications; procedures for appointment of members including the public advocate; officers; quorum and voting; meetings; and attendance requirements. 
(a)  Governing body-composition and appointments. The board shall consist of 13 members. 
(1)  The following ten members shall be appointed by the city commission: 
a.  One member who is actively engaged in the residential home building industry in connection with affordable housing; 
b.  One member who is actively engaged in the banking or mortgage banking industry in connection with affordable housing; 
c.  One member who is a representative of those areas of labor actively engaged in home building in connection with affordable housing; 
d.  One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing; 
e.  One member who is actively engaged as a for-profit provider of affordable housing; 
f.  One member who is actively engaged as a not-for-profit provider of affordable housing; 
g.  One member who is actively engaged as a real estate professional in connection with affordable housing; 
h.  One member who resides within the city limits of the city; 
i.  One member who represents employers within the city; and 
j.  One member who represents essential services personnel, as defined in the local housing assistance plan; 
If the city is unable to appoint a member actively engaged in these activities in connection with affordable housing, a member engaged in the activity without regard to affordable housing may be appointed. 
(2)  The following three members shall be appointed as follows: 
a.  One chairperson nominated by the mayor and appointed by city commission; 
b.  Two members from city administration nominated by the city manager and appointed by city commission. One of these two members shall actively serve on the city's planning department; 
(b)  Terms of office and vacancies. Members shall be appointed for a term of four years. Except as hereinafter provided, the city commission shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation or removal of any member of the board, which person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. A vacancy in the chairperson or any of the two members appointed from city administration shall be filled in the same manner as provided above for the appointment of those board members. Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed, subject to the provisions of section 2-885. 
(c)  Membership qualifications. All board members shall be 18 years of age or older. 
Each member of the board shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and commitment to serving the community, and is expected to participate actively in the functioning of the board. 
Except as provided in subsection (a)(1), members of the board shall not be required to be permanent residents of the city, own real property in the city, or work or maintain a business in the city. 
(d)  Procedure for appointment of members. No appointment to the board shall be made until notice has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the appointments to be made at least 15 days prior to making the appointment, which notice shall have solicited and encouraged the public and citizen organizations within the city having interest to submit names of persons and their qualifications for consideration. The qualifications of those to be considered as prospective members of the board shall be evaluated by the department of community development. The department of community development shall recommend appointees to the city commission for final appointment. 
(e)  Officers. The chairperson shall be appointed by the mayor. The board shall elect from its members a vice-chairperson, and may designate a secretary and such other officers as deemed necessary. The chairperson of the board shall have the power to appoint all members serving on the various committees which the board may establish from time to time. 
(f)  Quorum and voting. At all meetings of the board, a minimum of five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and each member shall have one vote on every issue submitted to a vote of the board. The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board. The members of the board may make and adopt bylaws and rules for the board's governance. 
(g)  Meetings. The board shall hold regular monthly meetings, except in the month of August, and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. All meetings of the board shall be public meetings. Written minutes of the proceedings of all actions taken at the meetings of the board shall be properly recorded and maintained. 
(h)  Attendance requirements. 
(1)  Any board member shall be automatically removed if, in a given calendar year: 
a.  He or she is absent from three consecutive meetings; or 
b.  He or she is absent from four of the board's meetings; 
c.  Provided that regardless of their compliance with subsections (1)a. and b., members must attend at least 50 percent of all the board meetings held during each calendar year. 
(2)  A member of the board shall be deemed absent from a meeting when he or she is not present at the meeting at least 75 percent of its duration. 
(3)  The provisions of this section may be waived by a vote of the members of the board if, prior to removal for failing to meet the attendance requirements hereinabove, a member requests a waiver of the same providing the member's reasons supporting such request. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1304. - Staff liaison; assignment, qualifications, general powers and responsibilities. 
There shall be an individual or individuals who shall be specifically assigned to the board by the city manager to facilitate its activities. The employee assigned by the city manager shall act as the liaison to the board and the administration and shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the management and operation of all board activities. The employee shall attend all meetings of the board, and shall from time to time prepare and furnish such reports, audits and other information relating to the duties of the board as may be requested by the board, the administration or the community development department. In the event that the employee is for any reason temporarily incapable of exercising the powers and performing the duties and assigned functions, the city manager shall designate an employee to perform such functions and duties until such incapacity of the permanently assigned employee ceases. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1305. - Counsel. 
The city attorney's office shall provide legal counsel to the board as may be necessary and requested by the board. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1306. - Administrative support services. 
The board is hereby designated as a category "C" board as it relates to the administrative support services to be provided by the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1307. - Sunset review of the board. 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 2-892, the board shall be initially reviewed in 2013. Thereafter the board shall be reviewed every four years. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 2-1308. - Abolition of the board. 
The city commission may, by an affirmative four-fifths vote, abolish the board, at which time the powers and duties of the board shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 13030, § 3, 10-16-08)  
DIVISION 20. - EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1309. - Education advisory board—Establishment and purpose. 
The education advisory board, is created to oversee matters related to the city education compact; improve and enhance communication between Miami-Dade County public schools and the city; recommend projects to improve and enhance school facilities; and advise the city commission regarding matters relating to education, health, safety, transportation and quality of life issues that affect students. The board shall provide written recommendations to the city commission regarding any matter relating to education impacting the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
Sec. 2-1310. - Powers and duties. 
Subject to city commission approval, as to any implementation of its decisions, and compliance with the terms and conditions of any existing contractual obligations, the education advisory board shall advise the city commission on educational activities and: 
(1)  Communicate with the administration of each school within the city, and with those schools attended by city residents, regardless of the schools' location; 
(2)  Serve as liaison between the city and Miami-Dade County public schools; 
(3)  Serve as liaison among the city's residents, neighborhood associations, local businesses and the city on educational issues; 
(4)  Coordinate with the city and Miami-Dade County public schools regarding the use of schools and parks as community hubs; 
(5)  Develop joint-use agreements where the city's parks and public schools can share resources to provide additional or expanded programming to the community; 
(6)  Coordinate activities of the city with those activities of the local public schools, colleges and universities to promote educational opportunities for citizens and residents of the city; 
(7)  Develop recommendations regarding programs which may be created to enhance educational opportunities in the city; 
(8)  Develop proposed actions, including proposed legislation at the state, county, and federal levels, supports educational programs in the city; 
(9)  Identify and advise the city on ways to attract state and federal programs and grants to support schools within the city; and 
(10)  Contact businesses within the city and businesses outside the city, but who do business with the city, to provide mentors, professional skills, materials, financial or educational support for schools. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
Sec. 2-1311. - Governing body—Composition and appointments; terms of office and vacancies; membership qualifications; procedures for appointment of members; oath; officers; quorum and voting; meetings; and attendance requirements. 
(a)  Governing body—Composition and appointments. The education advisory board shall consist of 12 members, seven who shall be voting members, and five ex-officio members who shall be designated as follows: one ex-officio non-voting student member (youth representative); one ex-officio non-voting school district representative; one ex-officio non-voting children's trust representative; one ex-officio non-voting early childhood representative; and one ex-officio non-voting post-secondary education representative, as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Terms of office and vacancies. 
(1)  All members shall be appointed. The five voting members shall be nominated by the members of the city commission (one voting member per district commissioner for a term of four years) and the mayor shall appoint one voting member. The city manager shall nominate the remaining voting member for commission approval. Voting members terms shall be four years. The city manager shall appoint the five ex-officio non-voting members listed in subsection (a). 
(2)  In order to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation or removal of appointees of the education advisory board, the commission shall appoint the replacement as originally set forth in this subsection above. Such person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Membership qualifications. Education advisory board members shall be at least 18 years of age except for the ex-officio youth representative. Each member shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and commitment to serving the community; have a demonstrated interest in education and the vision of the education advisory board; and is expected to participate actively, in the functioning of the education advisory board. The education advisory board voting members shall either: 
(1)  Reside in the city; or 
(2)  Own real property in the city; or 
(3)  Work or maintain a business in the city. 
The ex-officio non-voting members will not be counted in determining if a quorum is present and will be exempt from membership qualifications and attendance requirements for municipal board members set forth in this Code. 
(d)  Procedure for appointment of voting members. Qualifications of those to be considered as prospective appointees of the education advisory board shall be submitted to the city clerk. At least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, the commission shall make available to the public, and shall publicly make announcement of the fact, that the list of names submitted, together with a short statement of the qualifications of each person, is prepared and available for public inspection and consideration. In reaching a decision on the appointments, the mayor and commissioners shall give due consideration to the names submitted. 
(e)  Officers. The voting members of the education advisory board shall elect from its voting members a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and a secretary and such other officers deemed necessary for a term of one year. The chairperson of the education advisory board may appoint members to serve on the various committees which the education advisory board shall establish from time to time. Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit the chairperson from being re-elected. 
(f)  Oath. Upon the effective date of appointment, or as soon thereafter as practicable, each member of the education advisory board shall assume the duties of a member of the education advisory board, but before doing so, shall take an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, that he or she will support, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the state. 
(g)  Quorum and voting. At all meetings of the education advisory board, a minimum of four voting members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and each voting member shall have one vote on every issue submitted to a vote of the education advisory board. The decision of a majority of the voting members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the education advisory board. The members of the education advisory board may make and adopt bylaws and rules for the education advisory board's governance. 
(h)  Meetings. The education advisory board shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. All meetings of the education advisory board shall be public. Minutes of the proceedings of all actions taken at the meeting of the education advisory board shall be maintained property recorded and submitted to the city clerk. 
(i)  Rules of procedure. The education advisory board shall adopt and approve rules of procedure necessary to its governing and the conduct of its affairs, in keeping with the applicable provisions of the City Charter, ordinances and resolutions. Such rules of procedure shall be available in written form to persons appearing before the board and to the public upon request. 
(j)  Attendance requirements. A voting member shall be automatically removed if (a) in a given calendar year he or she is absent from three consecutive meetings; or (b) he or she is absent from four properly noticed meetings within a 12-month period without an excused absence. A member shall be deemed absent when is not present at the meeting at least 75 percent of its duration. The application of the provisions of this section may be waived by a four-fifth vote of the members of the city commission. 
(k)  Vacancies. Vacancies in the membership of the education advisory board shall be filled in the manner set forth in subsection (b), for appointed members. Nothing shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed. 
(l)  Removal. Members of the education advisory board may be removed for cause by a vote of not less than three members of the city commission, upon written notice to the member, after a public hearing, unless the member noticed for removal waives such public hearing in writing. However, whenever any member has had three consecutive absences or four total absences within a calendar year from the regularly scheduled meetings, the chairperson of the board shall certify same to the city clerk. The city clerk shall then inform the mayor and the commission in writing that the position has been declared vacant and a successor member must be appointed. 
(m)  Assignment of tasks. The city manager shall provide for necessary staffing to assist the education advisory board. Such staff, shall: 
(1)  Provide and perform necessary administrative duties, including providing assistance to the education advisory board regarding the scheduling of meetings of the education advisory board, preparing agendas, and ensuring that proper notice is provided for such meetings. 
(2)  Work with other city departments, public agencies, and private groups, as required, to provide information to the education advisory board on activities and developments in the area of education, substantially impacting the residents of the city. 
(3)  Submit the adopted minutes of each education advisory board meeting to the city clerk, mayor and the commission. 
(4)  Prepare summary reports of board actions for review by the board prior to delivery of the same to the city manager or designee for delivery to the city commission. 
(5)  Review the board's budget; 
(6)  Coordinate the research, development and preparation of reports and policies for projects initiated by the education advisory board. 
(7)  Serve as the community liaison between the city, the education advisory board and the residents of the city. 
(8)  Follow through with the implementation of all decisions and actions approved by the education advisory board. 
(9)  Coordinate projects of the education advisory board with other community organizations and governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-1312. - Compensation. 
Members of the education advisory board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to the prior written approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
Sec. 2-1313. - Counsel. 
The office of the city attorney shall provide legal counsel to the education advisory board as may be necessary and requested by the education advisory board, from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
Sec. 2-1314. - Sunset review of the education advisory board. 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 2-892, the education advisory board shall be initially reviewed in 2010. Thereafter the education advisory board shall be reviewed every four years. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
Sec. 2-1315. - Abolition of the education advisory board. 
The city commission may, by an affirmative vote, abolish the education advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 13066, § 2, 5-14-09)  
DIVISION 21. - WYNWOOD BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1316. - Establishment and purpose. 
The Wynwood Business Improvement District Board of the city ("BID board") is herewith established for a period of ten years to improve and strengthen the area known as the Wynwood Arts District as more particularly described in Resolution No. 13-0228 adopted on June 13, 2013 through promotion, management, marketing, and other similar services, including but not limited to, coordination, funding, implementation and maintenance of infrastructure improvements, and other projects. The Wynwood Arts District shall be described herein as the "area." The BID board shall be the board charged with managing the Wynwood Business Improvement District ("BID"). 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13; Ord. No. 13453, § 2, 5-8-14)  
Sec. 2-1317. - Composition of board; terms, filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The BID board shall have nine members, seven of which are voting members, two of which are non-voting. The seven voting BID board members must be commercial property owners in the district. Beyond the first year, all terms will be for two years. To ensure a voice for North Miami Avenue, at least one of the nine board seats shall be dedicated to a property owner from North Miami Avenue. The two non-voting members shall be either retail, cultural arts, office, or restaurant established business owners in the district. 
(1)  The BID board, on the recommendation of the current chair, will form a slate selection committee which will formulate a slate from among property owners who have been self-nominated or nominated by other property owners. After approval by the BID board, the slate will be put to an up-or-down as a whole vote by the commercial property owners of the BID, with one vote allowed per assessed folio. Guidelines will be issued by the BID staff which will give deadlines and acceptable manner for casting votes. The board shall be sworn and seated on or about the first day of the month of October. 
(2)  Selecting and seating of future board members beyond the first year of the BID. The BID board will finalize and establish the method for electing and seating of future BID board members in the by-laws developed by them for the BID in the first year of operations. 
(b)  At the first meeting of the BID board, the members will determine lengths of terms for the initial BID board. Three of the seven members will serve initial terms of one year. Four members will serve initial terms of two years. In years "two" and beyond of the BID, all terms will be for two years. Among the members of the board who serve an initial one-year term, the maximum time they may serve, if re-elected, is a total of seven years—either consecutively or intermittently. Among the members of the board who serve an initial two-year term, the maximum time they may serve, if elected, is a total of six years—either consecutively or intermittently. 
(c)  Members shall continue to serve until their successors have been elected and seated. Appointments to fill board vacancies shall be made by the chair and confirmed by a majority of the board for the unexpired term only. 
(d)  Quorum shall consist of a majority four of voting members. 
(e)  The BID board shall have the power to establish committees and appoint the members to the various committees, consistent with any standards for standing committees provided for explicitly in sections herein. 
(f)  Protection from personal liability. The BID board shall maintain officers and director's liability insurance coverage at all times, in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the city's director of risk management. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit or waive sovereign immunity. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13; Ord. No. 13453, § 2, 5-8-14; Ord. No. 13554, § 2, 9-24-15; Ord. No. 13835, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 2-1318. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members of the BID board shall be "affected commercial property owners" in the area. 
(b)  All members of the BID board shall be individuals of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability and acumen. 
(c)  Convicted felons may not serve on the BID board. 
(d)  Before assuming the duties of the office, each member shall take and subscribe to the oath of office required of officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1319. - Meetings; parliamentary authority, rules and regulations; compensation of members. 
The parliamentary authority of the BID board shall be Robert's Rules of Order for Small Boards and Associations. The BID board shall hold regular meetings no less often than once each quarter. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the by-laws of the BID. All meetings of the BID board shall be open to the public. Each member of the BID board shall serve without remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1320. - Removal of members. 
Notwithstanding anything in the Code to the contrary, by resolution specifying facts sufficient to advise a BID board member as to the basis for his or her removal and after reasonable notice to the BID board member and an opportunity for the member to be heard, the BID board, by a 51 percent vote of the board, may remove a board member, so long as the reason for removal is one or more of the following: 
(1)  If the member ceases to meet the qualifications and integrity criteria set forth herein or any additional qualifications set forth in the BID board by-laws; 
(2)  If the member is not current with timely payment of BID assessment(s) due; 
(3)  For purposes of this section, being absent from three regular BID board meetings or committee meetings—or a combination thereof—during a calendar year shall constitute good cause for removal; or 
(4)  For one or more violations of the Sunshine Law, as reviewed by the Board and the Miami-Dade County Commission on Ethics. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1321. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The BID board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Subject to city commission approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, appoint an executive director and fix the terms of engagement and compensation of the executive director. 
(2)  Prepare an annual budget to be presented to the city commission for approval. 
(3)  Plan, propose, and implement programs and services for the purpose of stabilizing and improving the BID through promotion, management, marketing, and other similar services, such as streetscape improvements. 
(4)  Plan and propose to the city and the city commission, within the area, land use and zoning policies, public improvements, including but not limited to renovation, repair, remodeling, reconstruction or other changes in existing buildings and streetscape which in the opinion of the BID board will aid in the economic growth of the area. 
(5)  Recommend to the city commission the acquisition by purchase or otherwise, of any land and any other property, real or personal, or any rights or interests therein, which it may determine is reasonably necessary for any project or purpose of this article. 
(6)  Cooperate with any governmental agency or public body for the purposes authorized herein. 
(7)  Solicit and accept grants in cooperation with the city office of grants administration. The BID staff shall contact the office of grants administration for assistance in project planning, proposal writing, application assembly, and monitoring financial and budgetary compliance with grantor agency guidelines. All grant applications shall be submitted to the office of grants administration for review and coordination prior to submission. The BID board shall be responsible for implementing and managing all of its grants. Any and all other contributions and financial support from individuals, private business interests, the general public, governmental entities, corporations and organizations, foundations and other philanthropic entities shall follow the approvals established by the city. 
(8)  Exercise all powers incidental to the effective and expedient exercise of the foregoing powers to the extent not in conflict or inconsistent herewith. 
(9)  The city manager may delegate to the executive director the authority to execute contracts consistent with the provisions of chapter 18, article III, subject to BID board approval. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13; Ord. No. 13554, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Sec. 2-1322. - Employees generally. 
(a)  Executive director. The executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the BID board and shall be a person of good moral character and have a reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability. No member of the BID board shall be eligible to hold the position of executive director. Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, the executive director shall take and subscribe to the oath as required of members of the BID board. Subject to the approval of the BID board, and direction by it when necessary, he/she shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the preparation of plans and the performance of the functions of the BID in the manner authorized in this article. He/she shall attend all meetings of the BID board and shall render periodic reports covering the activities and financial condition of the BID. The executive director shall have no civil service rights or privileges. 
(b)  Staff. Subject to the specific policy directives and goals of the BID board, budget limitations, and the approval of the board, the executive director may engage such staff members as are necessary for the efficient operation of the BID. Staff members shall have no civil service rights or privileges. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1323. - Annual budget; source of funds. 
(a)  The BID board shall establish a fiscal year which coincides with that of the city. Within 60 days following the effective date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this division derives, the BID board shall submit to the city commission, in a form acceptable to the city manager, a BID board budget for adoption and ratification by the city commission. Commencing with fiscal year 2014-2015, consistent with the city's budget process, the BID board shall submit to the city manager, a BID board budget pertaining to management, operation and maintenance expenditures and delineating the financial responsibility of the city for certain categories including but not limited to: insurance, security, utilities and maintenance to be approved by the city commission. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the BID board from submitting a supplemental budget to the city commission for approval. 
(b)  As needed, the BID will revise budgets and submit these revisions to the city commission for approval. BID expenditures shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  In conjunction with the submission of the budget, the BID board shall submit a plan reflecting the proposed operations, activities, improvements, and maintenance plans for the forthcoming fiscal year. 
(d)  No provision contained in this division shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500—18-503. 
(e)  The operations of the BID board shall be principally financed from the following sources and such other sources as may be secured: 
(1)  Proceeds of a special assessment as authorized by resolution. 
(2)  Contributions, gifts, and/or donations to the BID board for the performance of its functions. 
(3)  Such parking waiver fees as are authorized. 
(4)  Such parking surcharge fees as are authorized. 
(5)  Such sidewalk cafe fees as are authorized. 
(7)  Such other fees as are authorized. 
(8)  Grant funds. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1324. - Annual report and audit. 
The BID board shall submit to the mayor and city commission an annual report and an annual audit. The audit shall be performed by an external auditor who is a certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1325. - Notices and filing of records. 
The BID shall publicly notice meetings of board and committees at the city. The BID shall keep a record of all motions passed at board and committee meetings. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1326. - Sunshine. 
The BID will be governed by the Sunshine Law and will schedule appropriate training for each member of the board and staff in this regard. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1327. - Counsel. 
The office of the city attorney shall provide legal services to the BID board as may be necessary and requested by the BID board. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1328. - Inapplicability of sunset provision. 
The BID board shall not be subject to the provisions of section 2-892 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 13404, § 2, 9-12-13)  
Sec. 2-1328.1. - Wynwood design review committee. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a standing committee of the BID, to be known as the Wynwood Design Review Committee ("WDRC"), for the purpose of recommending to the director of planning and zoning and the Urban Development Review Board ("UDRB"), pursuant to the Wynwood NRD-1 and Miami 21, the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended or superseded. whether the design of developments and/or improvements to properties within the boundaries of the Wynwood NRD-1 are compatible with the cultural and architectural character of the Wynwood Arts District and guidelines that may be adopted from time to time. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Composition; appointment. The WDRC shall consist of seven members and one alternate, to be appointed by the BID board, or any successor body designated by the city commission. 
(2)  Qualifications. It is intended that members of the WDRC shall be persons of experience, mature judgment and background; having knowledge of the Wynwood Arts District; and having the ability, special professional training and interest to act in the public interest in order to make informed and equitable decisions concerning art, architecture, urban, physical and site design for developments within the Wynwood NRD-1 boundaries. To that end, qualifications of members shall be as follows: 
a.  BID members. At least three members shall be individuals who are members of the BID. Each member shall have been living or working within the Wynwood NRD-1 boundaries for at least two years. 
b.  Professional members. Two members shall be professionals, licensed by the State of Florida (or professional equivalent) as an architect, landscape architect, urban designer, planner, engineer, general contractor or attorney. Each member shall have been living or working in the city for at least two years. 
c.  Tenant/cultural member. Two members shall be a tenant with an active lease within the Wynwood NRD-1 boundaries, artist, or cultural institution representative. 
d.  Alternate. The alternate member shall satisfy the qualifications set forth either in subsection (2)a. or b. above. 
e.  During the qualification process, members of the BID shall be encouraged to submit names of persons and their qualifications to the BID board through the BID's executive director. 
(3)  Terms of office. Members of the WDRC shall be appointed to the following terms. Two of the BID members, one of the professional members, and one of the tenant/cultural members shall be appointed for an initial term of one year. All other appointments to the WDRC thereafter shall be for a term of one year. Notwithstanding the above, individual WDRC members may serve until his/her successor is appointed. 
(4)  Vacancies. Vacancies in the membership of the WDRC shall be filled by the BID board, and shall be only for the unexpired term of the member affected. 
(5)  Removal. Members of the WDRC may be removed with or without cause by vote of not less than three members of the BID board; however, any member or alternate member of the WDRC who fails to comply with the attendance requirements contained in section 2-886 of this Code shall be automatically removed in the manner prescribed under section 2-889 of this Code. Following said removal, the BID board shall fill the vacancy pursuant to subsection (4) above. 
(c)  Functions, powers and duties generally. In addition to such other powers, duties and authority as may be set forth elsewhere in this City Code and in the zoning ordinance, the WDRC is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the director of planning and zoning for approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of all applications within the Wynwood NRD-1 boundaries for which the WDRC is specifically designated for such role. Said review shall be pursuant to city guidelines and standards or such design guides contained in the requirements of the applicable zoning district text, Wynwood NRD-1, and any design guides adopted by the BID from time to time. 
(2)  Require submission to the WDRC of all information as may be reasonably necessary for the WDRC to evaluate completely the proposed structure of improvement. 
(3)  To recommend, from time to time, to the director of planning and zoning amendments to the city guides and standards applicable to the Wynwood Arts District. 
(4)  Adopt and amend rules of procedure. 
(5)  Where the UDRB has jurisdiction to review projects, review and recommend to the Urban Design Review Board ("UDRB") such projects for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, with reasons for such recommendation stated in writing. 
(6)  In conformity with chapter 10 of the City Code, and other applicable regulations, recommend legislation for security screens and shutters in the Wynwood Arts District. 
(d)  Proceedings. The WDRC shall meet at least once each month, except for August, and all meetings shall be open to the public. The WDRC shall establish rules of procedure necessary to its governing and the conduct of its affairs, in keeping with the applicable provisions of the City Charter and City Code. Such rules of procedure shall be available in written form to persons appearing before the WDRC and to the public upon request. The WDRC shall not defer or continue an item before taking affirmative action to recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval, unless requested by an applicant or the director of planning and zoning. 
(e)  Voting; quorum. All decisions and recommendations of the WDRC shall require a concurring vote of a majority of the members present, except if the WDRC's action results in a tie vote, and there are no further motions put forth, the recommendation to the director of planning and zoning or UDRB, as applicable, shall reflect a tie vote. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 13554, § 2, 9-24-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13554, § 2, adopted September 24, 2015, enacted provisions intended for use as section 2-1329. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 2-1328.1.  
DIVISION 22. - STARS OF CALLE OCHO ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-1329. - Stars of Calle Ocho Walk of Fame celebrity and community recognition advisory committee—Establishment, purpose and powers and duties. 
(a)  The Stars of Calle Ocho Walk of Fame Celebrity and Community Recognition Advisory Committee ("committee") is hereby established. The purpose of the committee will be to oversee the nomination process and placement for any new Stars of Calle Ocho Walk of Fame celebrity and community recognition plaques ("stars") and to oversee the maintenance, repair relocation, and replacement of existing stars. The stars are situated in Little Havana on Southwest 8th Street, between Southwest 12th Avenue and Southwest 27th Avenue in Miami, Florida ("Calle Ocho"). The stars will recognize entertainment professionals in motion pictures, television, live theater, arts, radio and recording. 
(b)  The committee, on behalf of the city, will oversee a not for profit organization to place, replace, repair, relocate, and maintain the stars in order to defray the costs for the city. The honoree will work with the not for profit organization working with the committee to pay for the costs of the initial placement of the star. 
(c)  The committee may solicit unrestricted and unconditional funds, subject to the acceptance of the city manager or city commission, as applicable per section 18-115 of the City Code, to be used for the placement, replacement, repair, relocation, and maintenance and upkeep of the existing and future marble stars and the contiguous sidewalk area they are in, in coordination with the not for profit. 
(d)  The committee will, in general, advise the mayor and the city commission, and additionally the city manager and public works director, as applicable, as to matters in relation to the honorees and the placement, replacement, repair, relocation, maintenance and upkeep, security, promotion, enhancement, and encouragement for the stars. However, the committee will have no power to contract, incur debt, obligation or liability or to take any final independent action on behalf of the city. 
(e)  The committee may accept nominations from any person, entity or group, as to proposed honorees who the nominator(s) think has made an outstanding contribution to the fields of motion pictures, television, live theater, arts, radio and recording and who has made a significant contribution to the community in South Florida that merits the inclusion of that honoree in the stars. The committee will review and advise the city commission of their choice(s) for inclusion among the stars. The city commission will select the nominee. There will be no more than one new star placed per year, unless there is a unanimous vote of the city commission. 
(f)  The committee shall issue quarterly or bi-annual reports to the city commission and mayor on such matters as stated above and makes their recommendations in such report(s). Whenever possible, nomination(s) shall be presented to the committee 30 days before they take a vote on the item. 
(g)  The not for profit will maintain a separate account for the stars and work with reporting to the city and the committee on funds raised to be placed in that account for placement, replacement, repair, relocation, and maintenance and upkeep of the existing and future marble stars in order to avoid any cost to the city. 
(h)  The placement, replacement, repair, relocation, and maintenance and upkeep shall be approved by the director of the department of resilience and public works or designee and the aesthetics of the Star will be approved by the director of planning and zoning or designee prior to any placement, replacement or repair. 
(Ord. No. 13497, § 3, 2-26-15; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 2-1330. - Membership and qualifications, meetings and quorum. 
(a)  The committee will consist of nine members, one appointment by the mayor, three members to be appointed by the commissioners at large, two members appointed by the not for profit organization working with the city for the placement, replacement, repair, relocation, and maintenance of the stars, and three additional appointments by the District 3 commissioner, all subject to ratification by the city commission. 
(b)  The term of their appointment will be as is set forth in section 2-885 of the City Code. 
(c)  The qualifications of the members shall be as are set forth in subsection 2-884(a) of the City Code, unless waived by four-fifths of the city commission. 
(d)  The committee shall hold quarterly public meetings at city hall and may hold additional meetings if needed as decided by a unanimous vote of all members present. 
(e)  A quorum of the committee shall consist of five members. A majority vote of the members present shall be required to make any recommendation to the city commission. 
(f)  The committee will use Robert's Rules of Order, latest edition, as its rules of procedure. 
(g)  The city attorney's office will serve as counsel to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 13497, § 3, 2-26-15)  
Sec. 2-1331. - Sunset review. 
The committee will be initially reviewed in 2016 and thereafter be reviewed every four years. 
(Ord. No. 13497, § 3, 2-26-15)  
DIVISION 23. - SENIOR CITIZENS' ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1332. - Senior citizens' advisory board-establishment, purpose and powers and duties. 
The senior citizens' advisory board is hereby established to advise and make recommendations to the city commission concerning subjects of particular interest to senior citizens and others who share the same interests as senior citizens. Such subjects include without limitation health, nutrition, medical services, recreation, transportation, housing, utility rates and service, employment and other matters related to the safety and welfare of senior citizens. As used in this chapter, the term "advisory board" refers to the senior citizens' advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 2-1333. - Membership and qualifications. 
(a)  The advisory board shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  Each city commissioner shall nominate one person to the advisory board. The sixth member shall be nominated by the mayor and the seventh member shall be nominated by the American Association of Retired Persons ("AARP"). With the exception of the person nominated by the AARP, each person so nominated must reside, own property, own a business, or work in the city and, if nominated by a city commissioner, must reside, own property, own a business, or work in the district represented by the commissioner making the nomination. 
(c)  The term of each member of the advisory board is coterminous with the term of the city commissioner or mayor who nominated the advisory board member for appointment, except that a member may continue to serve until a successor is appointed. The term of the member nominated by the AARP will be four years. 
(d)  No member of the advisory board may: 
(1)  Serve for an uninterrupted period longer than eight years; or 
(2)  Continue to serve after ceasing to reside in the district from which he or she was appointed, unless that event occurs by reason of the realignment of district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 2-1334. - Officers and staff. 
(a)  The advisory board shall elect from among its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and such officers as deemed necessary or appropriate. Officers shall serve a term of one year, or until a successor is elected. 
(b)  The office of the city attorney shall provide legal services to the advisory board as may be necessary and requested by the advisory board. 
(c)  The city manager shall provide administrative support to the advisory board, which shall include the services of an individual to keep minutes of the meetings, maintain advisory board correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports, and perform all necessary support functions. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 2-1335. - Bylaws. 
(a)  The advisory board shall adopt such bylaws as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business. The bylaws may include procedural rules, the designation of regular meeting dates, and the procedures for calling special meetings. 
(b)  Bylaws, as well as any amendments thereto: 
(1)  Must be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  May be adopted only by a majority vote of the entire membership, provided that, in each case, at least 20 days written notice of the proposed amendment has been provided to board members. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 2-1336. - Committees and subcommittees. 
The advisory board may create such committees and subcommittees as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 2-1337. - Sunset review. 
The committee will be initially reviewed in 2019 and thereafter be reviewed every four years. 
(Ord. No. 13534, § 3, 7-9-15)  
DIVISION 24. - MIAMI FOREVER BOND PROGRAM CITIZENS' OVERSIGHT BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1338. - Established; sunset date. 
There is hereby established for a period of ten years a city board to be known as the "Miami Forever Bond Program Citizens' Oversight Board," which shall hereinafter be referred to as the "board". 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1339. - Purpose, powers, and duties. 
(a)  The purpose, powers, and duties of the board are: 
(1)  To serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor, city commission, and city administration related to the monitoring of the expenditure of bond proceeds derived from the issuance of the general obligation bonds approved by the electorate on November 7, 2017 for capital projects to reduce flooding risks; improve stormwater infrastructure; enhance public safety; and improve affordable housing, economic development, parks, cultural facilities, streets, and infrastructure, commonly referred to as the "Miami Forever Bond" ("bond"); 
(2)  To review and report to the mayor, city commission, and city administration on the proper and efficient use of all bond proceeds and request that vendors, contractors, consulting project managers, and any other entity or person receiving bond funding to appear before the board to answer questions regarding the status of such funded projects; and 
(3)  To review quarterly expenditure reports produced by the city to ensure that bond proceeds are expended on time, on schedule, and only for the purposes set forth in the ballot measure. 
(b)  The establishment of priorities, determinations of specific projects to be financed and constructed, and order of financing and construction for all projects shall be made by the city commission in its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1340. - Membership; qualifications; terms of office and vacancies; officers. 
(a)  Membership. The board shall consist of seven voting members who shall serve without compensation or benefits, shall be confirmed by the city commission, and shall be composed as follows: 
(1)  One regular member nominated by the mayor; 
(2)  One regular member nominated by each of the five commissioners for a total of five regular members; and 
(3)  One at-large member nominated by each of the five commissioners for a one-year term, with nominations in rotating years in the following order: district 1, district 5, district 2, district 4, district 3. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed in the same order as above first established by appointments from commissioner districts. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  All members shall be permanent residents of the city and shall have good reputations for integrity and community service. In addition, all board members should have demonstrated an interest in the field, activity, or sphere covered by the board. All members shall also comply with the provisions of subsections 2-884(b), (c), (d), and (e) of this article. 
(2)  All members shall be qualified and distinguished by their education; experience; community advocacy or involvement; or attainments in public or private finance, professional engineering, project management, affordable housing, or resiliency and sustainability. 
(3)  No member shall have a conflict of interest with any project, vendor, contractor, consultant, or other entity or person receiving funding from the proceeds of the bond issuance or interest derived therefrom. 
(c)  Terms of office and vacancies. The provisions set forth in section 2-885 of this article shall apply to all members of the board except that the terms of office for each regular member of the board shall be two years, unless appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(3), with the terms of office for said at-large member being one year. There shall be no limitation on the number of consecutive years served. 
(d)  Officers. The mayor shall designate the chairperson of the board. The board shall elect from its members a vice-chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. No chairperson shall serve more than two years. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1341. - Meetings; quorum; attendance requirements; parliamentary authority; rules of procedure. 
(a)  Meetings; quorum. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. A majority of the board's appointed and qualified members at such time shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening any meeting. An affirmative vote of not less than 50 percent plus one of the members present and voting at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the members. The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. 
(b)  Attendance requirement. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this article shall apply to all members of the board. 
(c)  Parliamentary authority; rules of procedure. The board shall use Roberts Rules of Order (current edition) as its parliamentary authority or may adopt its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings and actions on matters within its jurisdiction not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all board meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners, and city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1342. - Assignment of staff. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide full cooperation and sufficient personnel for necessary administrative support to the board including assignment of an individual to act as a liaison and secretary to the board as well as the assignment of individuals from city departments and offices, as may be necessary, to advise the board about ongoing and pending projects. It shall be the duty of the board liaison to keep minutes or cause said minutes to be taken at all meetings, maintain committee correspondence, post meeting notices with the city clerk, file reports, and perform all other necessary support functions. 
(b)  The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the board. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1343. - Annual reports. 
The provisions set forth in section 2-890 of this article shall apply related to the submittal of annual reports. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Sec. 2-1344. - Sunset provision. 
The board shall not be subject to the provisions of section 2-892 of this article; however, the board shall sunset ten years after it is established. 
(Ord. No. 13752, § 3, 3-22-18)  
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Fire protection, ch. 19; police, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-1—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
City Code cross reference— Cable TV auxiliary service defined to include burglar alarm service, § 11-2. 
County Code cross references— Automatic telephone dialing alarm system prohibited, § 8A-163; intrusion and burglary security generally, ch. 8C. 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "burglary and robbery alarm ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1, 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-21)  
Sec. 3-22. - Definitions. 
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this article shall have the meanings attributed to them by this section: 
Alarm business means the business of any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or in causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or facility. An alarm business shall be a burglar alarm specialty electrical contractor which shall have, as a qualifying agent, a State of Florida or Dade County company qualifier, meaning a person licensed as a Dade County master or journey-level burglar alarm specialty electrical contractor, Dade County master electrician, State of Florida alarm contractor, or State of Florida electrical contractor. An alarm business shall have a local business tax receipt issued by the city. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in conveyances or fire alarms. 
Alarm user means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Automatic telephone dialing alarm system means the automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically transmits by telephone or telephone line to the Miami police department, a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to transmit to the Miami police department a need for emergency response. 
False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by police when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist; but this definition does not include an alarm signal caused by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Hearing officer means an employee of the city designated by the chief of police to act as an impartial arbitrator at hearings related to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(2), 11-26-80; Ord. No. 10988, § 2, 6-11-92; Code 1980, § 3.5-22; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-23. - Alarm permits required; fee; renewal; enforcement provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system without a valid alarm user permit. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided for in F.S. ch. 775. 
(b)  Applications must be made to the City of Miami Alarm Unit which will issue permits to alarm users after payment of a $79.00 application fee. 
(c)  All alarm user permits will expire on September 30 of each year and must be renewed not later than October 1 of renewal year. Renewal permits will be issued after completion of an application form and the payment of a $79.00 renewal fee or a $26.50 renewal fee provided there have been no false alarms. 
(d)  Whenever the police respond to a location where no alarm permit has ever been issued or the alarm permit has expired for the alarm system generating a false alarm, a copy of section 3-23 entitled "Alarm permits required; fee; renewal; enforcement provisions," shall be sent to the alarm user along with written notification as follows: 
(1)  On nonpermitted accounts, a $79.00 renewal fee will be required, plus a $210.00 fine for a total of $289.00. There will be no police response to subsequent alarms until the fine and the permit fee are paid. 
(2)  A response to an alarm system where the permit has expired will result in a $79.00 renewal fee, plus a $157.50 fine for a total of $236.50. There will be no police response to subsequent alarms until the fine and the permit fee are paid. 
(3)  All expired permits will be charged a $26.50 late fee, plus a $79.00 renewal fee. All expired permits with no false alarms will require a $26.50 late fee, plus a $26.50 renewal fee. 
(e)  If a business has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be required for each structure. 
(f)  To reinstate police service the alarm user must obtain a valid alarm permit pursuant to section 3-23(b) or (c) and pay all outstanding fines. 
(g)  Subsections (b) through (f) of this section shall not apply in those situations where alarm use permits have been revoked under section 3-29. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(3), 11-26-80; Ord. No. 10948, § 1, 2-13-92; Ord. No. 10988, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-92; Code 1980, § 3.5-23; Ord. No. 11424, § 1, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 13142, § 3, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 3-24. - Application for alarm permit; emergency notification and reporting service information. 
(a)  Applications. Applications for alarm permits shall be made on forms provided by the police department. The initial application shall be accompanied by a fee of $79.00. The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the location where the alarm is installed. If the applicant's alarm is installed and serviced by an alarm company, then the alarm company must provide the city with their company name, address and telephone number and obtain the alarm user permit for the applicant prior to the installation of the alarm system. Noncompliance by the alarm company will incur a $262.50 fine. Each permit shall be valid until September of the renewal year. The permit will be valid for one year. 
(b)  Emergency notification. Each application shall list an emergency telephone number of the user or his/her representative to permit prompt notification of alarm calls and facilities assisting the police in the inspection of the property. Changes in emergency telephone numbers shall be kept current, and failure to provide updated information may constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(c)  Reporting service information. Each holder of an alarm user permit shall immediately notify the police department in writing of any and all changes in the information on file with the city regarding such permit. Failure to do so shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(4), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-24; Ord. No. 11424, § 1, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 13142, § 3, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-25. - Issuance of permit decals. 
A decal with the alarm user's permit number, name of business or residence owner's name, and permit address will be issued with the alarm user permit. This decal must be prominently posted on or near the front entrance to the premises so that the information provided on the decal is visible from the outside of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(5), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-25)  
Sec. 3-26. - Necessary items for alarm systems to qualify for an alarm user permit. 
(a)  All alarm systems shall have a backup power supply that will become effective in the event of power failure or outage in the source of electricity from the utility company. 
(b)  All alarm systems will have an automatic reset which silences the annunciator within 30 minutes after activation and which will not sound again as a result of the same event that resulted in the original activation. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(6), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-26)  
Sec. 3-27. - Response to alarm; determination of validity. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police department, and the police department does respond, a police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm. 
(b)  If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, said officer shall cause a report to be generated of the false alarm. A notification shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user, at the address of the said alarm system installation, advising the alarm user of the false alarm. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made and he/she may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(7), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-27; Ord. No. 11424, § 1, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-28. - Appeals. 
(a)  A hearing officer shall be appointed by the chief of police to hear appeals from alarm users on the issue of whether the alarm system in question activated a false alarm, as determined by a police officer at the scene of such activated alarm. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any false alarm report from the city, the alarm user shall have ten days, orally or in writing, to request a hearing before the said hearing officer. 
(c)  At the hearing, which must be scheduled and concluded within 15 days from the date the request for same is received, the alarm user shall have the right to present evidence and testimony. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall make written findings available to the alarm user and the chief of police within ten days from the date the hearing is concluded. 
(e)  A decision by the chief of police, or his/her designee, to uphold or to cancel the false alarm report which is the subject of the herein section must be made within ten days from the receipt of the above findings by the chief of police. 
(f)  Until all of the steps set forth in this section have been completed, the false alarm in question will be considered to have been genuine and will not be considered the basis for the prima facie presumption that the involved alarm system is malfunctioning. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(8), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-28; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-29. - False alarm service charges; enforcement provisions. 
(a)  It is hereby found and determined that more than six false alarms within any permit year is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  The activation of false alarms within a permit year will be handled according to the following escalating service fee schedule: 
(1)  The first and second false alarms will not be billed a service charge. The third false alarm will be billed a $52.50 service charge that shall be considered a bill owed by the alarm user to the city. Failure to make payment within 15 days of receipt of the bill shall result in a discontinuance of police response to alarms that may occur at the premises described in the alarm user's permit until payment is received. The fourth false alarm will be billed a $105.00 service charge and must be paid within 15 days of receipt or there will be no further police response. The fifth false alarm will be billed a $157.50 service charge and must be paid within 15 days of receipt or there will be no further police response. The sixth false alarm will be billed a $210.00 service charge and must be paid within 15 days of receipt or there will be no further police response. 
(2)  The seventh false alarm shall result in no police response and shall also result in revocation of the alarm user's permit in the following manner: 
a.  The alarm user shall be given ten days' advance written notification that the alarm user's permit will be revoked, which written notice shall set forth the reasons for such revocation. 
b.  The notice shall specify the specific date of revocation, and that the police department will discontinue responding to alarms that occur at the premises described in the revoked permit after the date of revocation. 
c.  False alarms occurring before the effective date of police response termination or while an appeal is pending pursuant to section 3-28 hereof, will continue to accumulate service charges which will be billed and handled in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
d.  Reinstatement of the permit and police service will be made upon receipt of a letter from an alarm company licensed in accordance with section 3-22 hereof [to the effect] that the alarm system is operating properly, that the permit holder has received alarm system user's retraining on how to properly operate the alarm system, and payment of a $157.50 reinstatement fee and all outstanding service charges. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section a permit year will extend from October 1 to September 30 of the following calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 10988, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-92; Code 1980, § 3.5-29; Ord. No. 11424, § 1, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 13142, § 3, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 3-30. - Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, operate or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by the public to directly request emergency service from the Miami police department. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his/her designee, when he/she has knowledge of the unlawful maintenance of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system, installed or operated in violation of subsection (a) of this section, shall, in writing, order the owner, operator or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of receipt of the order. 
(c)  Any automatic telephone dialing system installed unlawfully, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof prior to the effective date of this article January 1, 1981, shall be removed within 30 days of the order as contained in subsection (b) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 9203, § 1(10), 11-26-80; Code 1980, § 3.5-30; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Secs. 3-31—3-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 3-56. - Definitions. 
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Alarm system means any assembly of personnel or equipment, mechanical or electrical, so arranged to signal the occurrence of a possible fire requiring urgent attention, and to which the fire-rescue department is expected to respond, but does not include either alarms installed in conveyance or burglar alarms. 
Alarm user means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Automatic telephone dialing alarm system means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically transmits, by telephone or telephone line to the city fire-rescue department, a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; the term also means a system which, upon activation, automatically connects with an answering service whose function it is to transmit to said department a need for emergency response. 
Certified fire alarm company means fire alarm specialty electrical contractors or electrical contractors certified by the county or by the state, or individuals who are so certified. 
False alarm means an electrical signal eliciting a response by the fire-rescue department when a situation requiring a response by the fire-rescue department does not in fact exist. 
Hearing officer means an employee of the city designated by the city manager to act as an impartial arbitrator at hearings related to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10073, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 3.5-41)  
Sec. 3-57. - Response to alarm; determination of validity. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm system is activated, thereby requiring an emergency response to a location in the city by the fire-rescue department, and said department does respond, the fire officer in charge on the scene at said location shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm. 
(b)  If the fire officer at the location of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, said officer shall make a report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user, at the address of the said alarm installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm. A copy of this article shall also be included with the false alarm notification to the user. 
(c)  The director of the fire-rescue department, or designee thereof, shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and he/she may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10073, § 2, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 3.5-42; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-58. - Appeals. 
(a)  A hearing officer shall be appointed by the city manager to hear appeals from alarm users on the issue of whether the alarm system in question activated a false alarm, as initially determined by a fire officer after his/her inspection at the location of a response to such activated alarm. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any false alarm report from the city, the alarm user shall have ten days, orally or in writing to request a hearing before the said hearing officer; if the request is in writing, said writing is to be mailed or delivered to the fire prevention bureau, 444 SW 2nd Avenue, 10th Floor. 
(c)  At the hearing, which must be scheduled within 15 days from the date the request for same is received, the alarm user shall have the right to present evidence and testimony. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall make written findings available to the alarm user, and to the chief of the fire prevention bureau, within ten days from the date the hearing is concluded. 
(e)  A decision by said bureau chief, or his/her designee, to uphold or to cancel the false alarm report which is the subject of the hearing, shall be made within ten days, from the receipt of the above findings by said bureau chief or designee. 
(f)  Pending completion of all of the steps set forth in this section, each fire alarm in question will be presumed to have been genuine. 
(Ord. No. 10073, § 3, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 3.5-43; Ord. No. 13196, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 3-59. - Fee assessment for false alarms. 
Notwithstanding references in this section to false alarms being activated within a period of 12 consecutive months, there shall be a six-month grace period following the issuance of an initial or temporary certificate of occupancy by the department of fire-rescue. Computation of the period of 12 consecutive months shall not include this initial grace period in order to permit the correction or adjustment of a newly installed alarm system in a building which has just been constructed. Following the completed installation of a new alarm system in a previously constructed building, there likewise shall be a six-month grace period commencing on the date such newly completed installation, after inspection by the department of fire-rescue, receives final approval of said department. 
(1)  It is hereby found and determined that more than two false alarms within a period of 12 consecutive months is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance and creates a prima facie presumption that the involved alarm system is malfunctioning. 
(2)  The activation of three or more false alarms in a period of 12 consecutive months will result in the following: 
a.  The third and fourth false alarms shall result in a charge of $250.00 per incident. This fee shall be payable to the city upon receipt of said invoice by the alarm user. The alarm user shall submit, within 30 days from the invoice date is mailed to the alarm user, a letter from a certified fire alarm company to the fire prevention bureau, certifying the alarm system is operating properly. 
b.  The fifth and any subsequent false alarm after that shall result in a charge of $500.00 per incident. This fee shall be payable to the city upon receipt of said invoice by the alarm user. The alarm user shall also submit, within 30 days from the date the herein charge invoice is mailed to the alarm user, a letter from a certified fire alarm company to the fire prevention bureau, certifying that the alarm system is operating properly. The alarm user will also be given written notice that the occurrence of another false alarm may be cause for revocation of any certificate of occupancy issued in connection with said building. 
c.  If there is a sixth or subsequent false alarm, the certificate of occupancy may be revoked unless an inspection of the alarm system by a fire prevention bureau representative, and a certified fire alarm company representative results in the finding by the chief of the fire prevention bureau that the alarm system is working properly. 
(Ord. No. 10073, § 4, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 3.5-44; Ord. No. 13142, § 3, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13196, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 3-60. - Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, operate or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by the public to directly request emergency service from the department of fire-rescue. 
(b)  The director of said department or his/her designee, when he/she has knowledge of the installation or operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system installed or operated in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall, in writing, order the alarm user to disconnect and cease operation of said system within 72 hours after service of the order, said service to be effected pursuant to chapter 19 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10073, § 5, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 3.5-45; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13734, §§ 2, 3, adopted January 25, 2018, repealed and reenacted chapter 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 4, articles I, II, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Case Law reference— Any provisions of this chapter which attempt to exercise any power over those who obtain state or city licenses to engage in the businesses defined in F.S. chs. 561 and 562 are void, except those provisions which regulate the hours of business, regulate the location of the places of business and prescribe sanitary regulations for such places of business. City of Miami v. Kinchinko, 156 Fla. 128, 22 So. 2d 627; City of Miami v. State, 158 Fla. 56, 27 So. 2d 829. 
City may regulate other phases of alcoholic beverage control which have not been preempted by state statutes. Nelson v. State, 157 Fla. 412, 26 So. 2d 60. 
City Code cross references— Service to female employees of dancehalls, ballrooms, §§ 5-42, 5-43; minors prohibited in dancehalls and ballrooms when alcoholic beverages sold, § 5-46; possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks, § 38-69; special event wine/beer permit in city parks, § 38-70; consumption of alcoholic beverages on city marina premises, § 50-229; alcoholic and intoxicating beverages in Orange Bowl Stadium, § 53-87. 
State Law reference— Liquors and beverages generally, F.S. § 561.01 et seq.; municipal taxation of alcoholic beverages prohibited, F.S. § 561.342(3); authority of municipality to regulate hours of sale, location of business, etc., F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2); sales of malt beverages for off-premises consumption not subject to municipal zoning, F.S. § 563.02(1)(a). 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Consumption restricted. 
Consuming alcoholic beverages on the public streets, in vacant lots, or in places solely licensed to vend alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises is unlawful and strictly prohibited. 
The city manager may declare an exemption from the prohibition of consuming alcoholic beverages as stated herein and declare the prohibitions inapplicable on special occasions. Such special occasions shall require a special event permit or temporary use permit, as applicable, with any associated notice and fees that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them. 
Alcoholic beverages means beer, wine, liquor, and any other beverage as defined in and regulated by Title XXXIV of the Florida Statutes, as amended. 
Alcohol service establishment means any establishment that sells or offers for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as a principal use. Alcohol service establishments may include, but are not limited to, bars, taverns, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, supper clubs, and microbreweries. Food service establishments where the sale of food is the primary use are excluded from the definition of alcohol service establishment. 
Ancillary use means any use which is not the primary use of the establishment. 
Bottle club means an establishment with a valid "bottle club" license issued by the state and where alcoholic beverages are not sold but where patrons are allowed to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Cafe means an establishment in which coffee and light meals are served along with the sale of beer or wine for consumption on the premises and that may seat fewer than 20 patrons pursuant to a valid license issued by the state in connection with the operation of said food service establishment. Cafes must derive at least 60 percent of its gross food and beverage revenue from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages during the first 60-day operating period and each six-month operating period thereafter. Cafes may include, but are not limited to, Cafes, coffee shops, sandwich shops, and cafeterias. Cafes shall not sell alcoholic beverages after the hours of serving or consumption of food have elapsed. 
Convenience store means a retail business opened primarily for the sale of products other than beer or wine and which may sell beer or wine in sealed containers only for consumption off premises. Grocery stores are considered to be convenience stores for purposes of this chapter. 
Districts—Industrial. The following transect zones shall be considered districts—industrial for purposes of this chapter: D1, D2, and D3. 
Districts—Mixed-use. The following transect zones shall be considered districts—mixed-use for purposes of this chapter: T4-L, T4-O, T5-L, T5-O, T6-L, T6-O, and CI-HD. 
Districts—Residential. The following transect zones shall be considered districts—residential for purposes of this chapter: T3-R, T3-L, T3-O, T4-R, T5-R, and T6-R. 
Entertainment district means a district within the Urban Central Business District ("UCBD") of the city which allows a high concentration of specialized entertainment alcohol service establishments. 
Liquor package store means an establishment licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages in sealed containers only for consumption off the premises. Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. 
Miami 21 Code means the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended. 
Nightclub means an alcoholic service establishment where such business serves as a place of entertainment open at night providing music and space for dancing and often having a floor show. A nightclub shall provide floor space of at least 400 square feet located in one unit and on the same floor, suitably prepared for dancing, free from tables, chairs, or other obstructions at all times, and generally exceeds 5,000 square feet of total gross floor area. 
Private club means a non-profit establishment whose character is that of a fraternal or social nature and that sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises pursuant to a valid license issued by the state. 
Restaurant means a food service establishment that meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Derives at least 51 percent of its gross food and beverage revenue from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages during the first 60-day operating period and each 12-month operating period thereafter; 
(2)  Licensed by the state's division of hotels and restaurants; 
(3)  Sells or offers for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises pursuant to a valid license issued by the state permitting such activity; 
(4)  Equipped to seat at least 20 patrons at one time; and 
(5)  Does not sell alcoholic beverages after the hours of serving or consumption of food have elapsed. 
Retail specialty center means aa mixed-use development with a minimum of 50,000 square feet of net leasable area made up of a retail mixture of general commercial establishments and Restaurants. In addition to the above, the following are required: 
(1)  At least one of the following types of uses: lodging, residential, assembly hall, or office use; 
(2)  A unified plan of development which shall include, but not be limited to, plans providing for the different uses in the development to be physically integrated through direct access from one to the other; 
(3)  Parking provided by an on-site enclosed garage; and 
(4)  All project uses under common management. 
Sale and sell means any transfer of an alcoholic beverage for consideration; any gift of an alcoholic beverage in connection with, or as a part of, a transfer of property other than an alcoholic beverage for a consideration; or the service of an alcoholic beverage pursuant to any license issued by the state pursuant to Florida Statutes. 
Schools mean any elementary school, middle school, or secondary school. 
Shopfront means a frontage of a building that is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance opening to the sidewalk or street. 
Specialty district means a district within a unique and distinctive neighborhood in the city which allows a high concentration of alcohol service establishments. 
Waterfront specialty center means a building or buildings with adjacent on-site parking spaces, under common ownership or common management, abutting or linked to a navigable water body, having a unified commercial plan of development, with a minimum of 50,000 square feet of leasable area, and containing a mixture of restaurants, entertainment facilities, and general commercial establishments. 
(b)  None of the preceding provisions shall be deemed to modify, repeal, amend, or supersede any of the provisions in the Miami 21 Code. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-3. - Hours during which sales allowed; permits and public hearing required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, offer to sell, allow to consume, or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person, except during the following hours: 
Establishment Type 	Hours of Operation 	Notes 
Alcohol Service Establishment 	Mon—Sat: 
11:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 
  
Sun: 
12:00 noon—3:00 a.m. 
  
Nightclub: 7:00 p.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Extension of hours to 5:00 a.m. allowed by exception as outlined in section 4-7. 
  
Extension of hours to 5:00 a.m. allowed by right if located within the UCBD, Omni CRA, Central Design District, or Southeast Overtown/Park West CRA. 
  
Consumption on premises. 
Bottle Club 	Mon—Sun: 
11:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
Liquor Package Store 	Mon—Sat: 
9:00 a.m.—12:00 midnight. 
  
Sun: 
9:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m. 	Hours automatically extended to 10:00 p.m. on Sundays in December. 
  
Consumption off premises. 
Convenience Store 	Mon—Sun: 
11:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	Convenience stores with a gross floor area that exceeds 10,000 square feet and/or that are ancillary uses to the sale of gasoline may sell beer or wine in sealed containers for consumption off the premises during such hours as the stores legally remain open for the sale of other goods. 
  
Consumption off premises. 
Lodging 
(Ancillary Use) 	Mon—Sun: 
7:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
Private Club 	Mon—Sun: 
7:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
Restaurant 	Mon—Sun: 7:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
Cafe 	Mon—Sun: 11:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
Other 
Establishments 	Mon—Sun: 
7:00 a.m.—3:00 a.m. 	Consumption on premises. 
 
*Closing hours may be modified by sections 4-5 and 4-6 of this chapter. 
_____
(b)  The city commission may extend the hours of sale for any alcohol service establishment for consumption on or off the premises on special occasions by resolution. 
(c)  In the Coconut Grove Central Commercial District, the hours of sale for alcoholic service establishments are weekdays, including Saturday, from 11:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. on the following day and on Sunday, from 12:00 noon to 3:00 a.m. on the following day. The boundaries for the Coconut Grove Central Commercial District are set forth in Exhibit "P" . 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-4. - Distance separation. 
(a)  For alcohol service establishments, liquor package stores, and bottle clubs. For purposes of this chapter, any distancing requirements set forth shall be measured from the front door of a licensed establishment to the front door of a proposed establishment with the same license type along the route of ordinary pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  From alcohol service establishments, liquor package stores, and bottle clubs to districts—residential, religious facilities, or schools. For purposes of this chapter, any distancing requirements set forth shall be measured from the front door of a licensed establishment to the nearest point on a parcel of land along the route of ordinary pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  Distance separation within the city's boundaries in districts—mixed-use and districts—industrial for licensed establishments under the laws of the state that allow for the consumption or sale of liquor on or off the premises and/or beer or wine for consumption on the premises shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet from a license of the same type. 
(d)  The specified districts as set forth below are subject to the following modifications to distancing and use requirements for alcohol service establishments only: 
District 	Minimum Distance 	Notes 
UCBD 
Exhibit "A" 
500 feet 	Restaurants and cafes are allowed by right. 
  
Alcohol service establishments are allowed by right in T6 transect zones. 
Central Design District 
Exhibit "B" 
500 feet 	Restaurants and cafes are allowed by right. 
Midtown 
Exhibit "C" 
1,500 feet 	Alcohol service establishments are allowed by right. 
Omni CRA 
Exhibit "D" 
1,500 feet unless within the UCBD where 500 feet shall apply 	Alcohol service establishments are allowed by right in T6 transect zones. 
Southeast Overtown/Park West CRA 
Exhibit "E" 
1,500 feet unless within the UCBD where 500 feet shall apply 	Alcohol service establishments are allowed by right in T6 transect zones. 
 
(e)  Existing establishments requiring distance requirements as set forth above may be moved to a distance not greater than 300 feet from the original location by right. If the alcohol service establishment prior to being moved is legal nonconforming to the provisions set forth under the section identifying distancing requirements from specified uses to a school or a religious facility, the proposed location shall be located at a greater distance from a school or religious facility than the previous location of the alcohol service establishment. 
(f)  Distancing requirements from specified uses. 
Specified Use 	Minimum Distance 	Notes 
District—Residential 	500 feet 	Unless so constructed, arranged, or controlled as to prevent the emission of sounds, vibration, and odors. 
  
For consumption on premises only. 
Religious facilities in UCBD* 	300 feet 	Does not apply to any licensed alcohol service establishment that precedes the establishment of a religious facility. 
Schools in UCBD* 	300 feet 	Does not apply to any licensed alcohol service establishment that precedes the establishment of a school. 
Religious facilities in districts—mixed-use* and districts—industrial* 	300 feet 	Does not apply to any licensed alcohol service establishment that precedes the establishment of a religious facility. 
Schools in districts—mixed-use* and districts—industrial* 	1,000 feet 	Does not apply to any licensed alcohol service establishment that precedes the establishment of a school. 
 
* Distance requirements may be modified by sections 4-5 and 4-6 of this chapter. 
(g)  Reductions in distance set forth above for consumption on premises establishments may be reduced by up to 50 percent by exception issued by the planning, zoning and appeals board ("PZAB") with approval by the city commission pursuant to criteria set forth in section 4-10 of this chapter and the requirements of the Miami 21 Code. 
(h)  The requirements as to distance limitations set forth above shall not apply to the following specified uses nor shall establishments meeting the following requirements count as distance impacts to other establishments: 
Specified Use 	Notes 
Restaurants 	• Restaurants that meet the state requirement for the issuance of a 4COP SFS license. A restaurant meeting the requirements of a 4COP SFS license may substitute said license with a 4COP quota license. 
	• Restaurants not meeting the requirements set forth above shall be allowed the allocation of a 4COP quota license by warrant. 
	• Restaurants with a 2COP license. 
	• Restaurants shall have no signs advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages visible from the exterior. 
	• Restaurants shall always be subject to audit and inspection by the city for the purpose of determining that such establishments are complying with the requirements set forth in this Code. 
Cafes 	• Cafes shall be allowed the use of a 2COP license by warrant. 
	• Cafes shall always be subject to audit and inspection by the city for the purpose of determining that such establishments are complying with the requirements set forth in this Code. 
Residential or Mixed-Use Buildings 	• For mixed-use buildings with 100—299 dwelling units, one alcohol service establishment is allowed by exception. 
	• For mixed-use buildings with 300—399 dwelling units, one alcohol service establishment is allowed by right and one additional alcohol service establishment is allowed by exception. 
	• For mixed-use buildings with 400 or more dwelling units, two alcohol service establishments are allowed by right and one additional alcohol service establishment is allowed by exception. 
	• Alcohol service establishments with shopfronts are not exempt from distance separation requirements. 
Lodging 	• One alcohol service establishment per 50 or more guestrooms or historic structures with one or more rooms as provided by Florida Statutes. 
	• Alcohol service establishments with shopfronts not exempt from distance separation requirements. 
Office or Work/Live 	• One alcohol service establishment per 60,000 square feet devoted to and maintained for office space. 
	• Alcohol service establishments with shopfronts are not exempt from distance requirements. 
Private Clubs 	• Must be chartered in the county for not less than three months. 
Waterfront Specialty Center 	• Must be located on city-owned property. 
	• Allowed by exception with city commission approval. 
	• Within any one waterfront specialty center, not more than 50 percent of the waterfront specialty center's establishments shall be issued certificates of use or temporary certificates of use as an alcohol service establishment. 
	• If a waterfront specialty center is located within a specialty district or entertainment district, the alcohol service establishments within the waterfront specialty center shall not be counted against the total number of alcohol service establishments allowed within the specialty district or entertainment district. 
Retail Specialty Center 	• Shall not exceed one alcohol service establishment per 20,000 gross square feet of the retail component. 
	• Shall not exceed five total alcohol service establishments. 
	• If a retail specialty center is located within a specialty district or entertainment district, the alcohol service establishments within the retail specialty center shall not be counted against the total number of alcohol service establishments allowed within the specialty district or entertainment district. 
	• One security guard per 100 seats when alcoholic beverages are served for consumption on the premises is required. 
	• Retail specialty centers are designated by development agreement approved by the city commission or by determination of the zoning administrator as to the requirements set forth in section 4-2 of this chapter. 
Special Uses for which special Alcoholic Beverage Licenses are issued by the State but for which Uses are not otherwise addressed herein 	• Must meet state requirements for the corresponding license type. 
	• Allowed as an ancillary use to the respective principal use with an active certificate of use or temporary certificate of use. 
	• Including, but not limited to, the following state licenses: H, HBX, SBX, SPX, SAL, SCX, SCC, SA, IX, X, SL, PVP, 11-PA-C, 11PA-P, FEX, SWP, 11C, 11CG, 11CGPC, 13CT. 
 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-5. - Specialty districts. 
The restrictions as to distances between alcohol service establishments herein shall not be applicable within a specialty district as defined in section 4-2 of the City Code as designated by the city commission and pursuant to F.S. § 562.45(2)(a). Location of alcohol service establishments within a specialty district shall not be utilized when calculating distance requirements of religious facilities and alcohol service establishments located outside the specialty district, whether existing or new. The following specialty districts within the city are described below: 
Specialty District 	Permit and Cap 	Hours of 
Closing 	Notes 
8th Street 
  
Exhibit "F" 
Warrant 
  
No Cap 	3:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 500 feet from a school. 
			• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a religious facility. 
Liberty City 
  
Exhibit "G" 
Warrant 
  
30 Total 	3:00 a.m. 	• Shall be closed during school hours. 
			• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a school. 
Little Haiti 
  
Exhibit "H" 
Warrant 
  
20 Total 	3:00 a.m. 	• Shall be closed during school hours. 
			• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a school. 
Orange Bowl 
  
Exhibit "I" 
Warrant 
  
8 Total 	3:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 1,000 feet from a school. 
			• Extension of hours to 5:00 a.m. allowed by exception as outlined in section 4-7. 
Wynwood Cafe 
  
Exhibit "J" 
Warrant 
  
No Cap 	3:00 a.m. 	• Shall be closed during school hours. 
			• Shall not be located less than 500 feet from a school. 
			• Shall not be located less than 500 feet between other alcohol service establishments. 
Flagler 
  
Exhibit "R" 
By Right 
  
No Cap 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall have no distance separation requirements from a School or religious facility. 
Miami 
Riverside 
  
Exhibit "S" 
Warrant 
  
7 Total 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall be closed during school hours. 
 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-6. - Entertainment districts. 
The restrictions as to distances between alcohol service establishments herein shall not be applicable within entertainment districts as defined in section 4-2 of the City Code and as designated by the city commission. Location of alcohol service establishments within entertainment districts shall not be utilized when calculating distance requirements of religious facilities and alcohol service establishments located outside the entertainment district, whether existing or new. The following entertainment districts within the city are described below: 
Entertainment District 	Permit and Cap 	Hours of 
Closing 	Notes 
Brickell Village 
  
Exhibit "K" 
Warrant 
  
6 Total 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a religious facility or a school. 
Brickell Riverside 
  
Exhibit "L" 
Warrant 
  
5 Total 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a religious facility or a school. 
Park West 
  
Exhibit "M" 
Warrant 
  
11 Total 	N/A 	• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a religious facility or a school. 
Media 
  
Exhibit "N" 
Warrant 
  
7 Total 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a religious facility or a school. 
Overtown 
  
Exhibit "O" 
Warrant 
  
12 Total 	5:00 a.m. 	• Shall not be located less than 300 feet from a school. 
 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18) 
_____ 
Sec. 4-7. - Permits and public hearings. 
(a)  Alcohol reservation. Any applicant who wishes to open an alcohol service establishment within the city may submit an alcohol reservation letter request identifying the proposed location to the office of zoning for analysis along with a distance survey from a licensed and certified surveyor which addresses all distancing requirements from the proposed location within this chapter if necessary to establish the use and provide payment of $200.00 for processing. If the requirements as set forth in this chapter are met, an alcohol reservation letter may be issued by the zoning administrator. Said alcohol reservation letter shall be valid for three months from the date of issuance with the possibility of one-year extensions if the zoning administrator is presented with active building permits, submission of a warrant application, lease agreement, or any other documentation which the zoning administrator deems to be evidence of reasonable progress in acquiring a certificate of use for an alcohol service establishment at the proposed location. Each extension requires a letter of intent, the proposed evidence of reasonable progress, and $200.00 for processing. The alcohol reservation letter will reserve the location during the approved amount of time from encroachment of newly-proposed alcohol service establishments, religious facilities, or schools until the acquisition of a certificate of use from the office of zoning. 
(b)  Warrant. Where denoted in this chapter as necessary for approval, the property owner/applicant shall obtain a warrant as specified in the Miami 21 Code. In reviewing a warrant application, the director of planning shall apply the following supplemental review criteria in addition to the standard criteria for warrants as specified in Article 4, Table 12 of the Miami 21 Code: 
(1)  Operational plan. An operational/business plan that addresses hours of operation, number of employees, menu items, business goals, and other operational characteristics pertinent to the application. 
(2)  Parking. Regardless of parking requirements specified in the Miami 21 Code, adaptive re-use of existing buildings for the use requested in the warrant shall not require any additional parking; however, new buildings utilizing this exemption shall be required to provide a parking plan which fully describes where and how the parking is to be provided and utilized, e.g., valet, self-park, shared parking, after-hour metered spaces, and the manner in which the parking is to be managed. By a separate warrant (in addition to the warrant required for the subject alcohol service establishment), 100 percent of the required parking may be located offsite within a distance of 600 feet from the subject alcohol service establishment if the proposed parking is to be "self-park" and a distance of 1,000 feet from the subject alcohol service establishment if the proposed parking is to be by "valet". 
(3)  For alcohol service establishments proposing capacities over 300 persons, an indoor/outdoor crowd control plan that addresses how large groups of people waiting to gain entry into the alcohol service establishment and already on the premises will be controlled. 
(4)  A security plan for the alcohol service establishment and any parking facility. 
(5)  For alcohol service establishments proposing capacities over 300 persons, a traffic circulation analysis and plan that details the impact of projected traffic on the immediate neighborhood and how this impact is to be mitigated. 
(6)  A sanitation plan which addresses on-site facilities as well as off-premises issues resulting from the operation of the alcohol service establishment. 
(7)  A plan depicting proximity of the proposed alcohol service establishment to districts—residential. 
(8)  If the proposed alcohol service establishment is within 200 feet of any residential use, a noise attenuation plan that addresses how noise will be controlled shall be required. 
(c)  Exception. Pursuant to the Miami 21 Code, all alcohol service establishments that require an exception shall be subject to approval by the PZAB, and when required, final approval by city commission. Alcohol service establishments requesting extensions of hours of operations or variance from distance requirements shall only be permitted by process of exception with final approval by the city commission. 
In determining the appropriateness of such request, the PZAB and the city commission, as applicable, shall take into consideration the recommendation of the department of planning based on the following materials to be submitted by the applicant as criteria as well as the criteria listed in the Miami 21 Code: 
(1)  An operational/business plan that addresses hours of operation, number of employees, menu items, business goals, and other operational characteristics pertinent to the application. 
(2)  A parking plan which fully describes where and how the parking is to be provided and utilized, e.g., valet, self-park, shared parking, after-hour metered spaces, and the manner in which the parking is to be managed. The city commission or the PZAB, as applicable, may grant approval for 100 percent of the required parking to be located offsite within a distance of 600 feet from the subject alcohol service establishment if the proposed parking is to be "self-park" and a distance of 1,000 feet from the subject alcohol service establishment if the proposed parking is to be by "valet." 
(3)  For alcohol service establishments proposing capacities over 300 persons, an indoor/outdoor crowd control plan that addresses how large groups of people waiting to gain entry into the alcohol service establishment and already on the premises will be controlled. 
(4)  A security plan for the alcohol service establishment and any parking facility. 
(5)  For alcohol service establishments proposing capacities over 300 persons, a traffic study and traffic circulation analysis and plan that details the impact of projected traffic on the immediate neighborhood and how this impact is to be mitigated. 
(6)  A sanitation plan which addresses on-site facilities as well as off-premises issues resulting from the operation of the alcohol service establishment. 
(7)  Proximity of the proposed alcohol service establishment to districts—residential. 
(8)  If the proposed alcohol service establishment is within 200 feet of any residential use, a noise attenuation plan that addresses how noise will be controlled shall be required, especially in the case of indoor/outdoor uses. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-8. - Certificate of use. 
In addition to the requirements under chapter 2 of the City Code and Article 7 of the Miami 21 Code, if upon request by the city proof of an alcohol license issued by the state is not submitted to the city's zoning administrator within 60 days of the request, the alcohol service establishment's certificate of use, temporary certificate of use, and any approvals obtained under chapter 4 of the City Code or the Miami 21 Code may be revoked by the zoning administrator. 
If it is found that an alcohol service establishment is in violation of any laws regarding health, safety, and welfare including but not limited to building codes, fire codes, the Miami 21 Code, or any health department regulations, the certificate of use or temporary certificate of use shall be suspended for a period of 30 days to allow the alcohol service establishment to come into compliance. If the alcohol service establishment fails to come into compliance within 30 days, the certificate of use or temporary certificate of use shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-9. - Employees not to mingle with customers. 
It shall be unlawful for employees or entertainers in places dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to mingle or fraternize with the customers or patrons of such alcohol service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-10. - Prohibiting sales, etc., during emergency. 
Whenever in the opinion and judgment of the Mayor, a public emergency shall be created or exist in the city causing or tending to cause public disorder, lawbreaking, and confusion, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prohibit by and through the issuance of his official decree the sale, serving, or consumption of alcoholic beverages for and during a period of 24 hours or such longer period of time as may be described in such decree at all commercial establishments and at all other places in the city where alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold, served, or otherwise dispensed. In the issuance of such decree, the city manager shall have the fact of the issuance and the contents of such decree broadcast by law enforcement communication device and by commercial radio stations and otherwise given publicity as quickly and as widely as shall be feasible. It is hereby declared to be illegal for any person operating, employed at, or otherwise controlling any of the establishments or other places described in this section to sell, serve, or permit the consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages during the period described in the decree of the city manager provided for in this section. Each violation of or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall subject every person guilty thereof to the penalty prescribed in section 1-13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-11. - Nightclub. 
The additional regulations set forth below shall be applicable to all alcoholic service establishments that have been designated as nightclubs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or prevent or attempt to prevent reasonable inspection of any portion of any nightclub premises by any city official during any hour in which a nightclub is open for business. 
(2)  A nightclub business tax receipt issued by the city manager's designee is required in addition to any other requirement to qualify that the applicant is of good moral character. In making such determination, the applicant shall present to the city manager's designee the following qualifications: 
a.  Certificate of use. Issued by the office of zoning. 
b.  State licensure. Issued by the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco. 
c.  Business tax receipt history. Whether such applicant in previously operating in this or another state under a business tax receipt has had such business tax receipt revoked or suspended, and the reasons therefor. 
d.  General personal history. Such other facts relevant to the general personal history of the applicant as necessary to make a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant. 
(3)  Nonrenewal for certain convictions during a preceding year. 
a.  No nightclub business tax receipt shall be issued, renewed, or allowed a business name change at any time during a business tax receipt year at the location of any nightclub that previously possessed a nightclub business tax receipt when the holder or any managing agent or employee of the holder of a nightclub business tax receipt at such location has been convicted of a violation of this chapter or the alcoholic beverage laws of the state during the then-current business tax year or during a one-year period to any application request therefor or during the city's tax year immediately preceding such new licensing year. 
b.  A designation of the conviction relied upon by the city under the foregoing paragraph may be obtained at or before the start of the business tax year or prior to the date such business tax receipt is sought by request made to the city manager or designee. 
c.  Any person subject to the foregoing provision may request and obtain a hearing before the city commission. After a public hearing, the city commission may authorize or deny the issuance or renewal of new nightclub business tax receipt to such person or grant or refuse the request for a change of name on a nightclub business tax receipt providing any applicable provision of section 31-35 is fulfilled relative to such request. A holder of a nightclub business tax receipt for the year preceding the new business tax year, subject to the provisions of this section, shall not be considered to be operating without a current nightclub business tax receipt pending the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Sec. 4-12. - Violation of state law. 
It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall apply solely to those beverages constituting alcoholic beverages under the laws of the state. Every violation of the laws of the state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages is hereby specifically made a violation of this chapter with the same force and effect as if the provisions of such laws were fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 13734, § 3, 1-25-18)  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; amusement games or machines, ch. 12; offenses, ch. 37; parks and recreation, ch. 38; ships, vessels and waterways, ch. 50; stadiums and convention centers, ch. 53; permit for parades and processions, § 54-6; weapons, ch. 61. 
County Code cross reference— Obscene performances, § 21-42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Pool rooms—Midnight closing; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep open, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day, a room or saloon containing any billiard or pool tables, except such a room operated in conjunction with and incidental to a bowling establishment, or as a principal use in conjunction with an accessory restaurant (1,500 square foot minimum restaurant area) and where the main entrance is through the restaurant, and the billiard or pool room is not to be open for play unless the requisite restaurant is also open and serving food at the same time. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1; Ord. No. 10640, § 1, 9-28-89; Code 1980, § 5-1) 
City Code cross reference— License tax for poolrooms, § 31-50.  
Sec. 5-2. - Same—Minors prohibited; exceptions; permits for minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, his/her servant or employee to permit anyone under the age of 18 years to visit or frequent or play in any billiard parlor in the city, provided that this shall not apply to any person on active duty in the armed services of the United States, or who has a written permit or card signed and notarized by his/her parent or guardian and filed in the establishment to which the permit or card is given by the parent or guardian of the minor involved, or a married minor, or when accompanied by parent or guardian. Such permit card shall be valid only in the establishment to which it is issued, and such permit card may be revoked at any time by the parent or guardian, or by the operator of such billiard parlor by returning the card to the parent or guardian, or by any law enforcement officer upon conviction of the party of a crime. No written permit shall be valid in any establishment which sells or permits consumption on its premises of intoxicating or alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2; Code 1980, § 5-2; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 5-3. - Same—Order to minor to leave; calling police. 
(a)  In case any minor shall enter any pool or billiard room or parlor in violation of section 5-2, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of or owning or operating any such pool or billiard room or parlor to order such minor to vacate such place, and, in case the minor refuses to vacate such place, it shall be the duty of such person in charge of or owning or operating such pool or billiard room or parlor to call a police officer, whose duty it shall be to take such minor out of such place. 
(b)  In case any such minor is directed or ordered to vacate or move out of any such pool room or parlor by the person in charge of or owning or operating the same, unless such minor shall be excepted by the provisions of section 5-2, it shall be the duty of such minor to comply immediately with the order, direction or request of such person. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3; Code 1980, § 5-3)  
Secs. 5-4—5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANCEHALLS AND BALLROOMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
County Code cross reference— Public dancehalls, § 21-30.1. 
 
Sec. 5-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Dancehall or ballroom: Any room, place or space in which a public dance or public ball shall be held, and any room, hall or academy in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for hire. 
Public dance or public ball: Any dance or ball conducted in connection with instruction in dancing for hire, and any dance or ball to which admission may be had by the payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or in connection with which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property, and any dance or ball to which the public generally may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee. 
(Code 1967, § 4-32; Code 1980, § 5-67)  
Sec. 5-32. - Permit required for public dances; permit fee. 
(a)  No person, society, club or corporation shall hold a public dance or public ball within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor from the chief of police, provided that such permit shall not be required for dances held and conducted by regularly established instructors in dancing in connection with such instruction. 
(b)  The fee for such permit, which shall be paid at the time of the issuing thereof, shall be $5.00 for each public dance or ball. 
(Code 1967, § 4-33; Code 1980, § 5-68)  
Sec. 5-33. - License for dances, dancehalls, etc.—Required. 
It shall be unlawful to hold or conduct any public dance or public ball, or to hold or conduct classes in dancing, or to give instructions in dancing for hire, in any hall, ballroom, studio or academy within the city, unless the dancehall, ballroom, studio or academy is duly licensed for such purpose, and the fee provided in chapter 31 has been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 4-34; Code 1980, § 5-69) 
City Code cross reference— License fees for dancehalls and ballrooms, § 31-50.  
Sec. 5-34. - Same—Application; issuance. 
Application for licenses required by this article shall be made by the proprietor of such dancehall, ballroom, studio or academy to the chief of police, who is hereby authorized to issue the same. 
(Code 1967, § 4-35; Code 1980, § 5-70)  
Sec. 5-35. - Same—Revocation or refusal of renewal. 
The license of any public dancehall, ballroom, studio, or academy may be forfeited, revoked or annual renewal may be refused by the chief of police for disorderly or immoral conduct or ordinance violations on the premises, or upon proof that the dancehall, ballroom, studio or academy was frequented by disorderly or immoral persons, or for the violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances and laws governing or in any way applying to public dancehalls, ballrooms, studios, academies or public dances. If at any time the license of a public dancehall, ballroom, studio, or academy shall be forfeited or revoked or annual renewal shall be refused, at least three months shall elapse before another license or permit shall be granted for dancing on the same premises. 
(Code 1967, § 4-36; Code 1980, § 5-71)  
Sec. 5-36. - Compliance with other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
No license for a public dancehall, ballroom, studio or academy shall be issued until it shall be ascertained that the place for which it is issued complies with and conforms to all laws, ordinances, health and fire regulations applicable thereto, and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for which it is to be used. 
(Code 1967, § 4-37; Code 1980, § 5-72)  
Sec. 5-37. - Cleanliness, sanitation, lighting and windows. 
All public dancehalls, ballrooms, studios or academies shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition, and all stairways and other passages and all rooms connected with public dancehalls, ballrooms, studios or academies shall be kept open and well lighted. All windows shall, at all times, be clean and the glass shall be clear and transparent. The only thing that shall appear on such windows shall be the name and address of the dancehall in letters or figures not higher than eight inches. 
(Code 1967, § 4-38; Code 1980, § 5-73)  
Sec. 5-38. - Inspection by police. 
All public dancehalls, ballrooms, studios and academies shall be subject to inspection by the police department at all reasonable times and whenever they are open for dancing, instruction in dancing or for any other purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 4-39; Code 1980, § 5-74)  
Sec. 5-39. - Authority of police to order premises vacated for violations of law, etc. 
Any police officer of the city shall have the power to cause the place, hall or room where any public dance or ball is given to be vacated whenever any provision of any law or ordinance with regard to public dances and public balls is being violated, whenever any indecent act shall be committed or when any disorder of a gross, violent or vulgar character shall take place therein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-40; Code 1980, § 5-75)  
Sec. 5-40. - Closing hours. 
All public dances shall be discontinued and all dancehalls shall be closed between 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays, provided that upon application of a bona fide organization or society and upon investigation, the chief of police may grant such organization or society a permit to continue a dance until 2:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 4-41; Code 1980, § 5-76)  
Sec. 5-41. - Solicitation agreements with taxicab owners, drivers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or driver to have or make any contract or agreement with any dancehall owner, or with the agent or employee of such owner, by which such taxicab owner or driver agrees to solicit the patronage of any passenger for such dancehall. 
(Code 1967, § 4-42; Code 1980, § 5-77)  
Sec. 5-42. - Employees not to be served drinks purchased by customers. 
It shall be unlawful for any hostess, waitress, entertainer or employee in a dancehall or ballroom to be served any beverage, whether an alcoholic beverage or otherwise, for which a customer or patron in such establishment pays. 
(Code 1967, § 4-43; Code 1980, § 5-78) 
City Code cross reference— Employees in alcoholic beverage establishments not to mingle with customers, § 4-4.  
Sec. 5-43. - Solicitation of dancing partners or purchase of refreshments prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in or about any dancehall or ballroom to solicit dancing partners on a commission basis, directly or indirectly, or to solicit the purchase of refreshments on a commission basis, directly or indirectly. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other person connected with the operation of any dancehall or ballroom to permit or allow any such solicitation therein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-44; Code 1980, § 5-79)  
Sec. 5-44. - Sale of time by employees to customers prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee in a dancehall or ballroom to sell time to a customer, other than for the purpose of giving dance instruction to such customer. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other person connected with the operation of any dancehall or ballroom to permit or allow any sale of time by an employee to a customer other than for the purpose of giving dance instruction to such customer. 
(Code 1967, § 4-45; Code 1980, § 5-80)  
Sec. 5-45. - Employees mingling with customers. 
It shall be unlawful for employees or entertainers in dancehalls or ballrooms to mingle or fraternize with the customers or patrons of such establishments, except when actually providing dance instruction to such customers or patrons. 
(Code 1967, § 4-46; Code 1980, § 5-81) 
City Code cross references— Employees or entertainers in alcoholic beverage establishments not to mingle with customers, § 4-4; nightclub license holders not to permit entertainers to contact or associate with patrons, § 4-76.  
Sec. 5-46. - Minors prohibited where alcoholic beverages are available for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or person in charge of any dancehall or ballroom which provides hostesses or dance partners and has beverages, alcoholic or otherwise, available for sale, to employ or permit any minor under the age of 18 years to frequent or be in or about such place. 
(Code 1967, § 4-47; Code 1980, § 5-82)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to collect and dispose of carcasses of dead animals, § 3(o); authority to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals, poultry or other fowl, § 3(p); power to declare city a bird sanctuary, § 3(ff). 
City Code cross references— Regulation of domestic animals in parks, § 38-57; restrictions on domestic pets in city marinas, § 50-234. 
County Code cross reference— Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Restrictions on keeping poultry, fowl or grazing animals. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the terms hereinafter set forth shall be defined as follows: 
Fowl: Live guineas, pea fowls, pheasants and pigeons, except carrier and racing pigeons, kept, harbored, bred and maintained exclusively for such purpose. 
Grazing animals: Horses, cows, goats, sheep and rabbits. 
Poultry: Live chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. 
Poultry markets: Commercial establishments or places properly zoned and licensed where live poultry or fowl are kept temporarily for the purposes of sale. 
(b)  Live poultry, fowl or grazing animals may be kept, harbored, bred or maintained in the city, subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
(1)  No live poultry, fowl or grazing animals shall be kept, harbored, bred or maintained unless the person owning or leasing or occupying the premises on which the same are kept, harbored, bred or maintained secures, possesses and maintains a permit from the county health unit, authorizing the use of the premises for such purpose. 
(2)  In no event shall the owner or lessee or occupant of any premises keep, harbor, breed or maintain at any one time more than 15 hens and 30 growing chicks. No roosters shall be kept, harbored, bred or maintained at any time. 
(3)  No poultry, fowl or grazing animal pens or houses shall be situated less than 100 feet from any human dwelling, and no poultry, fowl or grazing animal shall be permitted to run at large. 
(4)  Poultry, fowl and grazing animal pens shall be kept free from odors and free from fly breeding. 
(5)  All food used for poultry, fowl and grazing animals shall be kept in suitable containers with tightfitting covers, so as to be inaccessible to rats. 
(6)  All poultry or fowl droppings shall be removed from the pens at least twice weekly, wrapped in paper and placed in covered garbage cans for removal. Droppings shall not be used for fertilizer unless first treated so as to destroy fly maggots. 
(c)  The limitations and restrictions set out in subsection (b) of this section shall not be applicable to poultry markets, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to authorize the operation of a poultry market in an insanitary manner and nothing contained in this section shall be construed to allow or permit the violation of any zoning ordinance of the city or to be in conflict therewith or prevent the rezoning of any property, provided the zone requirements are met and complied with. 
(d)  The limitations and restrictions contained in this section shall not be applicable to premises upon which guinea pigs, rabbits or chickens are kept, harbored, bred or maintained exclusively for clinical and medical research purposes, but this subsection shall not be construed so as to authorize the use of such premises in an unsanitary manner. 
(Code 1967, § 5-1; Code 1980, § 6-1) 
Case Law reference— Case raising, but not deciding, the constitutionality of this section, Bratley v. Nelson, 67 F. Supp. 272. Section held valid, State ex rel. Lockwood v. Nelson, 28 So. 2d 264.  
Sec. 6-2. - Animals not to run at large; exceptions. 
(a)  No animal kept, harbored, maintained or possessed by any person in the city shall be permitted to run at large or to remain in or upon public or private property unless the animal is under the actual or direct control of its keeper by a rope, chain, leash or suitable device, or is kept within an enclosed area capable of preventing the animal from escaping therefrom. Any person owning, possessing or having control or custody of any animal shall be held strictly responsible for compliance with this section, and it shall be no defense to a prosecution under this section that the defendant did not personally allow, permit or countenance the animal to run at large or roam in the city. 
(b)  This section shall have no application to dogs and cats. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2; Code 1980, § 6-2) 
State Law reference— Livestock at large, F.S. § 588.12 et seq.  
Sec. 6-3. - Bird sanctuary established. 
It is hereby declared that all territory embraced within the city shall be a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1967, § 5-7; Code 1980, § 6-3) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish bird sanctuary, § 3(ff).  
Sec. 6-4. - Shooting, trapping, etc., birds prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, trap or in any manner kill or destroy birds within the city, except that the chief of police may issue a special permit therefor to persons holding a valid permit to destroy birds for scientific purposes issued by the state fish and game commission and by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior. 
(Code 1967, § 5-8; Code 1980, § 6-4)  
Sec. 6-5. - Cruelty to animals; penalties. 
(a)  The following acts and all related acts as set forth in F.S. Ch. 828 and all amendments thereto, shall be as deemed cruelty to animals: 
(1)  Any person who shall overload, overdrive, torture, torment or deprive of necessary sustenance, or unnecessarily or cruelly beat or mutilate or kill any domestic animal, or cause or permit either of such offenses to be permitted within the city. 
(b)  An individual found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to all enforcement regulations as contained in this chapter and all penalties as set forth in F.S. Ch. 828, and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 5-9; Code 1980, § 6-5; Ord. No. 12092, § 1, 7-26-01) 
City Code cross reference— Cruelty to dogs, § 6-41. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828.  
Secs. 6-6—6-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13696, § 2, adopted July 27, 2017, changed the title of article II from "Dogs" to "Dogs and cats." 
County Code cross references— Dogs generally, § 5-3 et seq.; county license tags required, conditions for issuance, § 5-8. 
 
Sec. 6-36. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by this section: 
Animal rescue organization: A not for profit organization devoted to the rescue, care, or adoption of stray, abandoned, injured, or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
Animal shelter: A public animal shelter or duly incorporated not for profit organization, operated as a bona-fide charitable organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, devoted to the rescue, care, or adoption of stray, abandoned, injured, or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
Breeder: Any person or entity that causes dogs or cats to reproduce regardless of the size or number of litters produced. Any person or entity offering male dogs or cats for stud purposes shall be classified as a breeder. It is provided, however, that this classification shall not apply to a hobby breeder as defined in this section or to a pet owner who breeds his or her own pet and keeps all of the offspring so long as the total number of dogs kept on the premises does not constitute a kennel. Any establishment used by a breeder for the breeding of dogs, except for a hobby breeder as defined in this section, shall be regulated as a kennel. Breeders that sell directly to the public shall also be subject to regulation as pet dealers. 
Cat: An animal of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
Certificate of source: A document from the source declaring the origin of the dog or cat on the premises to be sold or transferred, or offered for sale or transfer, by the pet store. The certificate of source shall include, at minimum: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and electronic mail address of the source of the dog or cat; 
(2)  A brief description of the dog or cat, the original source of the dog or cat, and license information if the original source breeder is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture; and 
(3)  Shall be signed by both the pet store certifying the accuracy of the certificate of source and by the purchaser or transferee of the dog or cat acknowledging receipt of the certificate of source. 
Dog: An animal of the Canidae family of the order Carnivora. 
Hobby breeder: A person or entity that is an active member of a national, state, or local breeder organization and that houses or breeds dogs or cats at or adjoining a private residence for the purpose of improving the breed; exhibiting dogs or cats at shows operated by a national, state, or local breeder organization; or raising service animals or animals used for law enforcement or other types of work. A hobby breeder may sell no more than two litters of puppies or kittens per year per household so long as the total number of dogs kept on the premises does not constitute a kennel as defined in this section. A hobby breeder that sells more than two litters per year per household shall be deemed to be a pet dealer. 
Kennel: The following uses shall constitute a kennel: 
(1)  The keeping of any dog or dogs, regardless of number, for sale, boarding, or treatment purposes, except by a hobby breeder as defined in this section or as provided by law, in a dog hospital, dog beauty parlor, pet care center, pet shop, dog racing establishment, governmental agency, laboratory, or facility housing animals for medical research that is approved by a federal agency; 
(2)  The keeping of dogs six months of age or older on premises used for residential purposes in excess of: 
a.  Four dogs on property that is less than one acre in gross area or in any individual residence unit in a transect zone that allows multifamily uses; 
b.  Six dogs on property that is at least one acre but less than two acres in gross area; and 
c.  Eight dogs on property that is two acres or more in gross area; or 
(3)  The keeping of more than four guard dogs on vacant property or on property used for business or industrial purposes. 
Owner: Any person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog or cat within the city. 
Pet dealer: Any person that engages in the sale to the public of dogs or cats regardless of number. This classification shall include pet stores as well as breeders who sell directly to the consumer. Animal rescue organizations and hobby breeders shall be exempt from this classification. 
Pet store: A pet shop, pet beauty parlor, animal grooming establishment, pet hospital, or other retail establishment open to the public and engaging in the business of selling pet supplies, services, or animals at retail or wholesale prices. 
Pet store operator: A person who owns or operates a pet store. 
Retail sale: The display, offer for adoption, barter, auction, give away, or other transfer of any dog or cat. 
(Code 1967, § 5-10; Code 1980, § 6-20; Ord. No. 13696, § 2, 7-27-17)  
Sec. 6-37. - Maintenance of kennels. 
Any owner of six or more dogs, each of which is not less than six months in age, and which are held for profit, breeding or exhibition purposes shall be deemed the operator of a commercial dog kennel. Such dog kennel shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. The owner thereof shall operate the premises whereon dogs are held in such manner as to prevent annoyance to the neighborhood or the general public created by reason of odors or loud, frequent, habitual barking, yelping or howling emanating therefrom. 
(Code 1967, § 5-11; Code 1980, § 6-21)  
Sec. 6-38. - Prohibited in food establishments. 
No dog, whether on leash or without leash, muzzled or unmuzzled, except a guide or service dog accompanying a physically impaired person, shall be permitted at any time to enter a store in the city where food for human consumption is sold or held for sale, and it shall be the duty of the owner or manager of such store to post a sign in a conspicuous place and manner apprising dog owners that no dogs are permitted within the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 5-12; Code 1980, § 6-22) 
State Law reference— Right of physically impaired persons to be accompanied by guide dog when utilizing public facilities, F.S. § 413.08.  
Sec. 6-39. - Noisy dogs. 
No person shall keep or harbor or own any dog in the city which indulges or engages in frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, thereby creating annoyance to the inhabitants of the neighborhood in which the dog is kept or to people passing to and fro upon the public streets. 
(Code 1967, § 5-13; Code 1980, § 6-23)  
Sec. 6-40. - Vicious dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog which is mean or vicious. Upon the conviction of any person owning or harboring a mean or vicious dog, the county judge may order the proper agency to destroy such dog. 
(Code 1967, § 5-14; Code 1980, § 6-24)  
Sec. 6-41. - Cruelty to dogs; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or owning a dog to be cruel and inhumane to the animal. "Cruelty" and "inhumaneness" shall include all provisions as set forth in F.S. Ch. 828, and all amendments thereto, including unnecessarily beating or torturing or mutilating or cruelly killing or failing or neglecting to provide suitable food or drink in sufficient quantities, together with adequate shelter for such dog. 
(b)  Tethering means to restrain a dog by tying the dog to any object or structure, including, but not limited to a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including, but not limited to a chain, rope, cord, leash or running line. This shall not include using a leash for walking purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a responsible party to tether a dog while outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog is visible to the responsible party at all times and the responsible party is outside with the dog; 
(2)  The tether is connected to the dog with a buckle-type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one inch in width; 
(3)  The tether has the following properties: 
a.  It must be at least five times the length of the dog's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail; 
b.  It terminates at both ends with a swivel; 
c.  It does not weigh more than one-eighth of the dog's weight; and 
d.  It is free of tangles. 
(4)  The dog is tethered so as to prevent injury, strangulation, or entanglement. 
(5)  The dog is not outside during extreme weather, including, but not limited to, extreme heat or near-freezing temperatures, thunderstorms, tornadoes, tropical storms, or hurricanes. 
(6)  The dog has access to water, shelter and dry ground. 
(7)  The dog is a least six months of age. 
(8)  The dog is not sick or injured. 
(9)  Pulley, running line or trolley systems are at least 15 feet in length and are less than seven feet above ground. 
(10)  If there are multiple dogs, each dog is tethered separately. 
(d)  An individual found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to all enforcement regulations as contained in this chapter and all penalties as set forth in F.S. Ch. 828, and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 5-15; Code 1980, § 6-25; Ord. No. 12092, § 1, 7-26-01; Ord. No. 12995, § 2, 5-8-08) 
City Code cross reference— Cruelty to animals generally, § 6-5.  
Sec. 6-42. - Abandonment of dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an aged, sick, disabled or otherwise unwanted dog. 
(Code 1967, § 5-16; Code 1980, § 6-26)  
Sec. 6-43. - Stealing dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to steal a dog within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-17; Code 1980, § 6-27)  
Sec. 6-44. - Refusal to surrender dog. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to deliver his/her dog to the proper agency when requested to do so under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 5-18; Code 1980, § 6-28; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 6-45. - Removal and proper disposition of animal fecal matter required when dog defecates on public and private property and fine schedule for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, having the care, charge, control or custody of any dog(s) to not immediately remove and thereafter dispose of any fecal matter deposited by the dog(s) on public property or private property other than the private property of the owner or responsible party of the dog(s) unless the owner or person in lawful possession of the property has consented to such deposit. Public property includes, but is not limited to, parks, sidewalks, swales, and streets. For the purposes of this section, dog fecal matter shall be immediately removed by placing the matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it by depositing the matter in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed container. This section shall not apply to blind persons accompanied by a dog used for their assistance. 
(b)  Each violation of this section is a civil infraction. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by civil penalty in the amount as prescribed in section 6-71. 
(Ord. No. 12189, § 1, 2-14-02)  
Sec. 6-46. - Sale or transfer of dogs and cats. 
(a)  No pet store shall offer for retail sale any dogs or cats in the city on or after the effective date of this section unless the pet store is exempt pursuant to subsection 6-46(b). 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A publicly operated animal control facility or animal shelter; 
(2)  A private, charitable, not for profit animal rescue organization; 
(3)  A publicly operated animal control agency or not for profit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with, a pet store; 
(4)  A pet store that transitions into the sale of pets formerly from an animal shelter or a pet store that sells those pets acquired from an animal shelter or a locally regulated Miami-Dade County hobby breeder; or 
(5)  A hobby breeder. 
(c)  Certificate of source. 
(1)  A pet store shall post and maintain in a conspicuous place on or within three feet of each dog's or cat's kennel, cage, or enclosure a certificate of source of each dog or cat offered for retail sale and shall provide a copy of such certificate of source to the purchaser or transferee of any dog or cat offered for retail sale. 
(2)  Falsification of a certificate of source is hereby unlawful. A violation of this section shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of section 6-71 below. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet store, pet store operator, or employees of a pet store from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a publicly operated animal control agency or animal rescue organization and maintained at the pet store for the purpose of adopting or selling those animals to the public. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 6-71 of the City Code; chapter 2, article X of the City Code; or any other remedy as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13696, § 2, 7-27-17)  
Secs. 6-47—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Citation system for animal control. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the terms hereinafter set forth shall be defined as follows: 
Animal means any living dumb creature. 
Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the city who is authorized to investigate, on public or private property, civil infractions relating to animal control or cruelty and to issue citations as provided in this article. An animal control officer is not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. 
Citation means a written notice, issued to a person by an officer, that the officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this chapter and that the county court will hear the charge. The citation shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting probable cause. 
(5)  The ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he/she shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
Control means the regulation of the possession, ownership, care, and custody of animals. 
Cruelty means any act of neglect, torture, or torment that causes unjustifiable pain or suffering of an animal. 
Officer means any law enforcement officer defined in F.S. § 943.10 or any veterinarian defined in F.S. § 474.202. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction. During a one-year period, each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Violations of this chapter shall be enforced as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, by a civil penalty of $50.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(2)  For the first violation, by a civil penalty of $100.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does contest the citation and is found to have committed the violation. 
(3)  For the second violation, by a civil penalty of $200.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(4)  For the second violation, by a civil penalty of $300.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does contest the citation and is found to have committed the violation. 
(5)  For the third violation and each additional violation thereafter, by a civil penalty of $400.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(6)  For the third violation and each additional violation thereafter, by a civil penalty of $500.00, if the person who has committed the civil infraction does contest the citation and is found to have committed the violation. 
(7)  Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty within the time provided on the citation or who fails to appear in county court to contest the citation, shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to contest the citation and judgment may be entered against the person for an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)  An officer may issue a citation if he/she has probable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of a section in this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who has been issued a citation for committing an act in violation of a section of this chapter may contest the citation in the county court. 
(e)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by an officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided by F.S. § 775.082, 775.083, or 775.084. 
(Ord. No. 10508, § 1, 11-3-88; Code 1980, § 6-29; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Chapter 8 - BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12452, § 1, adopted December 18, 2003, changed the title of Chapter 8 from "Bicycles" to "Bicycles, Skateboards, Scooters and Other Similar Devices." 
City Code cross reference— Motor vehicles, traffic control and parking generally, ch. 35. 
County Code cross references— Bicycle regulations, §§ 30-263, 30-264; voluntary registration of bicycles, §§ 30-264.1—30-264.6; use of bicycle paths and bikeways by motor vehicles, etc., § 30-273. 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to regulate operation of bicycles, F.S. § 316.008(1)(h); bicycle regulations, F.S. § 316.2065; driving motor vehicles upon sidewalks or bicycle paths, F.S. § 316.1995, bicycle trails and footpaths along state roads, F.S. § 335.065. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "bicycle," "bicycle path," "moped," "pedestrian," "motorized scooter," "sidewalk," "street," and "vehicle," shall have the meanings ascribed to them in F.S. § 316.003, as amended. "Scooter" or "skateboard" shall mean any vehicle not having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider, designed for travel by human propulsion and "other similar devises" shall refer to any vehicle or apparatus intended to propel a person by either human power or an electrical, mechanical or other power source. 
(Ord. No. 12452, § 1, 12-18-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12452, § 1, adopted December 18, 2003, amended § 8-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 8-1 pertained to "Bicycle" defined, and derived from the Code of 1967, § 8-1, and the Code of 1980, § 8-1.  
Sec. 8-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle, moped, motorized scooter, scooter, skateboard, or other similar devises are operated on specifically designated areas of the city set forth below and to the operation of bicycles upon any street, or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 8-2; Code 1980, § 8-2; Ord. No. 12452, § 1, 12-18-03)  
Sec. 8-3. - Bell or other warning device. 
No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, but no bicycle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1967, § 8-3; Code 1980, § 8-3)  
Sec. 8-4. - Not to be rented unless chapter complied with. 
No rental agency shall rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless such bicycle is as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 8-4; Code 1980, § 8-4)  
Sec. 8-5. - Parents and guardians not to permit violations of chapter; safe driving. 
No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
All operators of motorized scooters as referenced in this chapter shall abide by applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations governing their operation. Motorized scooters will be operated in a safe and prudent manner and shall be operated defensively to avoid bicyclists, pedestrians, and any items, such as bus benches or trash receptacles, in the sidewalk furniture zone. 
(Code 1967, § 8-5; Code 1980, § 8-5; Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-6. - Prohibitions on the sidewalks of Southwest 8th Street between 4th Avenue and Tamiami Canal Road. 
To continue to encourage a pedestrian friendly environment and provide for the safety of pedestrians using the sidewalks, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, moped, motorized scooter, scooter, skateboard, vehicle, or other similar devises, unless such devices are used to assist in transport of physically handicapped person, on the sidewalks of Southwest 8th Street between 4th Avenue and Tamiami Canal Road. 
(Ord. No. 12452, § 1, 12-18-03) 
Editor's note— See note at § 8-7.  
Sec. 8-7. - Penalties for violation of this chapter. 
Every person guilty of a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 12452, § 1, 12-18-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12452, § 1, adopted December 18, 2003, amended § 8-7 (formerly § 8-6) in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 8-6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, § 8-6, and the Code of 1980, § 8-6.  
ARTICLE II. - MOTORIZED SCOOTERS 
 
Sec. 8-8. - Applicability, policy statement and purpose. 
This article is supplemental to the general laws of the State of Florida, including F.S. ch. 316, entitled "State Uniform Traffic Control." All definitions from F.S. §§ 316.003 and 316.2128, are incorporated herein by reference, including the definition of "motorized scooter." This article shall apply to any and all motorized scooters and motorized scooter services operating within the corporate limits of the City of Miami ("city"), as permitted. This article is intended to govern the operation of motorized scooters and motorized scooter services within the city to ensure that they are consistent with the safety and well-being of all bicyclists, pedestrians, and other users of the public rights-of-way. This article shall not apply to any sidewalk/sidewalk area funded by the Federal Government except as expressly allowed by United States Department of Transportation Secretary or as expressly allowed by 23 United States Code Section 217(h). The pilot program under this article shall apply to the area of the city within city commission district 2. Motorized scooters are not authorized by the pilot program under this article in any area of the city other than city commission district 2. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-9. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following definitions apply: 
Application Programming Interface Key" ("API Key") shall mean a code passed in by computer programs calling an application programming interface ("API") to identify the calling program, its developer, or its user to the web site. 
Bike lane shall mean a part of the road which is intended to be used in part by people riding bicycles. 
Bike path shall mean a bikeway separated from motorized traffic and dedicated to cycling or shared with pedestrians or other users. 
License shall mean the document by which a privilege is granted by the city to authorize a person to operate a motorized scooter service within its corporate limits. Any license issued in accordance with this article shall be nonexclusive. 
Motorized scooter(s) shall have the meaning ascribed to it in F.S. § 316.003, as amended. "Motorized scooter(s)" are further defined as a device, with an electric motor, designed to transport only one person, exclusively or in combination with the application of human power, which cannot attain a speed of more than 15 miles per hour without the application of human power on a level surface. 
Motorized scooter service shall mean a system in which motorized scooters are made available for shared use to individuals on a short-term basis for a price or fee. 
Operator shall mean an individual or company that has been issued a license pursuant to this article and/or pursuant to any appropriate procurement process, if approved by the city commission, as may be later determined by the city commission to be applicable, as outlined in chapter 18 of this Code. 
Rebalance shall mean moving motorized scooters from an area of low demand to an area of high demand. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the public right-of-way between the back of curb lines or the lateral lines of a non-driving lane separated by curb and the adjacent property lines, where a three-foot minimum clearance is available to pedestrians and intended for public use. There may also be a median strip or road verge (a strip of vegetation, grass or bushes or trees or a combination of these) either between the sidewalk and the roadway or between the sidewalk and the adjacent property line (also described as "right-of-way line" or "building baseline"). 
Sidewalk area includes bike lanes and bike path, as well as the sidewalk width perpendicular to the road times the sidewalk length along and parallel to the road. 
Transit facility means a facility providing accommodations by public, private, or nonprofit entities for the conveyance of persons from one place to another by means of a transportation system, including but not limited to: bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal, airport, helistop or seaport. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-10. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city manager, or his or her designee, may administratively issue, promulgate and establish additional rules and regulations, consistent with this article and applicable state and federal laws, as determined to affect the policy of this article. All additional rules and regulations shall be made available on the city's website. 
(b)  Pilot program. The city hereby establishes a six-month pilot program (the "pilot term") for the operation of temporary pilot program licenses within the boundaries of commission district 2. 
(1)  Operators shall have a maximum initial fleet of 100 motorized scooters. Each operator will deploy no more than 50 motorized scooters during the first two weeks of the pilot program. 
(2)  The city shall allow operators to increase their fleet size on a monthly basis by a maximum of 25 percent if operator's usage data demonstrates that their fleet provides on average more than three rides per motorized scooter per day. The increase in vehicles on the street or sidewalk/sidewalk area shall not exceed the amount required to keep usage rates at or above three rides per motorized scooter per day. The city may also require operators to reduce their fleet size on a monthly basis by 25 percent if operator's usage data demonstrates that their fleet provides on average less than two rides per motorized scooter per day. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), the city retains the right to require operators to reduce their fleet size or cease operations in the event that operators repeatedly fail to timely rebalance or remove vehicles blocking the right-of-way or provide timely responses to complaints received by the city. 
(4)  During the duration of the pilot program, operators shall designate two local operational staff who will be responsible for fielding complaints, addressing technical difficulties, coordinating the rebalancing and removal of scooters parked illegally, and providing public education. 
(5)  On or before the expiration of this pilot program, the city manager or his designee shall report to the city commission on the status of the pilot program. Following the city manager's report, the city commission will consider the city's options relative to the pilot program including: discontinuing, reinstating, or expanding the pilot program, authorizing the city manager to issue a competitive solicitation for a more permanent motorized scooter license program, or such other measures as determined to be in the city's best interests. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-11. - Application for pilot program license. 
(a)  A person may not operate, or cause or permit the operation of, a motorized scooter service for the duration of the pilot program without first having obtained a valid pilot program license issued under this article. 
(b)  A person desiring to obtain a license shall make a written application in a form prescribed by the city manager, or his or her designee, with the applicant being the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed motorized scooter service. 
(c)  An applicant shall file with the city a verified application statement that, at a minimum, contains the following: 
(1)  The address of the applicant's operations center within the city, and the address of the applicant's corporate headquarters, if different from the address of the operations center; 
(2)  A witnessed signature of the applicant; 
(3)  Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating that such insurance company has bound itself to provide the applicant with the insurance required by the article; 
(4)  Documentary evidence from a bonding or insurance company or a bank indicating that the bonding or insurance company or bank has bound itself to provide the applicant with the payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit required by this article; 
(5)  Documentary evidence indicating that the applicant has applied for and received a current certificate of use, business tax receipt, occupational license, and similar permits and approvals, as applicable; 
(6)  An agreement to indemnify the city, in a form acceptable to the city; 
(7)  The name of the person designated to receive any and all notices sent by the city to the operator, including their mailing address, telephone number, and e-mail address; and 
(8)  The name of the person designated to rebalance, remove, and/or relocate motorized scooter(s), including their mailing address, telephone number, and e-mail address. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable licensing fee of $50,000.00, which shall be used to offset any costs to the city and/or the department of off-street parking, also referred to as the Miami Parking Authority ("MPA") related to enforcement of this section. Any excess licensing fees shall be designated for sidewalk/sidewalk area and/or street improvements within the pilot program area. 
(e)  A pilot program license shall expire six months from the date it is issued. 
(f)  In the event that the pilot program is reinstated by vote of the city commission, pilot program license(s) may be renewed following the same process set forth in this section. 
(g)  The city manager, or his or her designee, reserves the right to cancel any license, if there is a violation of the article, violations involving public health, safety or general welfare, failure to maintain the required insurance or bonding or otherwise comply with this article, or for other good and sufficient cause as determined by the city manager in his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-12. - Motorized scooter fee. 
In addition to the non-refundable licensing fee set forth in section 8-11, operators shall remit to the city a motorized scooter fee in an amount equivalent to $1.00 per motorized scooter per day. The motorized scooter fee shall be calculated monthly based on usage data. During the duration of the pilot program, this motorized scooter fee shall be designated for sidewalk/sidewalk area, and/or street improvements within pilot program area. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-13. - Motorized scooter parking. 
(a)  Motorized scooters must be parked on a sidewalk or other hard surface, beside a bicycle rack, or at a city-owned location. Motorized scooters may only be parked on private property with the permission of the property owner. 
(b)  Motorized scooters may not be parked at bicycle docking stations located on city and/or MPA property with an existing agreement. 
(c)  Motorized scooters must be upright while parked. 
(d)  Motorized scooters may not be parked in a manner that would impede normal and reasonable pedestrian access on a sidewalk or in any manner that would reduce the minimum clear width of a sidewalk to less than three feet. 
(e)  Motorized scooters may not be parked in a manner that would impede vehicular traffic. 
(f)  Motorized scooters may not be parked in a manner that would impose a threat to public safety or security. 
(g)  Motorized scooters may not be parked on a block where the sidewalk is at any point less than six feet in width, or on a block that does not have sidewalks. 
(h)  Motorized scooters may not be parked in a visibility triangle as defined in section 54-1 of this Code, measured in accordance with Section 3.8.4 of Miami 21 Code, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended. 
(i)  Motorized scooters must be parked in a manner that is compliant with the applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
(j)  Motorized scooters may not be parked in a way that blocks: 
(1)  Fire hydrants call boxes or other emergency facilities; 
(2)  Transit facilities; 
(3)  Loading spaces or zones; 
(4)  Passenger loading spaces or zones, or valet parking service areas; 
(5)  Railroad tracks or crossings; 
(6)  Disabled or prohibited parking zones; 
(7)  Street furniture that requires pedestrian access (for example, benches, parking pay stations, or bicycle/news racks); 
(8)  Window displays; 
(9)  Building entryways; or 
(10)  Vehicular driveways. 
(k)  Motorized scooters that are parked in an incorrect manner must be re-parked, removed and/or relocated by an operator within two hours of receiving notification from the city. 
(l)  The city or the MPA may identify designated motorized scooter parking zones in order to guide riders to preferred parking zones and assist with the orderly parking of motorized vehicles throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-14. - Operations. 
(a)  No one under the age of 18 shall operate a motorized scooter. 
(b)  Operators shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, and laws, including any additional rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
Persons operating motorized scooters shall be subject to all rules, regulations, and laws, including any additional rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager, or his or her designee, applicable to an operator, except those which, by their very nature, can have no application. The city manager may consider the following factors in promulgating the rules: The National Association of City Transportation Officials recommendations, inclusive of, cities should require licensees to come to agreement with the city on procedures and protocols for: 
• Extreme weather (e.g. blizzards, hurricanes, floods) 
• Emergencies (e.g. earthquakes, fires, etc.) 
• Special events (e.g. marathons, events, parades, film shoots, etc.) 
• Maintenance (e.g. debris and trash removal) for small vehicle parking zones. Operators shall at all times maintain a staffed operations center within the city; 
(c)  Operators shall maintain a 24-hour customer service phone number prominently posted on each motorized scooter for customers and citizens to report safety concerns, make complaints, ask questions, or request that a motorized scooter(s) be relocated. 
(d)  Operators shall provide the city with the contact information for someone who can rebalance, remove, and/or relocate motorized scooter(s). The operator shall rebalance, remove, and/or relocate a motorized scooter(s) within two hours of receiving notification from the city. An operator shall notify the city within 24 hours of a change in contact information. 
(e)  Any motorized scooter that is removed due to maintenance or safety issues shall be repaired before being returned to service. 
(f)  The city and/or MPA may, without prior notice to the operator, remove any motorized scooter(s) that is/are visibly damaged or non-functional, or blocking the public right-of-way, or located outside the pilot program area, and take it to a MPA or other city facility for storage, at the sole expense of an operator. The city and/or MPA shall charge a fee of not to exceed $25.00 per scooter for removal and storage. The city and/or the MPA shall invoice the operator for the cost of removal and storage. Any motorized scooter that remains unclaimed with the city and/or MPA for five days is subject to sale pursuant to the procedures for abandoned or lost property set forth in F.S. § 705.103, or by any other method allowed by the laws of the State of Florida or the city. 
(g)  Motorized scooters must be well maintained and in good operating condition. 
(h)  Motorized scooters must be of a high quality and sturdily built to withstand the effects of weather and constant use for a period of no less than five years. 
(i)  Motorized scooters must be rebalanced on a daily basis. 
(j)  Motorized scooters shall not display any third-party advertising. 
(k)  Each motorized scooter shall be equipped with active global positioning system (GPS) technology. 
(l)  Each motorized scooter shall display the name of the operator, (and if it can be accommodated the local business address) along with a unique identification number. 
(m)  Operators shall educate persons operating motorized scooters regarding the rules, regulations and laws applicable to riding, operating, and parking a motorized scooter. An operator's mobile application must provide information notifying a user that: 
(1)  Motorized scooters may be operated on streets or sidewalks/sidewalk areas in a manner similar to bicycles; 
(2)  Motorized scooters are to be operated at a person's own risk, and that no representation is being made by the city as to the condition of any sidewalk or sidewalk area; 
(3)  Motorized scooters shall at all times yield to pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian; 
(4)  The use of helmets while operating a motor scooter is strongly encouraged; and 
(n)  Operators will implement marketing and targeted community outreach plans, at their own expense, and to the satisfaction of the city, to promote the use of motorized scooters, particularly in low-income communities, and provide education regarding the rules, regulations and laws applicable to riding, operating, and parking a motorized scooter, as well as safe, prudent, defensive, and courteous operation. 
(o)  Operators shall work with local businesses or other organizations to promote the use of helmets by persons operating motorized scooters through partnerships, promotional credits, and other incentives. 
(p)  Operators shall not place or attach any fixtures, structures, or personal property, other than a motorized scooter, in the public right-of-way without the written permission of the city manager or his or her designee. Permission to place any items in the public right-of-way must be incorporated into the license. 
(q)  If the city incurs a cost in addressing or abating any violation of this article, or incurs any cost of repair or maintenance of any public property resulting from the use of motorized scooters, the operator shall reimburse the city for the full cost within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-15. - Data sharing. 
(a)  Operators shall cooperate with the city in the collection and analysis of aggregated data concerning its operations. All data furnished under section 8-15 will be in a form reasonably acceptable to the chief information officer of the city. Operators shall provide the city with real-time information on all motorized scooters operating within its boundaries through a documented API. Operators shall provide the city manager, and his or her designee under section 8-15, the chief information officer, with the procedure and credentials to authenticate to the API. 
(b)  Operators shall publish to the API (1) the point location, and (2) identification number for each motorized scooter. The city shall be permitted to display real-time data provided via the API and may publish real-time motorized scooter availability data to the public. 
(c)  Operators shall publish to the API (1) the point location, and (2) identification number for each motorized scooter. The city shall be permitted to display real-time data provided via the API and may publish real-time motorized scooter availability data to the public. 
_____
(d)  Operators shall also provide the following anonymized data for each trip record through the API: 
Field Name 	Format 	Description 
Company Name 	[Company Name] 	N/A 
Trip Record Number 	XXX0001, XXX0002, XXX0003, … 	3-Letter Company Acronym + Consecutive Trip Number 
Trip Duration 	MM:SS 	N/A 
Trip Distance 	Feet 	N/A 
Start Date 	MM/DD/YYYY 	N/A 
Start Time 	HH:MM:SS (00:00:00 - 	N/A 
End Date 	MM/DD/YYYY 	N/A 
End Time 	HH:MM:SS (00:00:00 - 	N/A 
Start Location 	XY or Lat/Lon Coordinates XY or Lat/Lon Coordinates 	N/A 
End Location 	XY or Lat/Lon Coordinates 	N/A 
Identification Number 	xxxx1, xxxx2, … 	Unique Identification for Every Motorized Scooter 
 
Route: Licensee will create a GeoJSON Feature Collection where every observed point in the route, plus a time stamp, should be included. The route must include at least two points, a start point and end point. Additionally, it must include all possible GPS samples collected by a provider. 
Standard Cost: The cost, in cents that it would cost to perform that trip in the standard operation of the system. 
Actual Cost: The actual cost in cents paid by the user for the trip. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-16. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  An operator shall procure and keep in full force and effect no less than the insurance coverage required by this section through a policy or policies written by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Florida, who are rated A- (V) or better per A.M. Best's Key Rating Guide. 
(b)  The insured provisions of the policy or policies must list the city, the MPA, their officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a motorized scooter. 
(c)  An operator shall maintain the following insurance coverages: 
(1)  Commercial general liability with limits of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence, $5,000,000.00 policy aggregate affording coverage for claims resulting from bodily injury (including death) and property damage. The policy shall be written on a primary and noncontributory basis, and should insure against premises and operations, personal injury, and contingent and contractual exposures. 
(2)  Automobile/motorcycle liability affording coverage on all motor vehicles/scooters used in connection with the operations or activities contemplated under this article. The operator should furnish the city with a policy affording coverage on all owned autos and scooters, including coverage for hired and non-owned auto exposures, with a combined single limit for bodily injury (including death) and property damage of $2,000,000.00 per accident. 
(3)  Workers compensation subject to the statutory limits of the State of Florida. 
(4)  The city retains the right to require additional insurance coverage in connection with the activities performed by the operator under this article as may be determined by the city risk management director, considering the size of the fleet and other liability insurance related factors. 
(5)  Failure to maintain required insurance coverage is cause for immediate cancellation of the license by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(d)  Any insurance policy required by this section must be on file with the risk management department, in a form acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, prior to the issuance of a License under this article. 
(e)  Insurance required under this section must include a cancelation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify both the operator and city manager, or his or her designee, in writing not fewer than 30 days before cancelling any insurance policy or before making a reduction in coverage. An operator, upon receiving said notice, shall file with the risk management department, in a form acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, any and all replacement insurance policies prior to the cancelation or reduction of the same. 
(f)  An operator may not be self-insured. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-17. - Performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit. 
(a)  An operator shall submit to the risk management department a payment and performance bond, in a format as prescribed in F.S. § 255.05, and in a form acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, prior to the issuance of a license under this article. 
(b)  Alternatively, an operator may post an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank authorized to transact business in Florida. 
(c)  The payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the sum of $50,000.00, and must list the operator as principal and be payable to the city. 
(d)  The payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must remain in effect for the duration of the license. 
(e)  Cancellation of the payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit does not release the operator from the obligation to meet all requirements of this article and license. If the payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit is cancelled, the license shall be suspended on the date of cancelation and the operator shall immediately cease operations until the operator provides the city manager, or his or her designee, with a payment and performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit that meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-18. - Indemnification. 
Operators shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, the MPA, jointly and severally, and their respective officers, employees, agents and instrumentalities from any and all liability, losses or damages, including any and all attorneys' fees and costs of defense, which the city and its officers, employees, agents and instrumentalities may incur as a result of claims, demands, suits, causes of actions or proceedings of any kind or nature including, but not limited to, personal injury or wrongful death, property loss or damage, the conditions and features on all sidewalks and sidewalk areas, or other areas within the city on which a motorized scooter is operated, to the extent arising out of or in any way connected with the operation of the motorized scooter service or use of a motorized scooter. Operators shall pay all claims and losses in connection therewith and shall investigate and defend all claims, suits or actions of any kind or nature in the name of the city, where applicable, including administrative, trial, and appellate proceedings, and shall pay all costs, judgments, and attorneys' fees which may issue thereon. Operators shall expressly understand and agree that any insurance protection required by this article, or otherwise provided or secured by an operator, shall in no way limit the responsibility to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, the MPA, or their officers, employees, agents and instrumentalities as required by this section. The obligation to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless will survive the revocation, cancellation, or expiration of a license. The operators will acknowledge on the license application form, which will include this indemnification in substantially the language provided by this section, that the granting of the license is, in part, conditioned on the granting of this indemnification which is knowingly and voluntarily given by the operators. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 8-19. - Expiration. 
The motorized scooter pilot program will automatically terminate on April 30, 2019 or six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, whichever occurs last. 
(Ord. No. 13795, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Planning, building and zoning department, § 2-201 et seq.; downtown development, ch. 14; environmental preservation, ch. 17; placing of guards around trees and shrubs on public property during construction and repair of buildings, § 17-76; fire protection, ch. 19; landfills and waterfront improvements, ch. 29; operation of pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, etc., restricted, § 36-6; use of noise-creating blowers, power fans or internal combustion engines, § 36-8; street excavations, § 54-42; naming of streets and numbering of buildings, § 54-121 et seq.; planning and zoning generally, ch. 62. 
Law review references— Note as to revoked building permits and equitable estoppel in Florida, 15 Fla. L. Rev. 418; comment as to rescission of building permits and equitable estoppel, 16 Fla. L. Rev. 649. 
State Law reference— Licensing of construction industry, F.S. ch. 489; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; plumbing control act, F.S. § 553.01 et seq.; electrical code, F.S. § 553.15 et seq.; state minimum building codes, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Posting advertising matter on buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to post advertising matter on any unoccupied building or on any temporary structure in this city. This section shall not apply to any owner or to any person acting under authority of the owner of such building. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1; Code 1980, § 10-1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Reports of dangerous buildings by firefighters and police officers. 
The employees of the department of fire-rescue and police department shall make a report, in writing, to the director of the planning, building and zoning department of all buildings or structures which are, may be or are suspected to be dangerous buildings. Such reports shall be delivered to the planning, building and zoning department within 24 hours of the discovery of such building by such employee. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2; Code 1980, § 10-2) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to remove, or cause to be removed, dangerous buildings, § 3(r).  
Sec. 10-3. - Building code. 
(a)  The "South Florida Building Code" and the "South Florida Building Code, Dade County edition", will remain in effect, and enforced in the city, for all plans submitted and pending prior to the date the Florida Building Code was implemented. All plans submitted after the Florida Building Code was implemented shall be governed by the "Florida Building Code, as amended" and Chapter 8 of the Code of Ordinances of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended (hereinafter referred to as "Chapter 8 of the County Code"). Following implementation of the "Florida Building Code," the "Florida Building Code, as amended" and "Chapter 8 of the County Code" shall be enforced in the city. A copy of this building code is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Any and all liens referenced or imposed based on the foregoing provision or chapter 8 of the County Code shall be treated as special assessment liens against the subject real property, and until fully paid and discharged, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes, and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall accrue to such delinquent accounts. Such liens shall be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 86 or, in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions applicable to practice, pleading and procedure for the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate set forth in state statutes, or may be foreclosed pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The property owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred in the collection of fees, service charges, penalties and liens imposed by virtue of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12155, § 1, 11-15-01; Ord. No. 13036, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 6145, as amended, adopts the South Florida Building Code as the building code of the city. This ordinance is not set out in this volume, but is on file in the office of the building official. In addition to regulations as to construction of buildings, the South Florida Building Code also contains provisions as to unsafe and dangerous buildings; exit facilities; elevators and escalators; precautions during building operations; occupancy of public and restricted property; signs; awnings, canopies and tents; electrical installations and appliances; plumbing and gas; forced ventilation; air conditioning and refrigeration; and swimming pools.  
Sec. 10-4. - Building permit fee schedule. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Affordable housing development is owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 30 percent to 80 percent of the area median income as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"). 
Community redevelopment agency is a public entity created pursuant to F.S. § 163.356, as amended. 
Dry run is defined as the process of plans signed and sealed by the design team submitted for building permit but with a building permit application without having a contractor. 
Master permit is a building permit obtained for the complete work on any project. 
Private provider means a person who can provide alternate plans review under F.S. § 553.791 and is licensed as an engineer under F.S. ch. 471 or as an architect under F.S. ch. 481, as amended. 
Stand-alone permit is any trade (electrical, mechanical or plumbing) permit pulled for a single category without the need for a master permit. 
Trade permit is a subsidiary building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing permit that requires a master permit associated with it to be pulled prior to issuance. 
Up-front fee is the fee associated and charged at the time of submittal of a set of plans and building permit application. 
Workforce housing development is owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 80 percent to 140 percent of the area median income as published annually by HUD. 
(b)  General fee information. 
(1)  Building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical permit fees. 
a.  Residential (up to three dwelling units): For all residential properties, any trade or master building permit will be charged 0.50 of the estimated construction cost (including labor and materials) for new construction or additions, and 0.50 of the estimated construction cost for all remodeling permits. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the building permit fee for residential improvements where the amount of estimated construction is less than $2,500.00 shall be fixed at $45.00. 
b.  Commercial and multifamily master permit, trade permit and stand-alone permit fee: For a building whose estimated construction cost is equal to or less than $30,000,000.00 is one percent of the cost of construction as per the declared cost by the contractor. For projects were the construction cost exceeds $30,000,000.00, the fee will be the same as above up to $30,000,000.00, plus one-half percent of the amount in excess of the $30,000,000.00. 
c.  Minimum permit fee, applicable to any building permit, shop drawing, or revision of any category regardless of construction cost or number of pages: $110.00. 
d.  Phased permit fee: Any phased permit issued in accordance with the Florida Building Code (FBC 105.13) will be valid for six months from the issuance date. No extensions will be issued to the phased permits by the building official. These permits will be charged a $1,500.00 fee, plus any other applicable surcharges as defined or required by the surcharges section. 
e.  Fee for work started without permits: When work is commenced prior to obtaining a required permit, a fee of two times that specified in this section, plus a $110.00 fine shall be paid. The payment of such fees shall not relieve any person, firm, or corporation from fully complying with all of the requirements of all applicable regulations and codes, nor shall it relieve them from being subject to any of the penalties therein. The fee requirement shall be applicable to all trade divisions of the building department. 
f.  The building department will modify the permit fee calculation using the Engineering News Record-Building Cost Index (ENR-BCI) published each January. A credit will be applied to the total cost of the building permit fee using the ENR-BCI should the ENR-BCI increase. 
(2)  Surcharges. For all permits issued, the building department will collect the following surcharges for the State of Florida, Miami-Dade County and other city departments: 
a.  State of Florida surcharges. 
1.  State of Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation (DBPR). 
2.  State of Florida Building Code Administrators and Inspectors (BCAI). 
b.  Miami-Dade County Code compliance surcharges. 
c.  City solid waste surcharge. 
1.  Residential. $0.22 per $100.00 of the estimated cost of construction with a minimum fee of $26.00 and a maximum fee of $600.00. 
2.  Commercial. Permits for all building a surcharge of two and one-half percent of the cost of construction with a minimum of $57.00 and a maximum of $10,500.00. 
3.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from this surcharge: signs, landscaping, elevators, revisions, subsidiary permits, roofing, awning, windows and doors, shed, flooring, driveways, solar panel installations, and any affordable housing permit that the city director of community development exempts in writing prior to the issuance of the permit. 
4.  Automatic deferral. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall defer the surcharge for affordable housing developments and workforce housing developments for as long as the development remains affordable or workforce housing. The permit applicant shall provide the city the community redevelopment agency board's resolution approving or authorizing the project and a covenant running with the land, or a deed restriction, which ensures that the development conforms to the requirements of an affordable housing development or workforce housing development. Upon the project ceasing to be an affordable housing development or a workforce housing development, the solid waste surcharges that were deferred shall become due and payable to the city within 30 days. 
d.  City energy conservation surcharge. 
1.  This charge encompasses energy conservation plan review and field inspections for such energy conservation. 
2.  For each square foot of new construction or an addition, $0.11. 
(3)  Miscellaneous permits and inspections fees. 
a.  Private provider fee. When a property owner uses the services of a licensed private company for plan review and inspections services (a private provider under F.S. § 553.791), the fee will be assessed as a regular building permit with a credit of one-third of the original building/trade permit fee line. If only the plan review or the inspections are done by the private provider, then the fee will be one-half of the one-third credit stipulated above. 
b.  Dry run/upfront fees. At the time of issuance of the permit application process number assigned by the building department, the projects will be charged $2.80 per $1,000.00 of the estimated construction value. Eighty percent of the total collected amount for this item, will be credited towards the building permit fee line when issued. No credit will be issued if there is no issuance of a permit, a substantial design is submitted, or the permit is not issued after 180 days of the last review. Dry run and upfront fees are not refundable, however they will be fully credited towards the cost of the building permit. 
c.  Joint plan reviews. Each meeting with city staff, $276.00. 
d.  Revision of plans and re-works. Revision of plans (per discipline) and reworks, after the second review, $56.00. 
e.  40/50 year recertification. Recertification of buildings are required pursuant to the requirements of the Miami-Dade County Board of Rules and Appeals (BORA) standing order, and Miami-Dade County Code Chapter 8. Recertification review for compliance with 40/50 year recertification, $276.00 fee. Any extension request by the owner of a property after receipt of a notification letter from the city that the property must prove they are in compliance with the 40/50 year recertification will be assessed a $500.00 for each additional three-month extension, with a maximum of two possible extensions after the original notification letter. 
f.  Permit by affidavit, and legalization of existing structures. The permits issued by affidavit and legalizations of structures built without permits before the year 2002, will be charged a fee of $250.00, in addition to any other applicable enforcement fee, building and trade permit fee. For those structures built after 2002, they will be charged with a double permit fee and fine where applicable using subsection 10-4(b)(1) above. 
g.  Annual facility permit fee. These permits will be issued with a two percent fee based on the intended annual work schedule cost per building or trade. 
h.  Commercial engineered or structural glazing and curtain walls. A $150.00 fee for compliance with the recertification, every six months for the first year after receiving the certificate of occupancy (C.O.), and a fee of $300.00 every five years after that date in accordance with the Florida Building Code. 
i.  Certificate of occupancy (C.O.) and certificate of compliance (C.C.). In accordance with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
1.  Residential (single family/duplex, triplex or multifamily condominium): $105.00 per unit. 
2.  Commercial (including multifamily rentals): $0.10 per square feet of space with a minimum of $250.00 for a C.O. and $150.00 for a C.C. 
3.  Extensions of T.C.O. or T.C.C.: The T.C.O. or T.C.C. can be extended two times at the same original rate charged for a period of 90 days; if further extensions would be required, they shall be charged at a rate equal to 50 percent of the building/trade permit line. 
For projects qualifying as a phased project as defined in section 55-1 of the City Code, the T.C.O. may be issued as follows: 
A.  T.C.O. may be issued for an initial period of 365 days at the original rate charged; 
B.  T.C.O. may be extended for an additional 365 days at the same original rate charged; 
C.  T.C.O. may be extended a second time for an additional 180 days at double the original rate charged; and 
D.  T.C.O. may be extended a third and final time for an additional 180 days at a rate equal to 50 percent of the building/trade permit line. 
j.  Expired and inactive permit applications (NAC). For those expired applications where 180 days have passed from the original application date, in accordance with the Florida Building Code (FBC105.13), the building official may extend for periods not exceeding 90 days the expiration date, if requested by the applicant in writing, explaining the need and circumstances for the extension. Every extension will be charged $100.00 for residential single family, duplex/triplex and $500.00 for commercial and multifamily applications. For those inactive applications (NAC), if authorized by the planning director, they will be reactivated in the system after payment of a $1,500.00, for a period of six additional months. If a permit is not obtained and construction starts within this extension time, the process number will be voided and the applicant will need to re-apply for a new application number. All fees are non-refundable if the process number is voided. 
k.  Expired/completion permits. Any building/trade permit may be extended once by the building official if requested prior to the permit expiration date. If the building/trade permit is expired, a completion permit will be required. 
1.  Extension of permit: $100.00. 
2.  Completion of any type of permit: For the first $1,000.00 of value of the remaining work, $32.00, plus any additional $1,000.00 or fraction, $16.00. 
l.  Re-inspection fees. Re-inspection fees will be charged in instances where the inspector is scheduled to visit a site, and any of the included, but not limited to the following issues occur: a contractor or builder owner receives a rejection of an inspection because a notice of commencement is not posted at the site and a copy is not provided to the inspector; the wrong address was given to visit the site to inspect; work was incomplete or not ready for inspection; the corrections given in the previous inspections were not completed; the approved set of plans or required certifications are not at the site; or no arrangement was made to allow the inspector to gain entry to the area of inspection, a fee of $57.00 will be assessed and no further inspections will be scheduled until the re-inspection fee is paid. 
m.  Expedited plans review of green building permit applications. Green buildings are defined as those with resource efficient design, construction, and operation by employing environmentally sensible construction practices, systems, and materials and defined as residential or commercial buildings that are registered Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED") projects, or any equivalent Green rating system. LEED is defined as the most recent Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Rating System of the U.S. Green Building Council. Expedited priority review of permit applications shall be defined as those to be reviewed prior to non-green building applications, in the order received, within the building permit review process. A non-refundable deposit, described in subsection 10-4(b)(3)m.2.iv. below will be required. 
1.  Green buildings eligible for priority permitting will be: 
i.  For buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet, and that exceed the requirements of LEED Silver certification. 
ii.  For buildings below 50,000 square feet, and that meet or exceed the requirements for any level of LEED certification. 
2.  To qualify for expedited priority review and approval of permit applications, buildings meeting the criteria above must submit to the building department: 
i.  A LEED registration form; 
ii.  A LEED scorecard indicating all expected rating points; 
iii.  The name and contact information for a LEED accredited professional on the project team; and 
iv.  A non-refundable deposit of $500.00. 
n.  Expedited overnight review projects. 
1.  Outside source review fee. Actual cost plus ten percent. This ten percent is the administrative fee to cover the cost of the processing. 
2.  In-house review fee: $350.00. The fee is per discipline, with a maximum of one review per fee, per discipline for a maximum of four hours each. 
3.  Plans review or inspections shall not begin until after 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. No plans or inspection requests will be accepted on Saturday, Sunday or holidays when city offices are closed. Scanning and printing fees for electronic plan review: The fee shall be based on the same cost charged by the printing company to the city. 
o.  Application fee. All permits will be charged a non-refundable $40.00 application fee. 
p.  Change of architect, engineer, or contractor for any type of permit. $100.00. 
q.  Recertification of plans and revised plans fee, and permit card replacement. 
1.  When plans are lost by the owner or contractor, a recertification fee is required for a new set of plans: Thirty percent of the original fee. 
Minimum fee for residential/commercial uses: $100.00. 
2.  Revised plans and shop drawings (after approval of initial plans): 
Per sheet revised and reviewed: $20.00. 
Minimum fee: $100.00. 
Maximum fee: $5,000.00. 
3.  Replacement of lost permit card or replacement or duplication of plans (per sheet): $17.00. 
r.  Administrative services fees. 
1.  Computer print-out of property information, permits, inspections, etc.: $2.00 per sheet. 
2.  File search for every request of building department services, including notice of violations: $44.00. 
3.  Notarization of any document, including building permit application: $2.00. 
4.  Sending and receiving faxes (not related to the permitting process): 
i.  Local, per page: $2.00. 
ii.  Long distance, per page: $2.50. 
5.  City certification of plans: Cost of reproduction of plans plus $1.00 per page. 
6.  Folio change: $26.00. 
s.  Refunds, time limitations, revocation, etc. The fees charged pursuant to this section, provided the same are for a permit required by the Florida Building Code, may be refunded by the building department director, subject to the following: 
1.  No refunds shall be made where any work has commenced, except where duplicate permits are issued for the same work, in which case a refund in accordance with subsection 4. below may be granted to the original permit holder providing that the duplicate permits were issued within 90 days of each other and the request for the refund is received within 90 days of the issuance of the latter permit. 
2.  No refunds shall be made where a permit has become void or revoked as provided by paragraph 304.3(a) of the Florida Building Code. 
3.  No refunds shall be made on permit fees of $110.00 or less. 
4.  Refunds on permits or any item thereon, will be on a basis of 50 percent of the balance over $110.00; such refunds shall be made to the closest dollar. 
5.  Bonds may be required for unfinished work on temporary certificates of occupancy (T.C.O). The amount is to be established by the chief of the section(s) involved and shall be 100 percent of estimated cost of the required work. Cash bond will be refunded, less $100.00 or other bonds discharged, upon completion of required work by owner. 
i.  Methods for placing bonds may be: 
1.  Surety company issuance of bond. 
2.  Cash bond. Payable by cash, or certified cashier's check. A copy of signed contract with a contractor to do the work is also required. 
3.  Letter of credit from a guaranteed insured state certified bank. The letter shall indicate the purpose of the line of credit. A copy of signed contract with a contractor to do the work is also required. 
ii.  If work is done within specified time, the city will proceed to have the work done (1) through the bonding company if Method No. 1. was used; (2) through the contractor specified in the contract if Method No. 2 or Method No. 3 was used, using the proceeds from the cash bond or from the bank letter of credit. 
(4)  Building department enforcement fees. In compliance with the Florida Building Code, National Electrical Code, and Miami-Dade County Code Chapter 8, the following expenses will be recovered from necessary building department enforcement and/or demolitions: 
a.  Initiation and processing fee for all work without a permit and all unsafe structures cases after being given 90 days to comply: $500.00. 
b.  Digital pictures: $1.00 each. 
c.  Additional inspection of open non-compliant cases after being given 90 days to comply: $150.00. 
d.  Posting of notices: $50.00. 
e.  Unsafe structures panel fee: $200.00. 
f.  Title search will be charged: Actual cost. 
g.  Court reporting will be charged: Actual cost. 
h.  Legal advertisement will charged: Actual cost. 
i.  Lien/recordation/cancellation of notices-each will be charged actual cost plus a $1.00 administrative fee per every ten pages. 
j.  Bid processing fee and contractor notice to proceed (NTP) administrative cost: $150.00. 
k.  Demolition/secure services will be charged actual cost. 
l.  Asbestos and lead environmental sampling and abatement: Actual cost. 
m.  Corporate information and lenders search: $25.00. 
n.  Extension fee (90 days, one time extension only): $150.00. 
(5)  Waiver of permitting fees. All city building permit fees related to the installation of solar panels are hereby waived for residential and commercial properties. The building department will process all building permit applications for solar panels within three business days. This waiver does not include any surcharges, fees or costs required by federal, state or county governments. 
(6)  New permits prohibited, non-homestead properties. Permits shall not be issued for a non-homestead property with any outstanding code enforcement violations, building violations, or any relevant city lien or invoice due and owing to the city. Permits required to cure life safety issues, permits which are required to bring outstanding violations into compliance, or permits for any properties owned by a governmental entity are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 11633, § 2, 3-31-98; Ord. No. 11725, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 12030, § 2, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 12155, § 1, 11-15-01; Ord. No. 12237, § 1, 6-13-02; Ord. No. 12663, § 1, 3-10-05; Ord. No. 12978, § 2, 5-8-08; Ord. No. 13108, § 3, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13200, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13313, § 2, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 13391, § 2, 6-13-13; Ord. No. 13630, § 2, 9-8-16; Ord. No. 13658, § 2, 2-9-17; Ord. No. 13717, § 2, 12-14-17; Ord. No. 13784, § 2, 9-13-18; Ord. No. 13800, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 10-5. - Waiver and deferral of fees and senior citizens waiver. 
(a)  The fees required under this article may be waived by the city manager for entities and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized, and shall, upon a properly submitted application, defer those fees required pursuant to this article, except for those surcharges listed in subsection 10-4(b)(2) of the City Code, as amended, for extremely low income affordable housing, as defined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and as determined by the department of community and economic development. Applicants for such deferrals shall utilize the same petition process and covenant requirement as the affordable and workforce housing impact fee deferral program described in sections 13-8 and 13-16 of the City Code, as amended. The fees deferred pursuant to this article shall remain deferred so long as the property or extremely low income housing units, as applicable, do not change affordability status. Fees deferred under this section shall be due and payable for those properties that no longer qualify as extremely low income affordable housing as determined by the department of community and economic development. The covenant required by this section shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Run with the land; 
(2)  Clearly explain the rights and obligations of building unit(s) owner(s) to maintain the same as ELI affordable housing; and 
(3)  Provide remedies for the city to secure the owners obligations under this section. 
For projects that do not exclusively contain extremely low income housing units, deferral of fees shall be on a pro-rata basis utilizing the percentage of extremely low income housing units as compared to the number of total residential units. In no event shall this deferral program exceed $250,000.00 in total deferred fees each fiscal year. Any individual application for deferral that would exceed said limitation shall be denied only as to the portion thereof that would exceed said limitation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code or the Florida Building Code to the contrary, all fees and charges assessed by the city departments, including impact fees, which are required to be paid as a condition of the issuance of a building permit, shall not be charged if all the following conditions are met for senior citizens: 
(1)  The permit to be obtained will correct a violation for work without permit or for work with an expired permit for which the property owner has been cited by code enforcement or any section of the building department. 
(2)  The work performed without a permit commenced prior to March 1, 2002 (Florida Building Code entered in effect March 1, 2002), or the permit which expired was issued under the South Florida Building Code. 
(3)  The work for which the building permit is requested is for an improvement to a single-family or duplex residence, townhouse or condominium which is occupied by the property owner who is a senior citizen and who has had a valid homestead exemption for the past five years for that property. 
(4)  If the property is owned by more than one person each must qualify for the senior citizen exemption, except if the joint owners are married, only one of the owners must meet the qualifications for the senior citizen exemption. 
(d)  Each development department will track the amount of permit fees and charges affected by this exemption each fiscal year. The general fund shall reimburse each of the development departments the amount of permit fees and charges exempted as part of the following fiscal year's budget. 
(e)  This subsection is not intended to waive any permit fees or charges assessed by the departments of the state, the county or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 11795, § 2, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 12834, § 2, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 12950, § 2, 10-25-07; Ord. No. 13009, § 2, 7-10-08; Ord. No. 13313, § 2, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 13595, § 2, 2-11-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13313, § 2, adopted February 23, 2012, changed the title of section 10-5 from "Waiver of fees" to "Waiver of fees and senior citizens waiver." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 10-6. - Elevator/escalator fees and fines for non-compliance. 
(a)  Fees. 
Certificate of operations: $200.00 per elevator/escalator 
Elevator/escalator duplicate certificate: $100.00 per elevator/escalator 
Elevator/escalator delinquent certificate: $50.00 per elevator/escalator 
Temporary certificate of operations: $100.00 per elevator/escalator 
Elevator/escalator annual inspection: $200.00 per elevator/escalator 
Elevator/escalator re-inspection fee: $100.00 per elevator/escalator 
Elevator witness: 
One-year test: $200.00 
Five-year test: $250.00 
Elevator emergency power/fire recall test: $1,000.00 per test 
Elevator/escalator removal fee: $500.00 per elevator/escalator 
(b)  Fines for non-compliance. 
Elevator/escalator non-compliance fines: 
First offense: $250.00 per elevator/escalator 
Second offense: $500.00 per elevator/escalator 
Third offense: $1,000.00 per elevator/escalator 
(Ord. No. 13365, § 2, 3-14-13)  
Sec. 10-7. - Minimum requirements for contractors. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a structure to be built, constructed, or demolished, except for city unsafe structure demolitions, the contractor for such construction or demolition shall, prior to the commencement of any work, sign a contractor's code of ethics which shall be affixed to the building permit and shall read in substantially the attached form: 
1.  I will be fair, honest, impartial, respectful and professional, and act in good faith in all my business relationships with my clients and the public, including employees, subcontractors and suppliers. 
2.  I will always act in the interests of the client unless doing so violates an ordinance, statute or this Code of Ethics. 
3.  I will not discriminate in any business activities on the basis of race, national origin, religion, gender, sexual orientation, familial status or handicap, and will comply with all federal, state and local laws concerning discrimination and fair housing. 
4.  I will be truthful regarding my training, experience, qualifications and services. 
5.  I will be truthful regarding my licenses and certifications, and will provide documentation upon request. 
6.  I will be truthful regarding my bonding and insurance coverage. 
7.  I will accept only assignments and projects for which my skills and licensing are commensurate. 
8.  I will uphold and comply with all applicable statute, laws, ordinances, codes, and professional licensing requirements of the jurisdiction in which I conduct business, especially those related to safety. 
For any lot or site on which a structure is being built, constructed, or demolished, except for city unsafe structure demolitions, the contractor for such construction or demolition, prior to the commencement of any work, shall provide the following: 
(a)  A posted notice, not to exceed four square feet, attached to a temporary construction fence, or staked into the ground, and visible from the public right-of-way, at a minimum 168-point type that shall read in substantially the attached form: 
THIS IS AN ACTIVE CONSTRUCTION SITE. THE CONTRACTOR IS [insert contractor]. FOR ANY COMPLAINTS OR CONCERNS PLEASE CALL [insert telephone number] OR E-MAIL [insert e-mail address]. 
A contractor may incorporate this required language into an already existing sign at the lot or site provided the requirements above are followed. 
(b)  The contractor, if a corporate entity, shall provide its registered name, and not a fictitious name on the notice. 
(c)  The telephone number provided must be active and answered by a live person from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, or at any time during active construction activity, whichever is greater. 
(d)  The e-mail address provided must be active and all complaints or concerns regarding the site acknowledged within 24 hours of receipt. 
(e)  Enforcement of this section shall be as proscribed by chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement, and any other remedies as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13569, § 1, 10-22-15)  
Sec. 10-8. - Emergency plans and emergency preparedness measures required for certain buildings. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "facility" shall mean community residential homes licensed under F.S. ch. 419, assisted living facilities licensed under F.S. ch. 429, and nursing homes licensed under F.S. ch. 440, which caterer to the elderly. 
(b)  Any facilities located in the city shall prepare and annually update a comprehensive emergency management plan ("plan"). At a minimum, the plan must provide for components that address emergency evacuation transportation; adequate shelter arrangements; post-disaster activities, including provisions for emergency power generators with sufficient capacity to power the facility's fixed or portable heating, ventilation and air conditioning ("HVAC") system in order to maintain an ambient temperature of 81 degrees or less in one or more designated rooms for a period of a minimum of 96 hours in the event of the loss of electrical power after the foreseeable disaster passes; fuel to run the generator(s) for a minimum of 72 hours, whether stored entirely on site or provided for by periodic deliveries contracted for in advance of the start of hurricane season each year; bottled or potable water; food when the facility provides food to its residents on a daily basis in the normal course of the facility's operations; staffing; and when the facility provides custodial care, medical, or assisted living services, it shall provide for individual identification of residents, transfer of records, and communication with families (subject to residents' written consent and controlling regulations [(e.g. HIPAA)]. The plan is subject to review and approval by the city's emergency manager which shall not be unreasonably withheld. During the review of the plan, the emergency manager will complete his or her review within 60 days and either approve the plan or advise the facility of necessary revisions. 
(c)  Any existing facility shall comply with the provisions of this section within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. Commercially reasonable efforts to retrofit existing facilities shall be made. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it is not practicable or feasible to install the required generator(s) on-site of an existing facility, then the operator may contract with a third-party vendor for a portable generator(s) in the event of a foreseeable disaster. The foregoing provision for the installation and/or placement of the temporary and/or permanent generator(s) are subject to approval by all appropriate governmental agencies and/or departments. 
(d)  After the effective date of this section, any new facility shall not receive a certificate of use or a temporary certificate of use until the provisions of this section have been satisfied. 
(e)  Compliance with these requirements for such facilities shall be mandatory. 
(f)  Facilities shall be equipped with generators that are able to power essential services as set forth in subsection (a), including but not limited to, elevators, lights, emergency alarms, and air conditioning ("A.C.") in one or more designated room(s) within the facility. Designated Room(s) means a public, common, or private space which can safely and lawfully house residents in an appropriate fashion pre- and post-foreseeable disaster. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any requirement mentioned herein, facility staff are to be on site within 24 hours of a foreseeable disaster, or as soon a safely possible, unless they are required to remain at the facility. This does not negate the requirement to have staff on site and available to run the required generator(s) and other life safety necessities. 
(h)  If the facility requires additional time to process and submit all the requested information above, the reservation or application must be renewed for an additional 180 days. If the process is not completed within the two 180-day periods provided above, the reservation or application will expire and a new reservation or application cannot be processed on that property for 30 days. 
(i)  Such review costs shall be as stated by the City Code, as amended. 
(j)  A violation of this section may be enforced pursuant to the provisions proscribed in chapter 2, article X of the City Code, and any other remedies as provided by law, including but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief in the circuit court. The use of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. If the violator is found to have violated this article, the code enforcement board may impose a fine not to exceed $500.00 per day per violation for a first occurrence and a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation for each repeated violation. Such fines shall continue to accrue so long as the violation continues to exist on the property as per the provisions of sections 2-811 through 2-820 of this Code, as amended. Furthermore, the property may be subject to losing its certificate of use and/or business tax receipt pursuant to sections 2-211, 31-48, and 31-49 of the City Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13762, § 2, 4-12-18)  
Secs. 10-9—10-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXTERIOR FACADE CODE 
 
Sec. 10-21. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Miami exterior facade code for residential and commercial properties." 
(Ord. No. 11603, § 2, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 10-22. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in a singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Event shall, for the purpose of this chapter, mean any media related occurrence such as photo shoot, movie shoot, video shoot or other similar happening. 
Fire Station No. 2 Motion Picture and Media district shall mean and is designated as that area bounded by Northeast 15 th Street on the north, the FEC right-of-way on the west, I-395 on the south, and Northeast 1 st Avenue on the east. 
Media district shall be defined as an area within the city which is designated as being of aesthetic value for the media/entertainment industry. 
Nonresidential/commercial property means any business or establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Residential property shall include any and all property of a residential use or nature as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Zoning ordinance shall mean the City of Miami Zoning Ordinance No. 11000, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 11603, § 2, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 12052, § 2, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 12207, § 1, 4-11-02)  
Sec. 10-23. - Conditions of nonresidential/commercial properties. 
The exterior of all commercial property shall be maintained so as to prevent deterioration or blight from inadequate maintenance. 
(1)  All exterior building surfaces shall be free of chipping, pitting, cracking, peeling, fading or discoloration. 
(2)  All exterior signs shall be in good repair and free of chipping, pitting, cracking, peeling, fading or discolorations. Lighted signs shall have all lights working. 
(3)  Doors and windows shall be free of cracked or discolored glass or corroded frames. 
(4)  All awnings shall be without tears and holes and be free of dirt, discoloration, fading or cracking. Any lettering or painted surfaces on awnings shall conform to subsection (2) above. All hardware, supports and poles shall be straight, free of rust, and if painted shall be free of chipping, pitting, cracking, peeling, fading or discoloration, and in good condition. 
(5)  All building surfaces shall be free of any advertising signs, or posters, painted or attached to the walls unless a permit has been acquired. 
(6)  If any commercial property is vacant for more than 15 days, all glass surfaces visible to the public shall be kept clean and the interior of such vacant store shall be screened from public view in one of the following ways until the property is occupied: 
a.  All glass surfaces visible to the public shall be covered with white 60-pound weight paper. 
b.  Decorative displays of merchandise currently available within the city, merchandise of the future tenant of the vacant store, public service displays or festival and current holiday displays extending as much as three feet into the vacant store shall be located in display windows, provided that screening of the remainder of the vacant store shall be placed immediately behind the decorative display. All sidewalk overhangs attached to commercial buildings shall be structurally sound and free of rust, discoloration, peeling, chipping, cracking, fading, sagging or dirt. All lettering or signage on overhangs shall conform to the requirements provided in subsection (2) above. 
(7)  Construction sites shall provide temporary fencing to secure the site during construction and non-construction hours to mitigate the effects of vagrant activity, noise and dust upon the surrounding community. 
"Construction sites" shall include all sites where demolition (except city unsafe structures demolitions), new construction take place, other than just interior work which is not visible to the exterior of the premises. This shall not include affordable housing residential units as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for rental projects and the city first-time homebuyer program using the area media income as published annually by the state housing finance corporation for homeownership projects. 
"Secure," as applied to site access, includes protecting the construction site, during construction and non-construction hours by way of a locked fence surrounding the perimeter of the site. These sites must also have posted and visible "No Trespassing" signs: 
a.  If any commercial property is vacant for more than 15 days, all glass surfaces visible to the public shall be kept clean and the interior of such vacant store shall be screened from public view in one of the following ways until the property is occupied. 
b.  All glass surfaces visible to the public shall be covered with white 60-pound weight paper. 
c.  Decorative displays of merchandise currently available within the city, merchandise of the future tenant of the vacant store, public service displays or festival and current holiday displays extending as much as three feet into the vacant store shall be located in display windows, provided that screening of the remainder of the vacant store shall be placed immediately behind the decorative display. All sidewalk overhangs attached to commercial buildings shall be structurally sound and free of rust, discoloration, peeling, chipping, cracking, fading, sagging or dirt. All lettering or signage on overhangs shall conform to the requirements provided in subsection (2). 
(8)  Signage. A sign shall be placed on the construction site with the following language: 
"This area is a designated construction site. Anyone who trespasses on this property commits a third degree felony pursuant to Florida Statutes 810.09." 
(Ord. No. 11603, § 2, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 12930, § 2, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 10-24. - Conditions of residential properties. 
The exterior of every structure used for human habitation shall be so maintained with reasonable attractiveness so as not, in the case of scaling of paint or excessive mildew, to cause or contribute to a depreciation in property values in the immediate neighborhood. 
(1)  The exterior wall surfaces shall be kept free from materials, objects, and conditions which will have an adverse effect on adjacent premises. 
(2)  All exterior building surfaces shall be free of chipping, pitting, cracking, discoloration, peeling or fading. 
(3)  All awnings shall be without tears or holes and be free of dirt, discoloration, fading or cracking. 
(4)  All walls or fences shall be maintained in good condition, free of cracking, discoloration, peeling or fading. 
(5)  All awnings, walls or fences shall be kept free of debris, clothes, and/or any other material that may have an adverse effect on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 11603, § 2, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 10-25. - Enforcement. 
All violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement as set forth in chapter 2, article X, entitled "Code Enforcement," and may be brought for further proceedings before the Code Enforcement Board. 
(Ord. No. 11603, § 2, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 10-26. - Exceptions. 
The restrictions as set forth herein, may be modified by the director of the department of planning and zoning, subject to the issuance of a Class II Special Permit as required by Zoning Ordinance No. 11000, as amended, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, for properties lying within a designated media district. In determining the issuance of a Class II Special Permit, the director shall review and make findings based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure/building is of significant value to the media district; and 
(2)  The Class II Special Permit shall expire one year after its issuance; annual renewals shall be required; and 
(3)  The application fee for the Class II Special Permit shall be $420.00; and 
(4)  The owner of the property shall comply with the following: 
a.  The owner shall submit an engineering report, certifying that the subject structure is safe for the public and safe for the limited use of the media industry; and 
b.  Provide insurance coverage holding the city harmless from any liability, as required by the risk management division; and 
c.  Events, as required by the Class II Special Permit; and 
d.  Any other requirement that the director of planning and zoning may deem necessary for the safety of the proposed use and the public; and 
(5)  The director of planning and zoning shall review and approve any proposed aesthetic changes or modifications to the structure which are visible from the public right-of-way. 
Such finding shall be incorporated as part of the final decision of the Class II Special Permit. Decisions of the planning and zoning director are final, unless appealed according to the procedures set forth in article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance No. 11000, as amended, the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12052, § 2, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 13142, § 5, 2-11-10)  
ARTICLE III. - LEAD-BASED PAINT ON BUILDING EXTERIORS  
DIVISION 1. - WORK PRACTICES FOR EXTERIOR LEAD-BASED PAINT 
 
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
Accredited laboratory means a laboratory, which operates within the EPA National Lead Laboratory Accreditation Program. 
Adjacent properties means properties that adjoin the regulated area of the property in question, including at the corners of lot lines. 
Certified means a process used by the state and/or Miami-Dade County DERM and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to identify individuals who have completed training and other requirements to permit the safe execution of lead risk assessments and inspections, or lead hazard reduction and control work. Certified includes current "interim certification" by DHS, unless and until this status is modified by state legislation. 
Containment barriers means measures that prevent the migration of lead paint contaminants. Containment barriers shall be at least as effective at protecting human health and the environment as those contained in the most current HUD guidelines. 
Contractor means any person, whether or not in possession of a valid state contractor's license, which undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does by himself or herself or by or through others, any action that may or will disturb or remove paint. For purpose of this chapter, contractor shall also include subcontractors. 
Disturb or remove paint " means any action that creates friction, pressure, heat or a chemical reaction upon any lead-based paint on an exterior surface so as to abrade, loosen, penetrate, cut through or eliminate paint from that surface. This term shall include all demolition and surface preparation activities that are performed upon an exterior surface containing lead-based paint. 
Exterior means the outside of a building or steel structure and the areas around it within the boundaries of the property, including the outside of any detached structures, including but not limited to, outside and common walls, stairways, fences, light wells, breezeways, sheds and garages. 
HEPA means a high efficiency particulate air filter. 
HUD guidelines means the most recent "Guidelines for Evaluation and Control of Lead-Based Paint Hazards" promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Landlord means an owner, lessor, or sublessor who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of any commercial or residential rental property in the city, and the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing. 
Lead means metallic lead and all inorganic and organic compounds of lead. 
Lead-based paint or lead paint means any paint, varnish, shellac or other coating on surfaces with lead in excess of 1.0 mg/cm2 (milligrams per square centimeter) as measured by x-ray fluorescence (XRF) detector or laboratory analysis or in excess of 0.5 percent by weight, also expressed as 5,000 ppm (parts per million), 5,000 µg/g (micrograms per gram), or 5,000 mg/kg (milligrams per kilogram) as measured by laboratory analysis. 
Lead-based paint testing means testing of surfaces to determine the presence of lead-based paint performed by an independent certified risk assessor/inspector, in accordance with the HUD guidelines, and where testing includes bulk paint samples, such an accredited laboratory analyzes samples. 
Lead-contaminated dust means surface dust that contains an area or mass concentration of lead in excess of 100 µg/ft 2 (micrograms per square foot) on uncarpeted floors, 500 µg/ft 2 on interior window sills, and 800 µg/ft 2 on exterior window sills and exterior horizontal surfaces. 
Lead dust testing means tests conducted in accordance with the most recent federal guidelines to determine the presence or absence of lead-contaminated dust within a defined area. 
Lead-contaminated soil means areas that contain total lead in excess of 400 ppm (parts per million) in bare soil. 
Lead soil testing means tests conducted in accordance with the most recent federal guidelines to determine the presence or absence of lead-contaminated soil within a defined area. 
Lead paint contaminants means substances containing lead paint which are potentially hazardous to human health or the environment, including but not limited to paint chips and paint-containing soil, debris, dust, abrasives, fumes and water. 
Owner means the owner of a property or the owner's authorized agent. 
Person means a natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a municipal or state agency to the extent allowable by law, a firm, joint stock company, business concern, association, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
Prohibited practices means work practices prohibited under this chapter. 
Responsible party means either: 
(1)  The owner of the property where the owner or the owner's employees or persons otherwise under the control of the owner are performing the activities regulated under this chapter, or 
(2)  The owner and the contractor where the owner has entered into a contract with another to carry out (contractor is performing) the activities regulated under this chapter. 
Regulated area means an area in which work is being performed that disturbs or removes paint, and to which access is restricted in order to prevent migration of paint contaminants. Regulated area shall also include any area contaminated with lead paint contaminants as a result of a breach or lack of containment barriers or a violation of the containment requirement set forth in this chapter. 
Steel structure means any structure that is not a building and which has exterior surfaces made of steel or other metal, such as bridges, billboards, walkways, water towers, steel tanks and roadway or railway overpasses. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-28. - Prohibitions. 
No person shall disturb or remove lead paint, or in any other way generate lead paint contaminants during demolition or work on the exterior of any existing (residential, commercial or public) building(s) or steel structure, except in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-29. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to activities that disturb or remove paint where those activities are being performed on buildings or steel structures on which construction was completed after 1950, or on new construction. For purposes of this chapter, all paint on the exterior of any building or steel structure on which the original construction was completed prior to December 31, 1950, shall be presumed to be lead-based paint. Any person seeking to rebut this presumption shall establish through lead-based paint testing, or other means satisfactory to the city, that the paint on the building or steel structure in question is not lead-based paint. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-30. - De minimis notification exemption. 
Any person performing work subject to this chapter who disturbs or removes less than ten square feet of lead-based paint in total shall not be required to comply with the notification requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-31. - Containment barriers. 
Any person performing work subject to this chapter shall establish containment barriers at least as effective at protecting human health and the environment as those contained in the HUD guidelines or the lead paint removal guide published by the steel structure painting council, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-32. - Prohibited practices. 
No person performing work subject to this chapter shall use prohibited practices, including but not limited to 
(1)  Acetylene or propane burning and torching; 
(2)  Scraping, sanding or grinding without containment barriers or a HEPA local vacuum exhaust tool; 
(3)  Hydroblasting or high-pressure wash without containment barriers; 
(4)  Abrasive blasting or sandblasting without containment barriers or a HEPA local vacuum exhaust tool; and 
(5)  Heat guns operating above 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-33. - Migration. 
Any person performing work subject to this chapter shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent migration of lead paint contaminants beyond containment barriers during the course of the work. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-34. - Visible lead paint contaminants. 
The responsible party performing work subject to this chapter shall make all reasonable efforts to remove all visible lead paint contaminants from all regulated areas of the property prior to completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
DIVISION 2. - NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-35. - Notifying bidders. 
In any instance where an owner or a contractor is requesting bids for work subject to this chapter, the owner or contractor shall notify all bidders of any paint inspection reports disclosing the presence (or absence) of any lead-based paint in the regulated area of the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-36. - Contents of notice. 
Prior to the commencement of work expressly subject to this chapter, the responsible party (owner or contractor) shall provide written notice to the NET office of the following: 
(1)  The location of the project; 
(2)  The (nature and approximate square footage of the painted surface being disturbed and/or removed)) scope of work; 
(3)  The methods and tools for paint disturbance and/or removal; 
(4)  The approximate age of the building; 
(5)  The anticipated job start and completion dates for work subject to this chapter; 
(6)  Whether the responsible party has reason to know or presume that lead-based paint is present; 
(7)  Whether the building is residential or non-residential, and whether it is owner-occupied or rental property, and the approximate number of dwelling units, (if any), on the property; 
(8)  The dates by which the responsible party has or will fulfill any tenant or adjacent property notification requirements as described in the applicable sections of this chapter below; 
(9)  The name, address, telephone number, and 
(10)  If available, pager number, of the party who will perform the specified work. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-37. - Contents of notice. 
The city shall make available to the public a form that complies with the requirements of section 10-36 and contains blank spaces for the required information. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-38. - Notice (by landlord) to tenants. 
Where (the responsible party is a landlord, a person or persons in the employ of a landlord, or where a landlord has entered into a contract with a contractor to perform work subject to the requirements of this chapter) work subject to this chapter is to be performed on a residential property occupied by one or more tenants, not less than three business days before the work is to commence, the landlord shall provide written notice to the tenant(s) of the building on which the work is being performed that lead-related work is being performed. This notice shall be in the form of a sign, letter or memorandum, and shall prominently state the following: 
"Work is scheduled to be performed on this property starting [date]. This work may Disturb or Remove Lead-Based Paint. The persons performing this work are required to follow federal, state and local laws regulating work with Lead-Based Paint. You may obtain information regarding these laws, or report any violation concerning these laws, by calling your local City of Miami NET Office. The Owner of this property is also required to provide tenants with a copy of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pamphlet entitled Protect Your Family From Lead-Based Paint in Your Home. " 
The city shall make available to the public a form containing this required information in English, Spanish and Creole. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-39. - Availability of pamphlet. 
The owner shall provide to all tenants in the building, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pamphlet entitled Protect Your Family From Lead-Based Paint in Your Home, except that an owner (landlord) shall not be required to comply with this requirement with respect to tenants to whom the owner (landlord) has previously provided a copy of the pamphlet. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-40. - Notice of lead-contaminated dust or soil. 
Except as may be otherwise inconsistent with state law, any property owner who has performed lead dust testing or lead soil testing in a regulated area shall provide written notice to tenants of the property of the presence of any lead-contaminated dust or lead-contaminated soil verified by the test results within five business days of receipt of written results. The city shall make available to the public a form that complies with the above requirements and restates the generic information required by the notice in English, Spanish and Creole. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-41. - Removal of notice of lead-contaminated dust or soil. 
The owner may remove such signs when: 
(1)  All visible lead paint contaminants have been removed from the regulated area in accordance with this chapter, prior to the completion of the work, or 
(2)  Upon receipt of results of additional lead dust or lead soil testing indicating that no lead-contaminated dust or lead-contaminated soil remains in the regulated area. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-42. - Authority of the building official to sample. 
The city and the building official of the department of public health may also collect paint, dust, and soil samples from the property where the work is being performed and from adjacent properties in order to determine whether the work is being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-43. - Enforcement in general. 
The city is authorized to make use of all enforcement authority authorized by law, including, but not limited to, the authority set forth in sections 1-13 and/or 10-25 to enforce against any violation of this chapter. Where the owner and the contractor are both responsible parties, the city may proceed against either the owner or the contractor, or against both. The city is further authorized, pursuant to chapter 2, article X, following issuance of a notice of violation, to require as a condition of resuming work, that the responsible party conduct a special inspection by a certified risk assessor in order to establish that the regulated area is in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-44. - Stop work orders. 
The city shall have the power to stop any work that is disturbing or removing lead paint or otherwise generating lead paint contaminants in violation of this chapter or the construction, alteration or repairs of any steel structure or building subject to the requirements of this chapter when such work is being done in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and to order all work to be stopped upon notice to any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done. The work shall be stopped immediately and shall not be resumed without authorization. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-45. - No obligation by city. 
In undertaking the enforcement of this article, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 10-46. - Discretionary duty. 
Subject to the limitations of due process, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever the words "shall" or "must" are used in establishing a responsibility or duty of the city, its elected or appointed officers, employees, or agents, it is the legislative intent that such words establish a discretionary responsibility or duty requiring the exercise of judgment and discretion. 
(Ord. No. 12804, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Secs. 10-47—10-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION OF VACANT, BLIGHTED, UNSECURED OR ABANDONED STRUCTURES, AND OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGED PROPERTIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13599, § 2, adopted April 14, 2016, changed the title of article IV from "Registration of vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures" to "Registration of vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures, and of defaulted mortgaged properties." 
 
Sec. 10-61. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by: 
(1)  Establishing a program for identification and registration of vacant, blighted, unsecured and abandoned structures. 
(2)  Establishing the responsibilities of owners of vacant, blighted, unsecured and abandoned structures. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(4)  Allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08 on vacant, blighted, unsecured, and abandoned structures. 
(5)  Providing a fair, equitable, and efficient method of allocating and apportioning the assessed service costs, which constitute a special benefit to residential and commercial properties, among property owners within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08)  
Sec. 10-62. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Abandoned structures means a structure or building, as defined herein, or portion thereof, which may have multiple housing, code enforcement and/or building code violations, or may be illegally occupied and is: 
(1)  Unsecured; 
(2)  Unsafe as defined herein or as in the Miami-Dade County, Florida Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8 entitled Building Code, as amended; 
(3)  Condemned as defined by Miami-Dade County, Florida Code of Ordinances, as amended; 
(4)  Vacant for over a 30-day period of time, commencing with the date of city inspection and during which time an order to correct violations, abate a nuisance, or remove an attractive nuisance has been issued; 
(5)  Vacant for over a 30-day period of time without evidence of functioning water, electric and/or gas utilities; 
(6)  Boarded up, partially destroyed, or partially constructed or incomplete after the building permit authorizing its construction has expired; 
(7)  Accessible to trespassers, criminals or other unauthorized persons; or 
(8)  Currently the subject of mortgage or tax foreclosure proceedings, delinquent in mortgage or tax payments and vacant for at least 90 days. 
Accessible property/structure means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Annual registration means 12 months from the date of the first action that required registration, as determined by the city, or its authorized designee, and every subsequent 12 months. The date of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that required registration. 
Applicable codes means the city's zoning ordinance, City Code, and the state and county building and fire codes. 
Approved materials means all city approved materials used to secure a structure. 
Blighted property means: 
(1)  Structures that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing or malicious mischief; 
(2)  Structures whose maintenance is so out of harmony and conformity with the maintenance and quality of adjacent or nearby properties as to cause substantial diminution in the use or property value of such adjacent or nearby properties; 
(3)  A structure defined as a public nuisance pursuant to section 46-1, as amended or pursuant to state statute; 
(4)  Any individual, commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement that endangers the public's health, safety or welfare because the structure or improvement upon the property is dilapidated, deteriorated, or violates minimum health and safety standards, and lacks maintenance as defined by the Florida Building Code; or 
(5)  A structure which exhibits objectively determinable signs of deterioration sufficient to constitute a threat to human health, safety, and public welfare. 
Codes means all applicable codes, including but not limited to, National Fire Prevention Code, Florida Building Code, the Miami-Dade County Code and the City Code. 
Code violations means violations of any codes adopted and enforced by the city, which may include but not be limited to, the National Fire Prevention Code, Florida Building Code, the Miami-Dade County Code and the City Code. 
Default means that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the debt, referred to in the mortgage. 
Enforcement officer means code enforcement inspector, building inspector, or manager's designee. 
Foreclosure means the legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien. 
Local property management company means a property manager, property management company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance and security of registrable property located within Miami-Dade County or within 20 driving miles of the county limits. Upon review of credentials, the city, or its designee, may allow a non-local property manager to be listed. 
Manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Miami or the manager's authorized designee. 
Mortgage servicer means a company to which some borrowers pay their mortgage loan payment and which performs other services in connection with mortgages and mortgage-backed securities. 
Mortgagee means the creditor, including but not limited to. trustees; mortgage service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. 
Notice of lis pendens means the lis pendens as identified and described in F.S. § 48.23, as amended. 
Owner means any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership interest in real property, including but not limited to, owners identified on the blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures registration form; or a purchaser, devisee, lessee, fiduciary, or holder of an unrecorded deed. This term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction, maintenance or operation of the structure involved, as well any person, legal entity or agent authorized to initiate a foreclosure or collection proceeding against the property, whether or not such proceeding has in fact been initiated. This term shall not apply to the city. 
Plan means a city approved proposal required to be submitted by the owner to bring a structure into compliance pursuant to all applicable codes. 
Property management company means a local property manager, property maintenance company, or similar entity responsible for the maintenance of registrable property. 
Registrable property means any real property located in the city, whether vacant or occupied by trespassers or persons with no legal authority to be present on the property, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, for which a notice of lis pendens has been filed and recorded; is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee; is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale; or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure; and/or any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured. Non-related in this instance shall mean not related by blood or marriage to the seller in terms of natural persons and not affiliated, parent, or subsidiary companies, or a company with related natural persons as officers, directors, or as owners of more than five percent of the stock or other equivalent ownership, in terms of a business entity. 
Rental dwelling unit means any real property that is provided to an individual or entity for residential purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in lieu of rent, regardless of relationship between lessor and lessee. 
Rental property means property that contains a single-family rental dwelling unit or multi-family rental dwelling units for use by residential tenants including, but not limited to, the following: mobile homes, mobile home spaces, town homes, and condominium unit(s). 
Structure means a structure or building as defined by the Florida Building Code. 
Unauthorized person(s) means a person or persons who do not have legal authority to be present on the property such as a right of ownership or lease or similar agreement conveying a right of occupancy. 
Unsafe structure means a structure or building which is potentially hazardous to persons or surrounding structures, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  A structure which has collapsed, is in danger of partial or complete collapse, or unable to support the weight of normally imposed loads; 
(2)  A structure with any exterior parts which are loose or in danger of failing; 
(3)  A structure which is vacant, unguarded and open at doors or windows; 
(4)  A structure with an accumulation of debris or other material therein representing a hazard of combustion; 
(5)  A structure in a condition that creates hazards with respect to means of ingress and egress and fire protection as provided herein for the particular occupancy; 
(6)  A structure or structural parts that are in deterioration; 
(7)  A structure that is partially destroyed; 
(8)  A structure with electrical or mechanical installations or systems creating a hazardous condition contrary to the standards of the Florida Building Code; or 
(9)  A structure that by reasons of use or occupancy, the area, height, type of construction, fire-resistivity, means of ingress and egress, electrical equipment, plumbing, air conditioning or other features regulated by this Code do not comply with this Code for the use and group of occupancy. 
Unsecured means an unoccupied structure or a structure without a lawful tenant or occupant which is open to entry by unauthorized persons or covered with unapproved materials and that are not in conformity with the nearby structures or materials not in compliance with the Florida Building Code. 
Vacant means a structure that is unoccupied and is not actively used as a place of residence or business. Actively used shall not include occupancy or use by persons with no legal authority to be present on the property. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16)  
Sec. 10-63. - Responsibilities of owners of vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures. 
No owner shall maintain a blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure. 
(1)  An owner of a blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure shall comply with the requirements of subsections (2) through (6). 
(2)  An owner of a blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure shall secure and maintain all entrances and all other openings of the structure, including but not limited to windows and doorways. Such blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure shall be secured as follows: 
a.  All entrances, windows and other openings shall be secured with approved materials, provided that such materials completely seal all entrances, windows and other openings, thereby protecting the interior of the structure from wind, rain, and other naturally occurring elements. Entrances and windows above the ground floor shall be regarded as secure if the entrances and windows are locked and not otherwise open to entry and the windows contain glass that is not cracked or broken or shutters that prevent entry. 
b.  If a violation of this section is discovered by a code enforcement officer, said officer is authorized to issue a notice of violation (NOV) requiring the structure to be secured within the time period enumerated in the NOV. If the structure remains unsecured after the time period enumerated in the notice, the city, at its option, shall present a case based on the violation to the code enforcement board as defined per section 2-811 of the City Code, as amended, which is inclusive of the special master, pursuant to chapter 2, article X of this Code. As part of its case, or at any subsequent properly noticed hearing, the city may present evidence showing that criminal activities or incidents presenting a threat to life and safety are occurring on the property where the unsecured structure is located. If such evidence is presented and the code enforcement board or special master determines that this section has been violated, the owner of the structure at issue may be required to secure all openings with commercial quality, 14-gauge, rust proof metallic coverings. 
c.  Such metallic coverings shall consist of steel sheet metal, excluding aluminum and copper, which allow for ventilation. Said metallic coverings must have an exterior finish that allows for easy graffiti removal, and be designed to prevent removal from the exterior with a crowbar or other prying device. In addition, the metallic coverings must consist of threaded rods or cables attached on the interior of the structure to a steel cross-brace that spans the opening. 
d.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section of this article shall subject the owner to code enforcement action, as provided in section 10-66 of this article. 
(3)  All owners of a vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure shall be responsible for removing unauthorized signs, posters and graffiti from the structure's exterior unless exempted by this article or the city's zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Every owner of a vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure shall keep the premises free from rodents, insects, vermin, and other wild animals. 
(5)  The roof of every structure shall be well drained of rain water. 
(6)  All materials used to secure blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures shall be painted in a skillful fashion in the same color as its other exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13320, § 1, 5-10-12; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 10-64. - Vacant structure registration. 
(a)  Every owner of a commercial or single-family vacant structure, which is not in default as defined in this article, shall register said structure with the city. The registration fees for a commercial or single-family structure are set forth in section 10-65. Such registration shall include: 
(1)  A description of the premises including address, legal description, and folio number; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and contact numbers of the owner, or agents, that can be contacted within 24 hours; and 
(3)  Written consent by the owner allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08. 
(b)  Owners of vacant structures located within a multi-family building shall not have to comply with this section if: 
(1)  The multi-family structure has a property manager on the premises; 
(2)  The multi-family structure has a homeowners' association responsible for the management and maintenance of the property; 
(3)  The multi-family structure has security located on or responsible for the property; and 
(4)  The property manager of the multi-family building, at no costs to the property manager, registers the following information with the city: 
a.  A description of the property including address and unit number of all vacant structures within the multi-family building; 
b.  The names, addresses, and contact number of the property manager or agent who can be contacted within 24 hours; 
c.  Written consent by the owner allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08. 
(c)  If any of the requirements of subsections (b)(1)—(4) are not complied with, the individual owner of the vacant structure located within a multi-family building shall register pursuant to subsection 10-65(a). 
(d)  This registration must be done upon any transfer of the property and every October 1st thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16)  
Sec. 10-65. - Blighted, unsecured, vacant or abandoned structure registration. 
(a)  After any structure in the city becomes a blighted, unsecured, vacant or abandoned structure which is in default and for which a notice of lis pendens, is filed and recorded, as defined in this article, the owner shall register the property as provided in this section and section 10-66. 
(b)  The registration shall be submitted on designated forms and shall, at a minimum, include the following information supplied by the owner: 
(1)  A description of the premises, including address, legal description and folio number; 
(2)  The names, addresses and contact numbers of the owner, or agents, that can be contacted within 24 hours; 
(3)  The names, addresses and contact numbers of all known lien holders and all other parties with an ownership interest in the structure; 
(4)  A plan and timeline for bringing the structure into compliance; and 
(5)  Written consent by the owner allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08. 
(c)  The owner shall comply with all applicable laws and codes and close all outstanding City Code violations, unless waived by the appropriate department or agency. 
(d)  The owner shall submit a plan and timeline, as described in subsection (b)(4) to be approved by the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall require completion of the plan within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days. Any repairs, improvements or alterations to structures must comply with any applicable housing and/or building codes. 
(e)  The owner shall notify the enforcement officer of any changes to the information supplied on the registration immediately. All plan and timeline revisions and extensions must be approved by the enforcement officer or the city manager's designee. 
(f)  The owner of a blighted, unsecured, vacant or abandoned structure shall pay a registration fee: 
(1)  The owner of a blighted, unsecured, vacant or abandoned structure shall initially register the property with the city and pay an annual registration fee. The schedule is as follows: 
a.  $262.50 for the first year. 
b.  $394.00 for the second year. 
c.  $525.00 for the third and each subsequent consecutive year the building remains a blighted, unsecured, vacant or abandoned structure. 
(2)  The fee for the first year of registration shall be due and payable, in full, 30 days after the structure is registered as a blighted, unsecured, vacant, or abandoned structure. If the fee is not paid within 30 days of being due, the owner shall be subject to prosecution as prescribed in section 10-66. In addition, interest at the statutory rate per annum shall accrue on fees which are not timely paid. 
(3)  The registration fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any permits to repair or rehabilitate with the exception of a demolition permit. 
(4)  All delinquent registration fees, including interest, shall be paid by the owner prior to any transfer of ownership interest. If the fees are not paid prior to transfer, the new owner shall be responsible for all outstanding fees no later than 30 days after the transfer of ownership and subsequent registration fees shall be due and payable in accordance with this article. 
(5)  The registration fee is reasonably related to the administrative costs for processing the registrations and monitoring of the blighted, unsecured, vacant, or abandoned structures. Increasing fees reflect the growing costs of identifying, regulating, monitoring and policing of deteriorating structures. In registering property as blighted, unsecured, vacant, or abandoned, the form will indicate that submission grants the city's police department the authority to issue trespass warnings to individuals who cannot demonstrate written authorization to be on the property. The mortgagee or owner can opt out of or revoke the department's authority to issue a trespass warning by notifying the police department on the registration form or in writing directed to the chief of police. 
(g)  The enforcement officer shall keep a file for all registered blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures, which shall include any information from interested parties or citizens regarding the history, problems, status or blighting influence of such structure. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13142, § 5, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16)  
Sec. 10-66. - Defaulted mortgage real property registration. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property to determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor for which a notice of lis pendens has been filed and recorded. The mortgagee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the city, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied. 
(b)  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct mailing address, direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail address for the mortgagee/trustee, the servicer, and the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property, who has the authority to make decisions concerning the abatement of nuisance conditions at the property as well as any expenditure in connection therewith. 
(c)  Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective date of this section have 30 calendar days from the effective date to register the property with the city, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether it is vacant or occupied. 
(d)  If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five days of the transfer, must register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new mortgagee or trustee and are due and payable with the initial registration. 
(e)  If the mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the transferee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five days of the transfer, must register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new registrable property owner and are due and payable with their initial registration. 
(f)  As long as the property is registrable, it shall be inspected by the mortgagee, or designee, on a monthly basis. If an inspection shows a change in the property's occupancy status, the mortgagee shall, within ten days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration. 
(g)  A non-refundable annual registration fee as established in this article, as amended, and as applicable, shall accompany each registration pursuant to this section. 
(h)  All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, trustee, servicer, or owner. Third party registration fees are not allowed without the written consent of the city manager and/or the city manager's authorized designee. 
(i)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they are registrable. 
(i)  Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or final judgment and/or certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements of this article as long as the borrower is in default. 
(k)  Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this section must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(l)  Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the article and shall be subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary penalties. 
(m)  Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination that any property is in violation of this article, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and, thereafter place, a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and bring it into compliance. 
(n)  Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window. All such costs shall be borne by the owner(s). If the city or its agents decide to undertake repairs, the costs shall be subject to administrative costs, fines and liens as provided in chapter 2, article 10 of the City Code. 
(o)  If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or blighted, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the local property manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws. 
(p)  All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which, pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16)  
Sec. 10-67. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall subject the owner to code enforcement action, pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, as well as chapter 2, article X of the City Code, and specifically section 2-814. 
If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of this article, the city may, pursuant to F.S. ch. 170, secure or cause to be secured and make all reasonable repairs to such blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures, which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this article. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the local governing body to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the local governing body for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. 
If the work is done or caused to be done by the city, the enforcement officer shall keep an itemized accounting of expenses of the work done and the cost thereof and notify the owner of said expenses. If the statement is not paid within ten days after the owner is notified, interest shall begin to accrue annually at the statutory rate until paid in full. 
Under the lawful authority granted to municipalities pursuant to F.S. chs. 170 and 166, the city hereby authorizes the levy and collection of special assessments to fund the costs of any work done by the city to enforce compliance with the requirements of this article. 
Costs resulting from any work undertaken by the city pursuant to this section shall be levied as a special assessment lien against the real property where the violation existed. Said special assessment lien, until fully paid and released, shall remain a lien equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes, and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Interest upon such special assessment liens shall accrue pursuant to F.S. § 170.09, as amended. Special assessment liens shall be enforced by any method authorized by law to enforce payment thereof with all accrued interest and costs, including legal costs, or may be subject to foreclosure, pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, as amended. The property owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the collection of fees, service charges, penalties and liens imposed by virtue of this section. Additionally, the city may elect to utilize the uniform method for the levy, collection and enforcement of this non-ad valorem assessment pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13319, § 2, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13599, § 2, adopted April 14, 2016, renumbered the former sections 10-66—10-68 as sections 10-67—10-69. The historical notation of these sections has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 10-68. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to any structures protected by federal, state, or local law or any structures owned by the federal government, state government, Miami-Dade County, or the city. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16) 
Note— See editor's note at section 10-67.  
Sec. 10-69. - Penalties. 
Penalties under any provision of this article shall be assessed pursuant to sections 2-824 and 2-829. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16) 
Note— See editor's note at section 10-67.  
Sec. 10-69.5. - Alternative procedures. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to preempt existing remedies of the city authorized under existing law. 
(Ord. No. 13032, § 2, 10-16-08; Ord. No. 13599, § 2, 4-14-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13599, § 2, adopted April 14, 2016, intended to renumber the former section 10-69 as section 10-70. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 10-69.5.  
ARTICLE V. - CODE RELIEF PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 10-70. - City code relief program for structures built under prior building codes and zoning ordinances. 
Intent: This article concerns the legalization of remodeling work and additions to existing buildings or structures located on homestead property constructed prior to March 1, 2002. Applicants to this code relief program must apply before September 30, 2019. This article will sunset on September 30, 2019. Thus, applicants can avail themselves of the code relief program as long as they apply before September 30, 2019. This program can be extended for a period of one year upon vote by the city commission. Minimal life-safety requirements must be met, including but not limited to, side and rear setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12; Ord. No. 13411, § 2, 10-10-13; Ord. No. 13799, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
Administrative variance (as to set-backs) means minor deviation of any zoning regulation other than height, density, intensity, or use by up to 25 percent granted by the zoning director, in order to relieve practical difficulties with strict compliance with the zoning ordinance. An administrative variance may not be granted if it conflicts with the City Code, Florida Building Code, fire code, or any other life-safety requirement. 
Applicant means one who applies and wishes to participate in the code relief program. 
As-built certificates mean documents provided by a professional Florida licensed architect or engineer including a notarized affidavit, stating that the plans and the work completed on the structure complies with the building code for Miami-Dade County in effect at the time of construction. The architect or engineer will specify the methodology used to inspect the areas not readily visible (foundation, wall reinforcement, etc.). 
As-built plans means the set of drawings and calculations required for permits at the time of construction. The plans must be prepared by a professional Florida licensed architect or engineer who shall sign and seal the documents and insert a statement in the first page stating that the work complies with the building code for Miami-Dade County in effect at the time of the construction, and indicating in the drawings any work that will need to be done for compliance. 
Code relief program means a program pursuant to this article concerned with the legalization of structures constructed prior to March 1, 2002. 
Existing buildings mean those buildings constructed prior to March 1, 2002, as defined in Chapter 8-11 of Miami-Dade County Code and the Florida Building Code. 
Legalization permits mean building or zoning permits issued pursuant to this article. 
Participant means an applicant who has participated and completed the code relief program. 
Permit issued by affidavit means permits will be issued by the city's building official in accordance with the Florida Building Code § 105.14, as amended. Thus, when a permit is issued relying upon an affidavit or when work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which the building official opines are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations must supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity to the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion, make and file with the building official written affidavits that the work has been done in conformity to the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12; Ord. No. 13799, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 10-72. - Criteria and process. 
Existing remodeling work and additions located on homestead property may be granted a permit for legalization under this article. The legalization may be for any structure, including any part thereof, or for any addition or repair work, built without proper permits, if the work performed commenced prior to March 1, 2002, under any prior building or zoning code, or any permits obtained under the South Florida Building Code, which expired without certificates of completion or occupancy having been issued. 
The legalization permits will be issued by the building official in accordance with the Florida Building Code § 105.14, as amended, and by fulfilling the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall furnish a set of as-built plans, as defined in this article, of the building or structure; 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish an as-built certificate satisfactory to the building official issued by a Florida registered engineer or architect. The Florida registered engineer or architect will attest via affidavit based on knowledge, belief and professional judgment, and based on an inspection of the structure, that the structure can be legalized. The as-built certificate shall contain a narrative description of the methodology used by the engineer or architect tendering the certificate to make the determination that the structure can be legalized. In issuing the certificate of completion or occupancy, the building official shall be entitled to rely on the accuracy of the as-built certificate provided by an engineer or architect. More particularly, the affidavit will attest that the structure: 
a.  Is structurally sound, and complies with the FEMA zone requirements for minimum floor elevation; 
b.  Satisfies the requirements of the building and zoning code(s) in effect at the time the work was commenced, indicating the date the work on the structure was commenced from the best available records and the requirements of the building and zoning code(s) in effect on that date; 
c.  Complies with all safety minimum requirements identified below; 
d.  Complies with the permit application and any plans approved by the building official; and 
(3)  The as-built certificate and plans must indicate that the structure will comply with all of the following life-safety minimum requirements of the current Florida Building Code (FBC): 
a.  Means of egress or escape; 
b.  Requirement of shutters; 
c.  Residential single station smoke detectors - installed in accordance with NFPA (1999 edition); 
d.  Requirement for ground fault interrupters, bathroom and kitchen; 
e.  Requirement for full size pressure and temperature relief valve lines on all water heaters; 
f.  Handicapped access requirements; 
g.  All gas piping systems shall be bonded to ground; 
h.  Handrails shall be inspected and replaced, if necessary, in full compliance with requirements of the current building code. 
(4)  Prior to issuing the certificate of completion or occupancy, the building official shall conduct an inspection to determine whether: 
a.  The plans submitted reflect the present state of the structure; and 
b.  The structure complies with all requirements of the current building code identified above; and 
c.  The as-built certificate represents accurately the condition of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12; Ord. No. 13799, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 10-73. - Enforcement and mitigation. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the building official may at all times continue enforcement of this Code or any local (city or county) ordinances or technical codes through any authorized means, including issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement; recording of lien for same; commencement of a case before the unsafe structures board or panel; or the issuance of a civil citation. This section shall not be construed or serve as a defense against any enforcement action brought by the building official based on the current requirements of the ordinance, nor shall this article preclude the city from enforcing local (city or county) ordinances or technical codes through any means provided by law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement with regard to the mitigation of fines, the mitigation of code enforcement per diem fines shall be mitigated as set forth in the chart below, provided the participant has applied for the code relief program and has completed the program. Upon completion of the program, the director of code enforcement will advise the director of finance of the eligibility of the participant to pay the mitigated fines according to the chart below. Once proof of payment to the finance department is given to the director of code enforcement, the director of code enforcement will cause an affidavit of compliance to be issued. 
Amount to be 
mitigated in 
dollars 	Homestead 
Property 
in dollars 	Seniors or 
Disabled or 
Veterans in 
dollars 	Payment 
Options 
0—24,999 	$1,000 	$1,000 	Within 1 year 
25,000—49,999 	 1,500 	 1,000 	Within 1 year 
50,000—74,999 	 2,000 	 1,000 	Within 1 year 
75,000—99,999 	 2,500 	 1,000 	Within 1 year 
100,000—499,999 	 3,500 	 2,000 	Within 2 years 
500,000—999,999 	 5,000 	 2,500 	Within 3 years 
Over 1 million 	 7,500 	 3,500 	Within 4 years 
 
The amounts set forth above in the mitigation chart shall not be construed to prohibit the mitigation of fines that fall below the minimum fine to a lower amount. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12; Ord. No. 13327, § 2, 6-28-12; Ord. No. 13799, § 2, 10-25-18) 
_____ 
Sec. 10-74. - Building fees. 
The building official shall establish a fee schedule for processing applications and costs to conduct any testing done pursuant to this section. The city will waive the "double permit fee plus fine" in section 10-4 for all the permits issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12)  
Sec. 10-75. - Administrative variance. 
Pursuant to review by the zoning director, an administrative variance of up to 25 percent may be granted for setbacks as long as minimal life-safety requirements are met. However, such a variance will not in any event legalize that which cannot be legalized or allowed in a particular transect with respect to uses. 
(Ord. No. 13304, § 2, 1-26-12; Ord. No. 13799, § 2, 10-25-18)  
Secs. 10-76—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Unsafe structures panel. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Unsafe structures panel(s) shall hear unsafe structures cases, and appeals of decisions, of the city building official declaring properties and their structures and accessory structures to be unsafe where there is a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens in the community, all in the manner prescribed in this article. If such structure has been designated historic and is under the city's historic preservation jurisdiction, demolition procedures shall, whenever possible, abide by the process as set out in the city's historic preservation ordinance as found in chapter 23 of this Code, unless there is an immediate threat of danger, as determined by the building official. 
(2)  Buildings or structures that are, or hereafter shall become, unsafe, unsanitary or deficient, and dilapidated facilities, with inadequate means of egress, or which constitute a fire or windstorm hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or public welfare by reason of illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance, or which have been substantially damaged by the elements, acts of God, fire, explosion or otherwise, shall be deemed unsafe structures and a permit shall be obtained to demolish the structure, or where specifically allowed by this article, to bring the building into compliance with the applicable codes as provided herein. 
(3)  Incomplete buildings commenced without a permit or for which the permit has expired, or completed buildings commenced without a permit or for which the permit has expired, prior to completion and no certificate of occupancy has been issued, shall be presumed and deemed unsafe and a permit shall be obtained to demolish the structure or bring the building into compliance with the applicable codes as provided herein. 
(4)  Buildings which meet the physical criteria of unsafe structures, set forth in this section, and are ordered to be repaired by the building official or the unsafe structures panel, in the manner more particularly set forth below, which are not completed or repaired and brought into full compliance with the building code within the reasonable time allowed by the building official or the unsafe structures panel, will be demolished. 
(5)  Swimming pools that contain stagnant water are deemed unsanitary and dangerous to human life and the public welfare. If the stagnant water is not removed and all repairs made and brought into full compliance with the building code within a reasonable time, as allowed by the building official, then these swimming pools will be demolished and filled in. 
(6)  Buildings or structures subject to the recertification requirements in subsection 8-11(f) of the Miami-Dade County Code which the owner fails to timely respond to the notice of required inspection or fails to make all required repairs or modifications found to be necessary resulting from the recertification inspection by the deadline specified in the Code or any written extension granted by the building official will be demolished. 
(b)  Physical criteria. 
(1)  A building shall be deemed a fire hazard or unsafe when any of the following criteria are met: 
a.  It is vacant, unguarded and open at doors or windows. 
b.  There is an accumulation of debris or other material therein representing a hazard of combustion. 
c.  The building condition creates hazards with respect to means of egress and fire protection as provided herein for the particular occupancy. 
d.  It meets the criteria of a vacant and abandoned property under chapter 10 of this Code or under chapter 8 of the Miami-Dade County Code. 
(2)  A building, or part thereof, shall be presumed to be unsafe if: 
a.  There is a falling away, hanging loose or loosening of any siding, block, brick, or other building material. 
b.  There is a deterioration of the structure or structural parts. 
c.  The building is partially destroyed. 
d.  There is an unusual sagging or leaning out of plumb of the building or any parts of the building and such effect is caused by deterioration or over-stressing. 
e.  The electrical or mechanical installations or systems create a hazardous condition contrary to the standards of the building code. 
f.  An unsanitary condition exists by reason of inadequate or malfunctioning sanitary facilities or waste disposal systems. 
g.  By reasons of use or occupancy the area, height, type of construction, fire-resistivity, means of egress, electrical equipment, plumbing, air conditioning or other features regulated by this Code do not comply with this Code for the use and group or occupancy. 
h.  The construction, installation of electrical, plumbing or other equipment therein or thereon, or the partial construction or installation of electrical, plumbing or other equipment has been commenced or completed without a permit therefore having been obtained or where the permit has expired prior to completion and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
i.  The construction, installation of electrical, plumbing or other equipment therein or thereon, or the partial construction or installation of electrical, plumbing or other equipment has not been completed. 
j.  The building or structure is vacant and abandoned, and covered at doors or windows with materials not previously approved by the building official, or for a period exceeding the maximum limitations set forth in this article. 
k.  By reason of illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance does not comply with the building code, or the code in effect at the time of construction. 
l.  The building or part thereof meets the physical criteria of an unsafe structure set forth above and has not been repaired and brought into compliance with the building code following the expiration of the reasonable periods allowed by the building official, or an unsafe structures panel for such repairs. 
(3)  Grow houses. A building or structure that has been identified by any law enforcement officer as being used to grow or manufacture controlled substances as defined by F.S. ch. 893 or any drugs, as defined in F.S. ch. 499 (a "grow house") shall be presumed to be unsafe if any one of the following criteria has been satisfied: 
a.  There is an open and obvious modification or addition to any of the structure's electrical wiring or electrical components, or there exists any exposed wires or exposed electrical components; 
b.  There is an open and obvious modification or addition to any of the structure's plumbing, and/or any discharge of water or other effluent that is not into an ordinarily available drain; 
c.  The structure's interior walls have been destroyed, moved, or modified in any way. This may be evidenced by marks on the ceiling and/or floor that are indicative of a wall having been moved or removed, holes or passages in a wall that are not ordinary, and may be unfinished in appearance. This list shall not be considered exhaustive such that any other evidence of walls being destroyed, moved or modified shall be proper; 
d.  Any exterior window has been modified or covered in such a way, so as to inhibit or reduce egress or which inhibits or prevents normal use for ventilation purposes; this shall not include curtains and other ordinary window coverings; or 
e.  Any of the structure's exterior or interior doors have been modified or covered in such a way to prevent or inhibit ingress or egress. 
(c)  Upon observation of any one of the above criteria in subsection (b), any city enforcement personnel shall be authorized to post and shall post a notice in a conspicuous location on the building or structure that has been determined to be unsafe. 
(1)  The posted notice shall read substantially as follows: 
UNSAFE BUILDING. This building or structure is, in the opinion of the City of Miami, unsafe. THIS BUILDING SHALL BE VACATED-SHALL NOT BE OCCUPIED. The owner should contact the City of Miami Building Department immediately. THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT BE REMOVED EXCEPT BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. DATE (insert date posted). 
(2)  Entry to any structure posted with such a notice shall be prohibited except by an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, until such time as all necessary inspections listed in subsection (4) have been completed. 
(3)  Within 24 hours of the notice being posted by the building official, the Miami Police Department shall notify the building department of any trespass violations. Upon receiving such notification from the Miami Police Department the building department shall immediately send a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this article. This notice shall also state that building official will conduct an inspection of the structure and issue a notice of violation within five business days. 
(4)  All structures that meet any of the criteria from subsection (c)(1) above and have been posted with the requisite notice, must be approved by the building department based upon all of the following inspections before the structure can be deemed safe for use: 
a.  An electrical inspection; 
b.  A plumbing inspection; 
c.  An inspection by a certified mold inspector; and 
d.  An inspection by a structural engineer. 
Upon completion of the inspections described herein, an inspection report shall be filed with the building department for approval. The building director shall proscribe the forms to be used for the inspections described herein and shall be authorized to charge a fee for the review of the inspection reports. Each inspection report shall certify that there is currently no unsafe or hazardous conditions currently existing in the structure, all building code violations corrected and the structure is safe for occupancy. No building deemed unsafe pursuant to this section shall be occupied until the results from the required inspections have been reviewed, and all permits have been obtained to bring the structure back into compliance with the building code. Nothing herein shall relieve the owner from the requirement to obtain permits for any repairs required to meet the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Valuation criteria. 
(1)  If the cost of completion, alteration, repair and/or replacement of an unsafe building or structure or part thereof exceeds 50 percent of its value, such building shall be demolished and removed from the premises. If the cost of completion, alteration, repair and/or replacement of an unsafe building or structure or part thereof does not exceed 50 percent of its value, such building or structure may be repaired and made safe, as provided herein. 
(2)  For purposes of application of this formula, value shall be the estimated cost to replace the building in kind, excluding depreciation. The estimate shall be derived from multiplying the value of the square footage of construction used by the building department to calculate the applicable permit fee. That estimate shall be broken down on a percentage basis into an estimate of the following critical elements of construction, as applicable: structural, roofing, electrical, plumbing and mechanical, and other building components ("valuation of construction components"). The cost of completion, alteration, repair or replacement shall be estimated by application of the percentage of deterioration found on site for each of the critical elements of construction to the valuation of construction components for the structure, to arrive at an overall estimated cost to repair the affected structure. The appointing authority shall by administrative order provide a form for the application of the formula set forth above for the various types of construction. 
(3)  If a building or structure may be repaired and made safe pursuant to the valuation criteria set forth above, and the building or structure is otherwise unsafe in accordance with the physical criteria set forth in this article, the building official may order such building or structure to be temporarily secured in the manner and subject to the limitations set forth in this article. Such building must be completed and brought into full compliance with the building code within such time as the building official or unsafe structures panel may determine to be reasonable for such completion. If the building or structure is not temporarily secured, completed and brought into full compliance with the building code within the reasonable periods allowed, such building or structure shall be demolished and removed from the premises. 
(e)  Inspection of unsafe buildings and structures. The building official, on his/her own initiative or as a result of reports by others, shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure appearing or reported to be unsafe, and if such is found to be an unsafe building or structure as defined in this article, the building official shall proceed in the manner set forth in this article. 
(f)  Emergency action. When in the opinion of the building official, there is actual or immediate danger of the failure or collapse of a building or structure, or there is a health, windstorm or fire hazard, he/she may order the occupants to demolish, vacate, temporarily close for use or occupancy the rights-of-way thereto, sidewalks, streets or adjacent buildings or nearby area and institute other such temporary safeguards, including securing the building or structure or any demolition or partial demolition, as he/she may deem necessary under the circumstances, and may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. In such event, the operation of the notice and hearing requirements of this article shall be suspended as reasonably necessary in the opinion of the building official to redress the emergency situation. Costs incurred in the performance of such emergency work shall be paid by the appropriate owner of the property and upon the recording in the public records of this county a certificate executed by the building official, certifying the amount so expended, the same shall become a special assessment lien against the property involved. 
(g)  Unsafe structures meeting valuation criteria for immediate demolition. 
(1)  The provisions below shall apply to buildings or structures meeting the valuation criteria for demolition. 
(2)  The building official shall prepare a notice of violation. The notice shall state in summary form the nature of the defects which constitute a violation of this article and shall order the structure to be demolished within such time as is reasonable, subject to extension when requested in writing within the reasonable discretion of the building official. The notice shall state that the specific details concerning the violations can be obtained in writing from the building official upon request. In addition, the notice will explain the right of appeal of the decision of the building official to the unsafe structures panel, in its appellate capacity, and advise that unless the decision is appealed, the building or structure shall be demolished without further notice. 
(3)  The notice of violation shall be affixed to the structure concerned. The building official shall also affix to the structure notice of the hearing of the unsafe structures panel scheduled to consider any appeal of the decision of the building official in connection with the structure. The notice of hearing shall be issued by the director of the building department or his/her designee for appeals to an unsafe structures panel advising persons to appear before the panel to show cause why the decision of the building official should not be carried out. The hearing shall not be scheduled earlier than 30 days following the date of posting of the notice of hearing and notice of violation. 
(4)  The building official shall post a notice bearing his or her signature in a conspicuous location on the building or structure that has been determined to be unsafe. The posted notice shall read substantially as follows: "UNSAFE BUILDING". This building or structure is, in the opinion of the Building Official, unsafe. "THIS BUILDING SHALL BE VACATED-SHALL NOT BE OCCUPIED." Action shall be taken by the owner as prescribed by written notice. "THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT BE REMOVED EXCEPT BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. DATE (insert date posted)." 
(5)  Within ten working days of posting the notice of violation and notice of hearing, the building official shall send written notice of violation and notice of hearing to the owner and any interested party. For these purposes, the owner shall be the taxpayer as reflected in the most recently certified real property ad valorem tax roll of Miami-Dade County; provided however, where the records of the Dade County Property Appraiser indicate that ownership has changed, the owner shall be the taxpayer as reflected in those records. An interested party shall be the owner and any other person or entity who has previously requested real property ad valorem tax notices with respect to the subject property in accordance with F.S. § 197.344, as the same may be renumbered or amended from time to time. The notice of violation and notice of hearing shall be sent by certified or first class mail to all such parties' last known addresses as reflected in the records of the Miami-Dade County Property Appraiser. Failure to receive such notice, or the lack of a signed return receipt shall not invalidate the notice. 
(6)  Upon expiration of the period of appeal provided in the notice of violation, the building official may file an appropriate instrument in the office of the clerk of the circuit court to be recorded in the public records of this county, indicating that the property is in violation of the building code. The recording of the notice shall constitute constructive notice of the violation to all concerned, subsequent purchasers, transferees, mortgagees, lessees, grantees and all persons claiming or acquiring interest in the property. In the event that the violation is corrected, the building official shall file proof of the same upon payment for fees incurred. 
(7)  The building official shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two consecutive weeks. The published notice shall contain the address of the subject property and the names of the owner and any interested party, and state that the subject property has been found to be in violation of the building code and subject to demolition. The published notice shall also state the time and place of the hearing scheduled before the unsafe structures panel. 
(8)  The notices provided in this section are intended to serve as full and effective notice of the hearing and the violations related to the structure. Failure of one form of notice shall not invalidate or impair the full effectiveness of notice provided by other means pursuant to this section. 
(h)  Unsafe structures not meeting the valuation criteria for immediate demolition. 
(1)  If a building or structure may be repaired and made safe pursuant to the valuation criteria set forth above, and the building or structure is otherwise unsafe in accordance with the physical criteria set forth in this section, the building official may order such building or structure to be temporarily secured in the manner and subject to the limitations set forth in this section. Such building must be completed and brought into full compliance with the building code within such time as the building official or the unsafe structures panel may determine to be reasonable for such completion. If the building or structure is not temporarily secured, or once served, not completed and brought into compliance with the building code within the reasonable periods allowed, such building or structure shall be demolished and removed from the premises. 
(2)  The building official shall prepare a notice of violation. This written notice shall state in summary form the nature of defects which constitute a violation of this section and shall prescribe the action to be taken to comply and the time within which compliance must be accomplished, in such time not to exceed ten days to secure an open structure to the reasonable satisfaction of the building official, 90 days to obtain permits to repair the structure, and 120 days to bring it into compliance with the building code. This notice shall also state that the specific details concerning the violations can be obtained in writing from the building official on request. In addition, this notice will explain the right of appeal of the decision of the building official to the unsafe structures panel, in its appellate capacity and also advise that unless there is compliance with the directions of the building official, a case will be commenced before the unsafe structures after time for compliance has expired, or that the building official's order will be enforced. 
(3)  The notice of violation shall be affixed to the structure concerned. 
(4)  Within ten working days of posting the notice of violation, the building official shall send the written notice of violation to the owner and any interested party, in the same manner provided in above. 
(5)  In the event that the building or structure is not secured or brought into compliance with the requirements of the building code within the periods specified in the notice of violation, and no application for extension is made in the manner set forth in this section, the building official may schedule the case for hearing before the unsafe structures panel to secure an order for demolition of the building or structure or to obtain any other appropriate remedy. 
(6)  In the event that the building official requests that the director of the building department or his/her designee schedule a hearing, or in the event that the owner or interested party files a timely appeal of the decision of the building official, the secretary to the board or director of the building department or his/her designee shall issue a notice of hearing which shall be affixed to the property, mailed to the owner and interested party, in the same manner provided in subsection (g) above. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the same manner provided in subsection (g) above. 
(7)  Upon expiration of the period of appeal provided in the notice of violation, if the property has not been secured or permits for repair obtained in the manner stipulated in the notice, the building official may file an appropriate instrument in the public records in the manner provided in subsection (g) above. 
(8)  The periods set forth in the notice of violation for bringing the structure into compliance with the building code may be extended by the building official for one or more additional periods which in the aggregate do not exceed an additional 180 days, provided all of the conditions of this subsection are met. Application for the extension must be made in writing by the interested party to the building official prior to the expiration of the period allowed for compliance, and shall set forth to the reasonable satisfaction of the building official that the extension is warranted by one or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  The interested party has a demonstrated financial hardship that will prevent the interested party from completing a building or structure; 
b.  The interested party has filed a completed zoning hearing application which affects the final completion of the building or structure and which zoning hearing request has not received final approval or rejection from the city or applicable governmental agency, including any or all appeals to court, for circumstances outside of the control for the interested party; 
c.  The building or structure is a multiple dwelling structure as defined in the building code and demolition of any unit comprising that structure compromises the structural integrity of the entire multi-unit structure, where the completion of the structure is outside of the control of the interested party; 
d.  The building or structure is the subject of pending litigation that renders it impossible for the building or structure to be completed; 
e.  The building or structure is the subject of a good faith insurance claim, the proceeds of which are intended to be utilized for repair and completion; 
f.  The building or structure is the subject of a pending sale to be closed within a reasonable time from the date the extension is requested, where the buyer has executed a written commitment to the building official to complete the structure within the applicable extension period. 
The written application for extension shall further represent to the building official that the building or structure is and has at all times been in full compliance with all of the conditions set forth in this subsection. 
(9)  Upon receipt of the written application, the building official shall be authorized to extend the date of full completion and compliance with the building code provided: 
a.  The completed written application demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the building official that one or more of the conditions set forth above exist with respect to the building or structure; 
b.  The building or structure is not open, vacant or abandoned, having been secured at doors and windows in a manner acceptable to the building official; and 
c.  The interested party has paid all reasonable costs of enforcement. 
(10)  Any interested party may appeal to the unsafe structures panel a decision to grant or deny the extension. Such appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date of mailing of the building official's written notice of his or her decision with respect to the application for extension. 
(i)  Public hearing. 
(1)  On the day established in the notice of public hearing the unsafe structures panel shall review all pertinent evidence and hear all testimony from the building official, the owner and other parties in interest and their respective witnesses. 
(2)  The unsafe structures panel may order repair, securing, and/or demolition of the structure upon application of the standards set forth in this article. The unsafe structures panel may modify, rescind, or uphold the decision of the building official as recited in the notice of violation. The unsafe structures panel shall modify or rescind a decision of the building official only upon a finding that the building official was in error in the interpretation or application of the building code. The unsafe structures panel shall not exceed the time frames allowed for repair and completion of buildings and structures specifically set forth in this article, except where the work involved reasonably requires such additional time. 
(3)  A copy of the order shall be forwarded to the owner, and all interested parties by registered or certified mail, and a copy thereof posted on the property. 
(4)  If the owner or interested party fails to comply with the order of the unsafe structures panel within the time stipulated therein and such order is to repair, complete or secure the building to make safe, then the building official shall cause such building to be vacated, if occupied; and shall through his/her employees or through a contractor enforce the order of the unsafe structures panel or building official. Buildings shall be secured with concrete block or other materials of the same durability as determined by the building official. Swimming pools shall be secured by fencing or by using another approved method as determined by the building official. 
(5)  If the order of the unsafe structures panel is to demolish the building or structure and to remove or salvage contents, debris and abandoned property from the premises, and the owner or those responsible shall have failed to comply with such order, then the building official may do so. Swimming pools shall be demolished by removal of any stagnant water and any above ground parts of the structure, breaking open the bottom and filling with sand or clean fill level to the existing grade. 
(j)  Multi-unit structures. 
(1)  This subsection shall be applicable to all multi-unit structures. As used in this subsection, the term multi-unit structures means all townhouses and other structures which contain units divided by one or more common walls, where the structural integrity of any component unit depends upon the structural integrity of one or more other units in the same structure. In the event that the owner or other interested party fails to comply with any order of the unsafe structures panel in connection with any multi-unit structure, then in addition to any other right or remedy contained in this section, the city shall be authorized, but not required, to secure the structure in the manner set forth in this subsection. In addition, and not in derogation of the use of other methods contemplated by this section for enforcing the building code with respect to any structure, multi-unit structures may be secured by performing whatever work the building official may determine is reasonably necessary to preserve the structural integrity, water-tightness, or safety of adjacent units or the surrounding community which work may include, but no b limited to roofing, windows, and electrical. 
(2)  The procedure for enforcement of this Code set forth above shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, other procedures available to the building official pursuant to the building code. The provisions of this subsection are not intended to exonerate any owner or other interested party from compliance with the building code or any order of an unsafe structures panel. 
(k)  Recovery of cost. 
(1)  All costs incurred pursuant to any of the provisions of this section shall be paid by the owner, interested party, or occupant of the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(2)  The building official shall file among his/her records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by this section. 
(3)  Any other employee, official or agency who incurs costs while executing any provision within this article shall create an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by this section. That affidavit shall be given to the building official responsible for the unsafe structure at issue and filed among his/her records for that property. 
(4)  The enforcing agency may institute a suit to recover such expenses against any liable person or may cause such expenses to be charged against the property on which the violation occurred as a lien or as a special assessment lien collectible according to established procedures. 
(5)  Any lien imposed pursuant to this article shall be a lien greater in dignity to all liens, excepting IRS tax liens. 
(6)  Liens created pursuant to this section may be discharged and satisfied by paying to the city the amount specified in the notice of lien, together with interest thereon from the date of the filing of the lien computed at the maximum statutory interest rate, together with the administrative costs, filing and recording fees and fees paid to file a satisfaction of the lien in the public records. When any such lien has been discharged, the city shall promptly cause evidence of the satisfaction and discharge of such lien to be recorded in the public records. 
(7)  The remedies and procedures for recovery of costs provided in this article shall be in addition to and not in derogation of other provided in the building code or otherwise provided by law. 
(l)  Unsafe structure panels. Unsafe structures panels are hereby created to conduct hearings as provided for under this section. 
(1)  Composition. Unsafe structures panel(s) shall consist of three members from the list of panel members available from the county clerk pursuant to Miami-Dade County Administrative Order No. 2-5, as amended. A building department representative will serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of each panel, to act as a liaison. The ex-officio member shall not count toward a quorum of the panel. 
(2)  Designation. At the request of the director of the building department, the county clerk shall designate three members to constitute one or more unsafe structures panel(s) to conduct hearings on the dates scheduled by the director of the building department or his/her designee. At least one of the members on each panel shall have knowledge of construction gained from experience as an architect, engineer, general contractor or lawyer. The director of the building department shall not have any input into which members are designated to comprise a particular panel. 
(3)  Organization of the unsafe structures panels. 
a.  The director of the building department may utilize one or more unsafe structures panel(s) as needed to conduct hearings. 
b.  Quorum. Three unsafe structures panel members must be present to conduct a hearing or take any action. 
c.  A majority vote of unsafe structures panel members present and voting shall be sufficient to overrule, modify or affirm any action or decision of the building official or to take any action within the scope of the powers and duties of the panel. 
d.  No member of an unsafe structures panel shall sit as a voting member in any hearing on a matter in which he/she has a personal or financial interest. 
e.  The director of the city building department, or his/her designee, shall assist the unsafe structures panel, but shall have no vote. 
f.  The director of the city building department or his/her designee may call and schedule unsafe structures hearings. 
g.  Audio record shall be kept of all unsafe structures hearings and all hearings shall be public. 
h.  All hearings shall be open to the public, and any person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard in person, or through his/her attorney. 
i.  Witnesses may be sworn and subpoenaed by the unsafe structures panel in a like manner as they are subpoenaed by the court or courts in Miami-Dade County. 
j.  The hearings shall be informal and need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rules which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. 
k.  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. 
l.  The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now, or hereafter may be, recognized in civil actions; and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
m.  The director of the city building department shall provide adequate and competent clerical and administrative personnel and such technical or scientific personnel as may be reasonably required by the unsafe structures panels for the proper performance of their duties, subject to budget limitations. The director of the city building department shall maintain a record of all proceedings, including but not limited to a court reporter's transcript of the proceeding, and may clarify the same as a true copy and make a reasonable charge therefore; provided, the court reporter shall certify the copy of his or her transcript. 
n.  The director of the city building department shall provide a regular meeting place for the panel. 
(4)  Duties, powers and compensation of the unsafe structures panels. The unsafe structures panels and shall have the following duties, functions, powers and responsibilities: 
a.  Hear and determine appeals from actions and decisions of the building official pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
b.  Hear and review the application of the building official for the review of his or her action where his or her decision as indicated in a notice of violations has not been complied with. 
c.  Affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the building official upon appeal or on application for review. 
d.  In the event of judicial review of an unsafe structure panel order, the director of the city building department or his/her designee shall transmit the records with all exhibits, instruments, papers and transcripts of its proceedings to the reviewing authority if so requested. 
e.  The members of the unsafe structures panels shall be compensated as provided for under Miami-Dade County Administrative Order No. 2-5, as amended. Moreover, the members shall not be employees of the city. 
(5)  Duties of the city attorney. The city attorney shall either be counsel to the unsafe structures panel or shall represent the city by presenting cases to the unsafe structures panel, but in no case shall the city attorney serve in both capacities. 
(m)  Requests for extensions of time. Any owner or authorized representative may seek an extension of the timeframes set forth in an order of the unsafe structures panel. Such request for a hearing to seek such extension must be in writing, directed to the unsafe structures panel. The unsafe structures panel shall not be authorized to extend any deadline for compliance, set forth in the order, unless the secretary of the unsafe structures panel receives the written request for extension prior to the deadline specified in the initial order. For example, in the event the unsafe structures panel order states that a permit must be obtained within a specified period, the request for extension of the deadline to obtain the permit must be received prior to the expiration of that specified period. If the same order provides a deadline for completion of the structure, the request for the extension for the deadline of completion must be received prior to the deadline for completion, provided that the applicant has complied with the permit deadline. In no event may the unsafe structures panel grant more than one extension of time for each initial order. 
To obtain an extension, the owner or applicant must demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the unsafe structures panel that the structure that is the subject of the order is secure at the time the extension is sought and that the owner or applicant has made a good faith attempt to comply with the order which has been impeded by changed circumstances or other circumstances outside of the owner or applicant's control. As a further condition of the extension, the owner or applicant must submit in writing, together with the petition for an extension, a written timetable for compliance with the substantive provisions of the order and for completion of all necessary repairs. The unsafe structures panel shall not reconsider the order, limiting its consideration of the petition to deciding whether the grounds for an extension have been satisfied in the manner set forth in this subsection. 
(n)  Judicial review. Any owner or interested party aggrieved by a decision of the unsafe structures panel may seek judicial review of that decision in accordance with Rule 9.110(c) of the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. Accordingly, any order, requirement, decision, denial of a request for extension of time, or determination of the unsafe structures panel shall be reviewed by the filing of a notice of appeal in the circuit court appellate division of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit in and for Miami-Dade County, Florida, within 30 days of rendition of the order. 
(o)  Definitions. 
Building or structures shall be synonymous. 
Building code shall be the Florida Building Code, as amended from time to time. 
Interested parties shall be defined as stated in chapter 10 of this Code. 
All other definitions shall be defined as stated in chapter 10 of this Code or chapter 8 of the Miami-Dade County Code. 
(Ord. No. 13295, § 2, 12-15-11; Ord. No. 13422, § 2, 12-12-13; Ord. No. 13580, § 2, 12-10-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 10-102. - Maintenance of vacant lots after demolition of structures. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate an improved or unimproved lot that has become vacant or the ground has been left in disarray or excavated due to demolition of a structure(s) on the lot and to implement regulations to: 
(1)  Ensure the lot is rehabilitated in a park-like appearance; 
(2)  Reduce neighborhood blight and its negative effects by regulating the aesthetic character of vacant lots, formerly improved lots; or 
(3)  Ensure the lot does not have portions of land which have been excavated and not returned to a uniform and level grade after a demolition. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  Vacant lot: As defined in City Code section 22-114, as amended, a lot, tract, or other parcel of land in the city that does not have a structure or building on the land. 
(2)  Structure: As defined in City Code section 22-114, as amended, a structure or building as defined by the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(3)  Tree: As defined in City Code section 17-2, as amended, any self-supporting woody plant or palm which usually has a single main axis or trunk, with a minimum trunk diameter at breast height of two inches and a minimum overall height of 12 feet. This definition excludes plants which are defined as shrubs, hedges, vines, or ground covers. Palms shall have a minimum height of 14 feet in order to be classified as a tree. 
(4)  Lot: A parcel of land; a portion of land; property. 
(c)  Minimum requirements. When a structure has been demolished and real property has become a vacant lot or a portion of a lot has been left in disarray or excavated because of a demolition, the owner of the lot shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Remove all debris resulting from the demolition of the structure, along with any other garbage from the lot. 
(2)  Refill and grade the lot in accordance with subsection (d), and lay down sod or hydroseed on any exposed dirt on the lot. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the removal of trees from the lot. 
(3)  If the owner, fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the city, may issue a notice of violation. Moreover, after proper notice to the owner of record as listed in the Miami-Dade tax roll, certified mail return receipt requested, the city may refill, grade, and sod the lot and impose a lien on the property for the work done. 
(d)  Fill requirements. The re-filling, grading, and sodding of the lot shall comply with the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(e)  Enforcement provision. This section may be enforced in accordance with chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement. Nothing in this section precludes the city from enforcing this section by any and all means provided by law, including but not limited to, any actions in the circuit court. 
(f)  Special assessment provision. 
(1)  Under the lawful authority granted to municipalities pursuant to F.S. chs. 170 and 166, the city hereby authorizes the levy and collection of special assessments to the fund the costs of any work done by the city to enforce compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any work undertaken by the city under this section shall be treated as special assessment liens against the subject real property, and until fully paid and discharged, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes, and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall accrue to such delinquent accounts. Such liens shall be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85, as amended, or, in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions applicable to practice, pleading and procedure for the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate set forth in state statutes, or may be foreclosed pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, as amended, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The property owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred in the collection of fees, service charges, penalties and liens imposed by virtue of this section. Additionally, the city may elect to utilize the uniform method for the levy, collection and enforcement of this non-ad valorem assessment pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632. as may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  [Best efforts.] The city, when at all possible, will use best efforts to comply with the provisions of this section when demolishing property within the city, regardless of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 13310, § 2, 2-9-12)  
Sec. 10-103. - Maintenance of lots or property containing excavated construction sites or excavated sites in considerable non-compliance with the Florida Building Code. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate property containing excavated construction sites or excavated sites that have become a nuisance or a danger to the community and are in considerable non-compliance with the Florida Building Code, pursuant to the building official. This section seeks to implement regulations to: 
(1)  Reduce neighborhood blight and its negative effects by regulating the aesthetic character of lots or property containing excavated construction sites or excavated sites; or 
(2)  Ensure the lots or property containing excavated construction sites or excavated sites do not have portions of land which have been excavated are returned to a uniform and level grade. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  Construction site: A lot or site on which a structure is being built or constructed. 
(2)  Excavation; excavated site: A site that has been unearthed; a site made hollow by removing the inner part; a site which has a hole or cavity in or formed into a hollow, as by digging. 
(3)  Excavated construction site: A construction site which has an excavation or hole. 
(4)  Lot: A parcel of land; a portion of land; property. 
(c)  Minimum requirements. When an excavated construction site or an excavated site has been left derelict and in disarray for more than three months, to the point that the property is deteriorating and poses a danger to the community, the building official shall make a determination as to whether the property is in substantial non-compliance with the Florida Building Code and Chapter 8 of the Miami-Dade County Code and at such time, order the property owner, via a notice of violation, that such violations must be corrected within the time set on the notice. 
(1)  If the property owner refuses to correct the violations on the property, as stated in subsection (d) below or commence construction on the property, the building official shall be authorized to return the property to a uniform and level grade. 
(2)  The building official shall order the property to be refilled and graded in accordance with subsection (d) below. Moreover, the building official shall order sod or hydroseed on any exposed dirt on the property. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the removal of trees from the lot. Nothing in this section shall prevent the property owner from performing this re-filling on his/her own. 
(d)  Fill requirements. The re-filling, grading, and sodding of the lot shall comply with the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(e)  Enforcement provision. This section may be enforced in accordance with chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement. Nothing in this section precludes the city from enforcing this section by any and all means provided by law, including but not limited to, any actions in the circuit court. 
(f)  Special assessment provision. 
(1)  Under the lawful authority granted to municipalities pursuant to F.S. chs. 170 and 166, the city hereby authorizes the levy and collection of special assessments to the fund the costs of any work done by the city to enforce compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any work undertaken by the city under this section shall be treated as special assessment liens against the subject real property, and until fully paid and discharged, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes, and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall accrue to such delinquent accounts. Such liens shall be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85, as amended, or, in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions applicable to practice, pleading and procedure for the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate set forth in state statutes, or may be foreclosed pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, as amended, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The property owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred in the collection of fees, service charges, penalties and liens imposed by virtue of this section. Additionally, the city may elect to utilize the uniform method for the levy, collection and enforcement of this non-ad valorem assessment pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632. as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13312, § 2, 2-23-12)  
Secs. 10-104—10-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SECURITY SCREENS AND SHUTTERS 
 
Sec. 10-111. - Transparency of windows in Coconut Grove, the Downtown Development District and the Neighborhood Revitalization District 1. 
Applicability: This article shall apply to commercial buildings in the following areas: the Coconut Grove Central Commercial District, described pursuant to chapter 35, article V, as amended, and the Coconut Grove Business Improvement District, more particularly described in Resolution No. 08-0455 adopted July 24, 2008, and later confirmed in Resolution No. 09-0076 adopted February 12, 2009 (collectively, "Coconut Grove"), the boundaries of the Downtown Development District, described pursuant to section 14-27 of the City Code, as amended, more particularly described in Ordinance No. 12307, adopted December 12, 2002, and the boundaries of the Neighborhood Revitalization District 1, more particularly described in Ordinance No. 13561, adopted September 24, 2015, all incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 13412, § 2, 10-10-13; Ord. No. 13454, § 2, 5-8-14; Ord. No. 13555, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Sec. 10-112. - Definitions. 
Clear glass means glass in windows, doors, and display windows shall be transparent to insure a safe, pedestrian-oriented environment, and to maintain the historic charm of the areas. Glass shall be clear in appearance at the street level. 
Decorative shutter is a usually lightweight louvered or flush wood or non-wood frame in the form of a thin door located at each side of any opening of a building, such as a window or door. Most decorative shutters are fastened or painted onto a wall as a decorative device. 
Reflective surfaces. Highly reflective surfaces are those surfaces that include reflective glass and mirrors. 
Security screens and shutters shall be defined as any exterior barrier or covering (made of any material, including but not limited to, aluminum, metal, steel, plastic, etc.) which may cover any opening on the ground floor of a building such as a window or door. Security screens and shutters may include, but are not limited to, hurricane shutters or curtains, rolling or retracting metal flexible shutters, and other security devices. This definition applies to non-decorative shutters as distinguished from decorative shutters above. 
Other types of security screens and shutters are as follows: 
(1)  Permanent security screens and shutters are those which remain affixed to the building and are not of a temporary nature. 
(2)  Temporary security screens and shutters are those which are affixed to the building for a limited duration. 
(3)  Opaque security screens and shutters are not transparent or translucent and are impenetrable to light. 
(4)  Transparent security screens and shutters are those which you can see through and are 70 percent open pursuant to the Miami 21 Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13412, § 2, 10-10-13; Ord. No. 13454, § 2, 5-8-14)  
Sec. 10-113. - Security screens and shutters not allowed. 
(a)  Permanent security screens and shutters are not allowed pursuant to this article, except as described below: 
(1)  Hurricane shutters or curtains may be installed temporarily when there is a tropical storm warning, hurricane warning, hurricane, or other similar large-scale weather event provided that said hurricane curtains are removed no later than 72 hours after the dissipation of said weather condition. 
(2)  Security screens and shutters may be allowed when remodeling or repairing windows or entrances damaged by an accident. The length of time for the remodeling or repair shall be no longer than one month or the length of time described in the building permit. These would be considered temporary security screens and shutters. 
(3)  Permanent security screens and shutters may be allowed for an outdoor use, in limited circumstances, in conjunction with a cafe, restaurant, terrace, porch, or recessed retail area or alcove. Said square-footage of outdoor private property area may be screened, provided it is not opaque, using ornate and decorative permanent security screens and shutters or transparent security screens and shutters, as defined above, pursuant to review by the planning department. 
(b)  Permanent security screens and shutters shall not be permitted on the exterior of any building. They may be located in the interior of a building only if they are transparent security screens and shutters. 
(c)  Opaque security screens and shutters are not permitted on the exterior of any building. 
(d)  Transparent security screens and shutters. Only transparent security screens and shutters in compliance with the Miami 21 Zoning Ordinance are permitted on the exterior of any building. 
(Ord. No. 13412, § 2, 10-10-13; Ord. No. 13454, § 2, 5-8-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13454, § 2, adopted May 8, 2014, changed the title of section 10-113 from "Permanent security screens and shutters not allowed" to "Security screens and shutters not allowed." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 10-114. - Compliance with this article in Coconut Grove. 
(a)  All properties with opaque security screens and shutters not in compliance with this article shall come into compliance on or before October 15, 2015. 
(b)  All properties with transparent security screens and shutters not in compliance with this article shall come into compliance on or before October 15, 2016. 
(c)  However, any issuance of a building permit for the exterior remodeling of a building or replacement of windows will trigger immediate compliance with this article. 
(d)  The city shall not issue a building permit for any new construction which uses permanent security screens and shutters to comply with wind loads and impact tests, as defined and described in Chapter 16 of the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(e)  Once nonconforming security screens and shutters are removed, the use of highly reflective surfaces, including reflective glass and mirrors, is prohibited on the ground floor. Windows shall be clear glass and allow only those coverings or percentage of window covering as approved in the Miami 21 Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(f)  All nonconforming security screens and shutters, shall be subject to enforcement via chapter 2, article X, entitled "Code enforcement" and any other remedy as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13412, § 2, 10-10-13; Ord. No. 13454, § 2, 5-8-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13454, § 2, adopted May 8, 2014, changed the title of section 10-114 from "Compliance with this article" to "Compliance with this article in Coconut Grove." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 10-115. - Compliance with this article in the Downtown Development District. 
(a)  All properties with opaque security screens and shutters not in compliance with this article shall come into compliance on or before May 1, 2016. 
(b)  The city shall not issue a building permit for new construction which uses permanent security screens and shutters to comply with wind loads and impact tests, as defined and described in Chapter 16 of the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(c)  However, any issuance of a building permit for the exterior remodeling of a building or replacement of windows will trigger immediate compliance with this article. 
(d)  Once nonconforming security screens and shutters are removed, the use of highly reflective surfaces, including reflective glass and mirrors, is prohibited on the ground floor. Windows shall be clear glass and allow only those coverings or percentage of window covering as approved in the Miami 21 Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(e)  Legally installed transparent security screens and shutters as of the date of this ordinance located in the Downtown Development District that do not otherwise comply with the Miami 21 Zoning Ordinance are exempt from enforcement for failure to comply with this article. All other nonconforming security screens and shutters, shall be subject to enforcement via chapter 2, article X, entitled "Code enforcement" and any other remedy as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13454, § 2, 5-8-14)  
Sec. 10-116. - Compliance with this article in the Neighborhood Revitalization District 1. 
(a)  Any issuance of a building permit for exterior remodeling of a building that exceeds 50 percent of the facades along the frontage of the existing building or replacement of windows will trigger immediate compliance with this article. 
(b)  The city shall not issue a building permit for any new construction which uses permanent security screens and shutters to comply with wind loads and impact tests, as defined and described in Chapter 16 of the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(c)  Once nonconforming security screens and shutters are removed, the use of highly reflective surfaces, including reflective glass and mirrors, is prohibited on the ground floor. Windows shall be clear glass and allow only those coverings or percentage of window covering as approved in the Miami 21 Code, the zoning ordinance, as amended. 
(d)  Legally installed transparent security screens and shutters as of the date of the ordinance from which this section derives located in the Neighborhood Revitalization District 1 that do not otherwise comply with the Miami 21 Code, the zoning ordinance, are exempt from enforcement for failure to comply with this article. All other nonconforming security screens and shutters, shall be subject to enforcement via chapter 2, article X, entitled "Code Enforcement" and any other remedy as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13555, § 2, 9-24-15)  
Secs. 10-117—10-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SQUATTERS 
 
Sec. 10-120. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Dwelling means a building or structure of any kind, including any attached porch, whether such building or structure is temporary or permanent, mobile or immobile, which has a roof over it and is designed to be occupied by people lodging therein at night, together with the curtilage thereof. 
Lessee is defined to include the lessee, any sublessee, or any other legal occupant of the property. 
Owner is defined as the person(s), legal entity, or other party having any legal ownership interest in real property, including but not limited to, owners identified on the blighted, unsecured or abandoned structures registration form; or a purchaser, devisee, lessee, fiduciary, or holder of an unrecorded deed. This term shall not apply to the city. 
Property is defined as any "structure" or "dwelling" as defined by this section of the City Code. 
Squatting is defined as the occupation of private property, a structure, or a dwelling without authorization from the owner or lessee. 
Squatters are defined as occupants of private property, a structure, or a dwelling without authorization from the owner or lessee. 
Structure means a building of any kind, either temporary or permanent, which has a roof or partial roof over it, together with the curtilage thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-121. - Squatting prohibited. 
Squatting is a public nuisance and is strictly prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-122. - Action to remove squatters. 
A property owner or lessee is required to take all lawful measures to prevent or remove squatters from their property. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-123. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this section may be cited pursuant to chapter 2, article X of the City Code and shall result in a fine of $500.00 for each day the violation remains uncured. These penalties shall not preclude any other remedies available at law or in equity, including, injunctive relief in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-124. - Notice and hearing. 
The city, through its code enforcement or police personnel, shall post a notice at the property indicating its intent to remove squatters and secure the property at least five days in advance of any such action. The city shall also make reasonable efforts to separately notify the property owner or lessee via certified and regular mail. The city may provide shorter notice, or act immediately without prior notice, where warranted by an emergency, such as a danger to the occupants or threat to public safety. Any appeal of the notice must be received by the city within three days of posting. The failure to appeal constitutes an admission that the occupants are squatters and an agreement to the remedy of removal. If an appeal is timely received, the city shall set an administrative hearing before a special master, and the matter shall be heard on an expedited basis prior to the removal of the occupants, unless such prior removal is warranted by an emergency, such as a danger to the occupants (unsafe structure or dwelling) or a threat to public safety and welfare, in which event the hearing shall be held on an expedited basis following the removal. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-125. - Removal of squatters and special assessment lien for costs of removal. 
The city is authorized to remove squatters from private property and to secure the property. The property owner or lessee shall pay the city an administrative fee in the amount of $500.00 for the expenses incurred in removing the squatters and securing the property. If the property owner or lessee does not pay said fee within 30 days of the date the city sends an invoice, then the city may lien the property with such fee. The lien created shall be considered a special assessment lien that may be recorded in the public records of Miami-Dade County. The lien shall accrue interest at the maximum legal rate allowed by law from the date of the city's invoice until the costs and administrative fee are paid. The city may foreclose on such lien pursuant to section 2-827 of this City Code. Such lien shall have equal dignity with a tax lien. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-126. - Presumption. 
Squatting may be presumed where the occupant of the property is unable to produce a written document, such as a lease, license, or other written proof of authorization from the property owner or lessee, demonstrating that the occupant has permission to be on the property. Squatting may also be presumed where a property is listed on the vacant, blighted, unsecured or abandoned structure registry pursuant to section 10-63 and 10-64 of the City Code and yet is occupied. Such presumptions may be rebutted if the occupant provides competent, substantial evidence demonstrating authorization to occupy the property. The presumptions stated herein are not the exclusive method for determining whether squatting is occurring on a specific property. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-127. - Other remedies. 
The remedies referenced in this division are cumulative with other available remedies pursuant to state law, including but not limited to an arrest and prosecution pursuant to criminal statutes, civil remedies, and fines, and are not exclusive. The city may remove trespassers from a property pursuant to state laws, including in cases where a lawful trespass warning has been provided and the occupants refuse to vacate the property. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
Sec. 10-128. - Liability. 
Law enforcement officers and code enforcement officers, as well as city staff and agents, are immune from civil or criminal liability for actions taken to remove squatters and secure property pursuant to the authority provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 13479, § 2, 9-29-14)  
ARTICLE IX. - FENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR OVERTOWN 
 
Sec. 10-129. - Fences and "no trespassing" signage required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any conflicting provisions in the City Code and/or the Miami 21 Code, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, all vacant lots located within the Overtown area shall be enclosed with at least a four foot high fence. All such fences shall be installed with a permit. 
(b)  "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted on all vacant lots located within the Overtown area subject to this article. 
(c)  The property owner shall provide written consent allowing the Miami Police Department ("MPD") to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08. 
As used herein, the "Overtown area" is that area approximately bounded on the north by Northwest 20th Street from Florida East Coast Railroad to Northwest 3rd Avenue to Northwest 5th Avenue; on the west by the Interstate 95 Expressway ("I-95") from Northwest 21st Terrace to the 836 Expressway and State Road 836 (East-West) Expressway from I-95 to the Miami River; on the south by Northwest 3rd Street from Florida East Coast Railroad to Northwest 7th Avenue and the Miami River from Northwest 7th Avenue to the 836 Expressway; and on the east by Florida East Coast Railroad right-of-way. (Note: All boundaries are to be construed expansively, incorporating the breadth of described streets, avenues, expressways, and railroad property.) 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 10-130. - Expedited permit approval for fences in Overtown. 
Any such fence permits required by this article shall be processed by the city on an expedited basis and no building permit fee shall be required. The city shall complete its review and issue the fence permit within three business days of submission of a completed building permit application. 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 10-131. - Enhanced penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this section may be cited pursuant to chapter 2, article X of this Code and shall result in a fine of $500.00 for each day the violation remains uncured. 
If the owner, agent, or occupant of any property within the Overtown area shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article within 90 days, the city shall cause the property to be fenced and shall keep an accurate accounting of the costs thereof, whereupon the amount of such costs and the interest thereon shall constitute and is hereby imposed as a lien against the subject property with equal rank and dignity of any other special assessment liens. An aggrieved party may appeal both the fees and costs imposed under this section to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
These penalties shall not preclude any other remedies available at law or in equity, including but not limited to, injunctive relief in the circuit court and special assessments for fencing the property or other work done by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 10-132. - Other remedies. 
The remedies referenced in this article are cumulative with other available remedies pursuant to Florida law, including but not limited to an arrest and prosecution pursuant to criminal statutes, civil remedies, and fines, and are not exclusive. The city may remove unauthorized persons from a property pursuant to Florida laws, including in cases where a lawful trespass warning has been provided and the occupants refuse to vacate the property. 
The city shall also require access to the vacant lot for public safety purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 10-133. - Liability. 
Law enforcement officers and code compliance officers, as well as city staff and agents, are immune from civil or criminal liability for actions taken to remove unauthorized persons and secure property pursuant to the authority provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
Sec. 10-134. - Sunset. 
This article will sunset on October 1, 2017, unless this section is earlier repealed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13637, § 2, 10-13-16)  
ARTICLE X. - MICROWAVE PATH 
 
Sec. 10-135. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Miami's ("city") microwave path ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-136. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to ensure the uninterrupted operation of the city's public safety services, Miami Police Department ("MPD"), fire-rescue department ("fire-rescue"), other agency's related personnel, and county operational telecommunications networks by requiring that persons or entities constructing or erecting structures in the city do so in a manner which does not interfere with the city's telecommunications networks, provide an approved remedy, or provide the appropriate facilities necessary to eliminate such interruption. 
(b)  The city's telecommunications networks are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the city as it provides communications for law enforcement activities, emergency management, fire suppression, carrying on the business of government, and communications in time of hurricanes and other disasters. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-137. - Procedure. 
(a)  To ensure compliance with this section, any person, entity, or designee for all new buildings or structures 60 feet or higher or any existing buildings or structures 60 feet or higher that undergo any modification that encompasses 25 percent or more of its square footage shall be responsible for supplying a microwave path study to the city's general services administration communications division ("GSA") during the earliest application phase (i.e. the first land development or building permit to be applied for and processed, as applicable) of the project. 
(b)  The city's GSA will provide a determination as to whether a proposed building or structure will interfere with the city's microwave path. Such determination will be made depending on the height of the building or structure and the distance the proposed building or structure is from the microwave path and/or radio site. 
(c)  Should the city's GSA identify a building or structure that does not conform with the above criteria for a microwave path study and has due cause to believe that said new building or structure will potentially impact the city's microwave path or system, the city shall have the sole discretion to request the owner/applicant/designee to provide a microwave path study during the application phase of the project. 
(d)  The city's microwave path, graphically described in Exhibit "A," attached and incorporated, as may be amended from time to time, defines and informs building permit applicants of the buildings or structures covered by this section. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18) 
Note— Exhibit A is not set out at length herein, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 10-138. - Microwave path study. 
The microwave path study shall include (1) the proximity of the new construction to the city's microwave path or radio site; (2) a tangential distance to the nearest microwave segment with a diagram delineating the locations of the new construction and of said closest microwave segment; and (3) calculations for the probability of interruption to the system. The microwave path study shall be certified by an electronic engineer who is a holder of a State of Florida Professional Engineer license. 
(1)  In the case where the city's radio communications liaison ("RCL") agrees to the microwave path study's findings of non-impact, the city shall proceed with the application and permitting process and grant approval of the land development or building permit, as applicable, subject to compliance with all other laws and regulations. 
(2)  If the microwave path study's findings indicate that there is an interruption or blockage of the microwave path, corrective action by the owner/applicant/designee will be required to assure microwave system reliability is retained. This shall include interruptions that are determined despite a non-impact result from the microwave path study. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-139. - Remedies. 
Proposed remedy provisions (remedies for interruption or blockage to the microwave loop infrastructure), as outlined herein, shall be agreed upon and accepted by the owner/applicant/designee and the city within the application phase and shall be adhered to during and after completion of construction. The owner/applicant/designee may opt for either of the following remedies: 
(1)  At no cost to the city, the owner/applicant/designee shall be responsible for: 
a.  The installation and operation of communications antennas, microwave, and transmission lines, as required, and the roof top space for said equipment. The roof top space shall have an area of no less than ten feet by ten feet (10' x 10'). All communications antennae and transmission line requirements shall be determined by the city's RCL, as per industry standards, and shall meet all federal, state, and local requirements. All proposed roof top space shall be reviewed by the city's RCL to ensure that the space is adequate for the restoration of the microwave system. 
b.  Providing no less than 200 square feet of enclosed air-conditioned space adjacent to the antennae installations for the city to place, install, and operate communications radio equipment. This room shall have at least 200 amperes electrical capacity. Electricity for said enclosed area will be on a separate meter and billed to the city. The building owner or designee shall be responsible for maintaining the air conditioning, space, and providing the city with access to all meters. The building owner or designee shall provide emergency backup power as specified by the city's RCL. The building owner or designee shall be responsible for meeting manufacturer's environmental requirements for all equipment located in said enclosed space (e.g. temperature, humidity, etc.). If the environmental requirements are not met and damage is caused to the equipment located within the space, the building owner or designee may be liable for damages caused to the equipment. 
c.  Reimbursing the city for any and all transmission equipment, installation, licensing, permitting, etc. (e.g. radios, antennae, cable trays, generators, UPS, etc.) needed for the city's microwave signals to continue to its original destination at the original signal strength (i.e. with no loss in signal or degradation), as determined necessary by the city. The equipment may be passive or active microwave systems (limited to the restoration of the microwave levels). The city reserves the right to replace or upgrade all equipment as required at the city's expense and the building owner or designee shall provide access to city personnel for such replacement or upgrade. 
d.  Providing an alternate signal routing either by using a local provider T1 or fiber-type service, during the construction and prior to interruption of microwave signals, to maintain or restore service to the city's communication sites. Alternative signal routing proposals must be reviewed and authorized by the city's RCL prior to implementation. 
(2)  At no cost to the city, the owner/applicant/designee shall be responsible for providing alternative solutions by either reducing the obstructing height, relocating the obstruction elsewhere, or other solutions acceptable to the city's RCL. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-140. - Failure to comply. 
Non-compliance with the requirements and failure to adhere to the aforementioned remedies shall result in either the city's (1) denial of land development or building permit issuance, as applicable; (2) withholding or revoking an issued land development or building permit, as applicable; or (3) loss of occupancy certification which shall withhold the building and/or fire code inspector's permission to allow any habitation until the building passes communication's system inspection, as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-141. - Fee assessment. 
(a)  After a microwave path interruption has been determined, the owner/applicant/designee has 60 days to implement the chosen remedy. Within said 60-day period, the owner/applicant/designee shall submit a letter of intent as to which remedy was selected and an invoice showing proof of the remedy. 
(b)  Failure to submit the letter of intent and detailed invoice shall constitute a civil offense and be punishable by an administrative civil penalty in the amount as prescribed in section 2-829 of the City Code, or in an amount deemed appropriate by the special magistrate or code enforcement board, as applicable, upon review of the violation. This remedy shall be cumulative and supplemental and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 10-142. - Compliance with Ordinance No. 13114, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended ("Miami 21 Code"). 
The city's microwave path ordinance does not repeal, supersede, or remove any permitting requirements applicable under the Miami 21 Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13746, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Chapter 11 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11936, § 2, adopted June 8, 2000, repealed §§ 11-1—11-20, 11-51—11-62 and 11-91—11-102. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 11 as set out herein. The former Ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matters and derived from Ord. No. 9223, §§ 1—16, 18—41, adopted Dec. 17, 1980; Code 1980, §§ 10.5-1—10.5-20, 10.5-31—10.5-42, 10.5-51—10.5-62; Ord. No. 11564, § 6, adopted Oct. 28, 1997; and Ord. No. 9538, §§ 1—5, adopted Jan. 13, 1983. 
City Code cross references— Local business tax and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 31; streets and sidewalks, ch. 54. 
County Code cross reference— Cable television regulations, § 8A-125 et seq., ch. 8AA. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Miami Cable Systems Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any license agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as those Acts may hereinafter be amended (collectively the "Cable Act"), and, if not defined therein, the common and ordinary meaning. 
Activated channel means those channels engineered at the headend of a cable system for the provision of services generally available to subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for public, educational, or governmental use. Channels on which signals flow in the direction from the headend to the subscriber are referred to as "downstream channels." Where the signal flows to the headend for redistribution, it shall be referred to as an "upstream channel." 
Access channel means any channel on a cable system set aside without charge by the licensee for public, educational and/or local governmental use. 
Affiliate means any person who directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a licensee. 
Analog channel means no less than six MHz of bandwidth. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application within the meaning of this chapter. 
Application means any proposal, submission or request to (1) construct and operate a cable system within the city; (2) transfer a license or control of the license or the licensee; (3) renew a license; (4) modify a license; or (5) seek any other relief from the city pursuant to this chapter, a license agreement, the Cable Act, or other applicable law. 
Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, and public, educational, or governmental access channels and such services as may be defined as basic by applicable law, as otherwise provided in the license agreement, during the term of any license granted pursuant to this chapter. 
Cable Act means the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as that Act has and may hereinafter be amended. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable service means the transmission of video or other programming services over a cable system to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, a licensee agrees that cable internet services, including, but not limited to @Home, Roadrunner and MediaOne Express, or other similar services, provided by a licensee, its parent, affiliates or subsidiaries, over the cable system shall be deemed "cable services" as permitted under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
Cable system , or system means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths or other transmission lines and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. Such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand services; (4) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; or (5) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. The foregoing definition of "cable system" shall not be deemed to circumscribe the valid authority of the city to regulate the activities of any other communications system or provider of communications services, including but not limited to telephony and open video systems. 
City means the City of Miami, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
Commission means the city commission of the City of Miami, Florida. 
Control of a licensee or applicant means possession of the ability to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a licensee or applicant, or the operation of the licensee's system, whether through operational control in whatever manner exercised or ownership of voting securities, by contract or understanding, or in any other manner. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern but with no value allocated to the license itself. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
Gross revenues means all revenues recognized in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) generated directly or indirectly by the licensee and, any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the licensee, provided that such entities are considered cable operators as such term is defined herein, from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the city. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subparagraph, gross revenues include, but are not limited to, fees charged subscribers for basic service; fees charged subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; fees charged subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; late fees; leased access fees; revenue from converter, remote, modem or any other equipment rentals; revenues from installation, service and content enhanced internet products and services including, but not limited to, access services and content enhanced services to the extent said services may be considered Title VI services according to applicable law; revenues from cable guides; advertising revenues allocable to the city based on a percentage of subscribers in the city divided by the subscribers in the system (such percentage shall then be multiplied by the total advertising revenue of the system to determine the allocable gross revenue stemming from advertising); and revenues from home shopping channels or other sources allocable to the city, provided that where certain home shopping channel or other such revenue is allocable to more than one license area due to common zip codes, the licensee shall allocate the percentage of revenue to the city which is equivalent to the percentage of the population of the city divided by the total population for the allocable license areas in question. Gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the license fee imposed pursuant to section 11-16 hereof. Gross revenues shall not include revenues received from programmers and used by licensee to market or promote a programming service; any revenue received by licensee for payment in connection with PEG access or facilities as required by subsection 11-15(b); any taxes on services furnished by the licensee which are imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, county, city or other governmental unit and collected by the licensee on behalf of said governmental unit and which the licensee passes on in full to the applicable tax authority. However, it is hereby expressly provided that license fees shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues. Further, license fees shall not be paid on subscriber deposits unless and until said deposits are applied to a customer account for services rendered. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a licensee shall include in gross revenues, subject to license fees, revenues received from any and all cable services for which such licensee, or any affiliate, subsidiary or parent of the licensee pays a license fee to any other jurisdiction, provided that such cable service is offered over the cable system in the city, unless the city and licensee otherwise agree to exclude certain revenues from license fees. 
Institutional network means a dedicated closed network, or an alternative acceptable to the city, for use by the city to provide cable services and non-cable services for public, educational and governmental use within the city. The network shall be capable of providing one-way, two-way, interactive, and machine-to-machine transfer of audio, video, voice and data signals within the network as designated by the city. 
Interconnection means the electronic connection of two or more cable systems for the purpose of sharing public, education and government access programming or transmissions. 
Law means all duly enacted and applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders. 
Leased access channel means a channel designated in accordance with Section 612 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 532, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the licensee. 
License means the nonexclusive right granted by the city to a licensee in a license agreement to construct, maintain and operate a cable system under, on, and over streets, roads and any other public ways, rights-of-ways, or easements within the city. The term does not include any license or permit that may be required by this chapter or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the city for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city or for disturbing or carrying out any work on any street. 
License agreement means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a licensee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the license shall be exercised. 
License area means that territory within the corporate limits of the city, as those limits may change from time to time through annexation or contraction, over which the terms of a license agreement shall extend. 
Licensee means any person granted a license pursuant to this chapter who has entered into a license agreement with the city. 
Overbuild means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers already served by an existing cable system. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, but shall not mean the city. 
Service tier means a category of cable service provided by a licensee and for which a separate charge is made by the licensee. 
State-of-the-art means that level of technical performance, equipment, components and services more modern than that which has been developed and demonstrated to be generally accepted and used in the cable industry, excluding "tests" involving new products offered for one year or less. The system shall have, at a minimum, the capability of no less than the channel capacity, products and services available from a system serving any similarly sized city or other community in the state, or other such system owned and operated by the licensee, its parent, affiliates or subsidiaries outside the state, except as otherwise set forth in a license agreement. In no event shall a system having a bandwidth of less than 750 MHZ be considered "state-of-the-art." Nothing herein shall be construed to require a licensee to employ any specific transmission technology. 
Street or streets means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, road, boulevard, concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, park, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, alley, way, drive, circle, easement, or any other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements dedicated for compatible uses, or any other property in which the city holds any kinds of property interest or over which the city exercises any type of lawful control, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon, as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to construct and operate a cable system; but shall not include city-owned buildings or city private property. 
Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service delivered over the cable system. 
Subscriber base means the total number of subscribers who receive cable service delivered to individual homes, dwelling units or multiple dwelling units, excluding such multiple dwelling units billed on a bulk-billing basis. 
System malfunction means any cable system equipment, facility or signal failure or malfunction that results in the loss of satisfactory service on one or more channels to one or more subscribers. A malfunction is major if it affects 50 or more subscribers. 
Transfer of a license means any transaction in which (1) any ownership or other interest in a licensee or its cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of a licensee or control of licensee's system is transferred; or (2) the rights and/or obligations held by a licensee under a license agreement are transferred or assigned to another person, group of persons or business entity. A transfer shall be considered "pro forma" only when it involves a transfer to a person, group of persons or business entity wholly owned or controlled by the licensee and shall not result in a change in the control or ownership of the licensee or licensee's system. 
Two-way capability means the incorporation into a cable system of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features, including all necessary equipment, which shall be installed and operational, so that two-way transmission, including but not limited to addressability, over the system can be implemented and activated. 
Video channel or channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel, including the associated audio signal. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-3. - Intent and purposes. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more licenses for the construction and operation of a cable system, and the provision of cable service, within the city; to provide for the regulation, to the extent provided for by law, of each cable system within the city in the public interest; to provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a licensee to the city for the use of streets and rights-of-way by its cable system; to promote the widespread availability of quality cable service to city residents and businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to encourage the development of cable and other communications technologies and cable systems as a means of communication between and among members of the public, city businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to promote competitive cable rates and services; to promote the safe and efficient use of city streets; to enhance and maximize the full potential of streets used by cable systems; and to encourage the provision of a diversity of information sources to city residents, businesses, the community, the city, and other public institutions by cable technology. 
(b)  Recognizing the continuing development of communications technology and uses, it is the policy of the city to encourage experimentation and innovation in the development of cable system uses, services, programming and techniques that shall be of general benefit to the community to the extent all such experiments and innovations are consistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-4. - Grant of authority; license required. 
(a)  The city may grant one or more licenses in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No person may construct or operate a cable system over, on, or under public streets, or provide cable service, in the city without a license granted by the city unless otherwise permitted to do so by law, and no person may be granted a license without having entered into a license agreement with the city pursuant to this chapter and other such ordinance of the city as may be applicable. 
(c)  Unless otherwise authorized by law, any license granted pursuant to this chapter is solely for the provision of cable service. The city's authority to regulate and/or authorize the use of the streets of the city for the provision of non-cable video or other telecommunications services (including the offering of dark fiber or connectivity) and/or any service not included under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as of the effective date of this chapter, shall not be waived, nor shall such authorization to use the streets of the city for the provision of other than cable services be granted, under a license granted pursuant to this chapter. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $2,000.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-5. - License characteristics. 
(a)  A license authorizes use of city streets and rights-of-way, for installing, on poles or underground, cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, ducts, conductors, amplifiers, vaults, and other facilities as necessary and pertinent to operate a cable system to serve subscribers within the city, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the licensee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(b)  A license is nonexclusive, and shall not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other licenses to operate cable systems within the city, or affect the right of the city to authorize use of city streets to other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate. 
(c)  All privileges prescribed by a license shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets, and the city reserves the right to reasonably designate where a licensee's facilities are to be placed within the streets. Such designation may include, but not be limited to, consideration of the availability of space in the rights of way. 
(d)  No transfer of a license shall occur without the prior consent of the city and unless application is made by the licensee, and city approval obtained, pursuant to section 11-24 hereof. 
(e)  A license granted to an applicant pursuant to this chapter to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within the city, shall be deemed to constitute both a right and an obligation on the part of the licensee to provide the services and facilities of a cable system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the license agreement. The license agreement shall constitute all of the terms and conditions of the license that are finally negotiated and agreed upon by the city and licensee. Licensee shall be bound by all documents or other portions of an application, including oral representations made by an applicant, or its representatives, before the city commission, which the city relies upon as inducement to granting an initial, renewal, transfer or modification of a license, or taking other action relating to the license, and which are integrated by the city and licensee as an exhibit to the license or amendment thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the event that licensee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary elects to offer to subscribers video programming services through an "open video system", licensee shall remain subject to all terms and conditions of a license granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-6. - Licensee subject to other laws, police power. 
(a)  A licensee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable and lawful federal, state and local laws. A licensee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city. 
(b)  Subject to applicable law, except as may be specifically provided in this chapter or under the terms of a license agreement and subject to the Cable Act, the failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this chapter or a license agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-7. - Interpretation of license terms; conflicts. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter at the time of the grant of a license (initial or renewal) shall apply to a license agreement as if fully set forth in the license agreement, and the express terms of this chapter shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a license agreement unless such license agreement expresses an intent to amend or modify a requirement of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as to matters which are governed by federal law or regulation, a license agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-8. - Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of licenses. 
(a)  A written application shall be filed with the city for: 
(1)  Grant of an initial license; 
(2)  Renewal of a license in accordance with section 626(a)—(g) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 546; 
(3)  Modification of a license agreement; 
(4)  Transfer or change of control of a license; or 
(5)  Any other relief from the city pursuant to this chapter or a license agreement. 
(b)  To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with seven copies, be accompanied by the required non-refundable application filing fee as set forth in subsection 11-8(i) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(c)  All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the city for public inspection. 
(d)  An application for the grant of an initial license may be filed pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the city or on an unsolicited basis. The city, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for proposals. If the city elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the city that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application which does not conform to the reasonable requirements of a request for proposals may be considered non-responsive and denied on that basis. 
(e)  An application for the grant of an initial license shall contain, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of all persons with five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other cable system ownership or other communication ownership interest of each named person; provided that in the case of an application for a renewal or transfer of a license, the information regarding cable system ownership or other communication ownership interest shall be provided upon written request of the city; 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, or director or person with five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable license revoked, or been found by any court or administrative agency to have violated a security or antitrust law, or to have committed a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances; provided that in the case of an application for renewal or transfer of a license, a licensee shall provide such information upon written request; 
(3)  A demonstration of the technical, legal and financial ability of the applicant to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the license area, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of any facility of the public utility, including, but not limited to, the use of utility poles, lines or conduits. In the case of a transfer pursuant to section 11-24 hereof, licensee shall only be required to provide evidence of the assignability of such agreements; 
(5)  In the case of an application for an initial license, a statement prepared by a certified public accountant or duly authorized financial officer of the applicant regarding the financial ability of the applicant to complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed; 
(6)  A description of the prior experience of the applicant in cable system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of communities in which the applicant or any person having a controlling interest in the applicant or having more than a ten percent ownership interest in the applicant has, or has had, a cable franchise or license or any interest therein; provided that in the case of an application for a transfer of a license, a licensee shall provide such information upon written request; 
(7)  Upon reasonable request of the city, the applicant shall provide copies of any franchise or license agreements entered into by applicant, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary; 
(8)  A description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities; upon request, the applicant shall provide information on technical design; 
(9)  In the case of an application for an initial grant of a license, where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed cable system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services shall be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
(10)  For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services, and the ownership interest of the applicant in any proposed program services to be delivered over the cable system; 
(11)  A demonstration of how the proposal of the applicant shall reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community; 
(12)  A description of any cable services offered by the applicant or its parent, affiliate or subsidiary, and applicant's plan with respect to the availability of services to subscribers in the city; 
(13)  Upon request, for information purposes only, a description of any non-cable services offered by the applicant or its parent, affiliate or subsidiary and plan of the licensee with respect to the availability of such services to subscribers in the city; 
(14)  Upon request, for information purposes only, a description of any non-cable services offered by the applicant or its parent, affiliate or subsidiary in any other community and a copy of the terms and conditions pursuant to which applicant offers such non-cable services in any other community; 
(15)  A proposal by applicant to offer discount rates to qualified senior citizens, consistent with Section 623(e)(1) of the Cable Act; 
(16)  In the case of an application for an initial license or the transfer of a license, where the transferee is not a publicly traded company, pro forma financial projections for the first five years of the license term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(17)  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable licensee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of the streets to accommodate an additional system; 
(18)  In the case of a renewal or transfer application, any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and information that the city may reasonably request of the applicant that is relevant to the consideration of the city of the application; and 
(19)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state law requirements. 
(f)  An application for modification of a license agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specific modification requested; 
(2)  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others; 
(3)  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545; 
(4)  Any other reasonable information necessary for the city to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and 
(5)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and state law requirements. 
(g)  An application for renewal of a license shall comply with the requirements of section 11-23 hereof. 
(h)  An application for approval of a transfer of a license shall comply with the requirements of section 11-24 hereof. 
(i)  To be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate: 
(1)  For a new or initial license: $26,250.00 
(2)  For renewal of a license: $10,500.00 
(3)  For a transfer of a license (other than a pro forma transfer): $10,500.00 
(4)  For a pro forma transfer of a license: $5,250.00 
(5)  For modification of a license agreement pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545: $10,500.00 
(6)  For any other relief: $5,250.00 
The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the cost to the city in processing an application. Such fee shall be credited against amounts due under section 11-9(f) herein. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a license within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the license fee imposed in a license agreement and shall not be passed through to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 13142, § 6, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 11-9. - Grant of licenses. 
(a)  The city may grant a license for a period not to exceed ten years. 
(b)  The city may make the grant of a license conditioned upon the completion of construction within a reasonably prescribed time or upon the performance of other specific obligations which are to be set forth in the license agreement, specifying that failure to comply with the condition shall cause the license to become null and void or may require the licensee to pay liquidated damages to the city as specified in a license agreement. 
(c)  In evaluating an application for a license, the city may consider, among other things, the following factors: the technical, financial, and legal qualifications of the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system; the adequacy of the proposed construction arrangements, facilities, equipment, and services based on the public convenience, safety and welfare; the experience of the applicant in constructing and operating cable systems and providing cable service in other communities, if any; the ability of city streets to accommodate the proposed system; the potential disruption to users of city streets and any resultant inconvenience to the public; and whether the proposal shall meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. evaluation by the city shall not be based on the content of the programming the applicant proposes to provide. 
(d)  The city shall hold a public hearing to consider an application or applications for a license. The applicant(s) shall be notified of the hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the application(s), the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the city or staff, and any other information relevant to the application(s), the city shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny a license application(s) and decide the terms and conditions of any license(s) granted. 
(e)  After complying with the above requirements, the city commission shall approve or disapprove the proposed license agreement by resolution, or may direct that it be subject to further negotiation. 
(f)  An applicant for an initial license hereunder shall reimburse the city for all reasonable expenses incurred by the city in considering and processing the application, including but not limited to costs and expenses resulting from accrued city in-house staff time, out of pocket expenses or administrative costs, and consulting and legal costs, less the amount of the filing fee set pursuant to section 11-8(i). Within 30 calendar days from the date of the resolution approving or denying the initial grant of the license thereof by the city commission, the city shall bill the applicant for the amount of the processing fee and its method of calculation. If the processing fee is not received by the city within 30 calendar days of date of the bill, the city shall notify such applicant and the applicant shall pay a late fee at the rate of 18 percent per annum of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid fee provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under applicable law. If said fee is not received in total by the city within 60 calendar days of the date of the bill, the city shall notify such applicant and, if applicable, the license shall be revoked. This processing fee is intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a license within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the license fee imposed in a license agreement and shall not be passed through to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-10. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A licensee shall be required by the city to maintain, and by its acceptance of the license, specifically agrees that it shall maintain, throughout the entire term of the license including any renewals thereof, insurance coverage insuring the licensee with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system, and the conduct of the licensee's business in the city, as described below and as required to satisfy all requirements of Florida law. 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability insurance including contractual liability, explosion, collapse and underground property damage, bodily injury and broad form property damage, personal and advertising injury and products/completed operations coverage. The licensee shall carry limits with a combined single limit of no less than $3,000,000.00 per occurrence naming the city as an additional insured. The licensee shall require any subcontractors to provide adequate insurance and provide proof of insurance to the city as well. 
(2)  The licensee shall carry workers compensation and employers liability insurance in compliance with Florida statute. The licensee shall require any subcontractors to provide workers compensation insurance for all of the subcontractors' employees. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired and non-owned vehicles used in connection with any activities arising out of this agreement. Such insurance shall afford coverage with a combined single limit of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. The licensee shall require any subcontractors to provide automobile liability insurance for all of the vehicles used by subcontractors arising out of the license. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with insurance companies authorized to do business in the state and shall be with insurance companies with a minimum Best's Rating of AV11, or an equivalent rating, and financial size category rating of X (ten). 
(c)  A licensee shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance which certificates shall indicate evidence of payment of the required premiums and shall indicate that the city, its officers, boards, commission, commissioners, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds, and that this insurance is primary over any other insurance or self-insurance program available to the city whether collectible or not. In the event of a potential claim such that the city claims insurance coverage, licensee shall immediately respond to all reasonable requests by the city for information with respect to the scope of the insurance coverage. 
(d)  All insurance policies shall name the city as additional insured and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 60 calendar days prior written notice thereof has been given to the city. A licensee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the licensee has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city which complies with this chapter. 
(e)  A licensee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, waive subrogation against and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all third party claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its cable system by the licensee, its agents or employees in the city, or the granting of a license agreement to the licensee or in any way arising out of the licensee's enjoyment or exercise of a license granted hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or a license agreement. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the reasonable attorneys' fees of the city incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings; and claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the licensee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or providers of programs to be delivered by the cable system, claims arising out of Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558, and claims against the licensee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. The city shall give the licensee written notice of any claim or of the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the indemnity in this section. In the event any such claim arises, the licensee shall have the obligation and duty to defend the city and any other indemnified party hereunder; provided, however, licensee may not agree to any settlement of claims affecting the city without the city attorney's approval. If the city attorney finds that separate representation to fully protect the interests of the city is necessary, licensee shall consult with the city attorney on counsel that is acceptable to the city attorney. If licensee is unwilling or unable to select counsel acceptable to the city attorney, licensee shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any action, suit or proceeding subject to this indemnification. The city's expenses shall include all out of pocket expenses, attorney's fees and costs of the city attorney or his/her assistants, or any employees of the city, outside attorneys, or other agents. Not withstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subparagraph, the obligation of the licensee shall not extend to any claims caused by the gross negligence of the city, its officials, boards, commissioners, agents or employees, or to claims arising from licensee's provision of access channels for public, educational and/or governmental use pursuant to section 11-15 hereof and a license agreement, to the extent such claims relate to programming and content on such channels, over which licensee has no editorial control nor exercises administrative control. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a licensee shall be responsible for all actions of the subcontractors and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city for any and all claims against the city or arising out of the activity of such subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-11. - Security fund. 
(a)  The city shall require in a license agreement that, prior to the license becoming effective, the licensee shall post with the city a security fund. Such fund may be in the form of a cash deposit, letter of credit, or performance bond as determined by the city in its sole discretion or as set forth in a license agreement. The security fund shall be used to ensure the licensee's faithful performance of and compliance with all provisions of this chapter, the license agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city, and the payment by the licensee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The amount of the security fund shall be the amount that the city determines, under circumstances existing at the time, that is necessary to protect the public, to provide adequate incentive to the licensee to comply with this chapter and the license agreement, and to enable the city to effectively enforce compliance therewith, but in no event less than $2,000,000.00. The license agreement shall provide for the procedures to be followed with respect to the security fund. Neither the posting of the cash deposit or filing of an indemnity bond or any form of performance bond with the city, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the licensee or limit the liability of the licensee under the terms of its license for damages, either to the full amount of the fund or otherwise. 
(b)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by other law or the license agreement, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-12. - Construction bond. 
(a)  The city shall require in a license agreement that, prior to any cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work in the streets a licensee shall establish in the favor of the city a construction bond in an amount specified in the license agreement or other authorization as necessary to ensure the faithful performance of the licensee of the construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work, but in no event shall the amount of the bond be less than $500,000.00. Licensee shall at all times comply with chapter 54 of this Code. 
(b)  In the event a licensee subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets in a safe, timely and competent manner in accord with the provisions of the license agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the licensee, or the cost of completing or repairing the system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund pursuant to section 11-11 hereof where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund. 
(c)  The license agreement may specify that upon completion of the cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the streets and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city may eliminate the bond or reduce its amount. However, the city may subsequently require an increase in the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the streets. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, or an equivalent rating acceptable to the city; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall provide that this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 calendar days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew. 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this chapter, the license agreement, or at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-13. - Minimum facilities and services. 
(a)  The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all licenses granted by the city. The city may require in a license agreement that a licensee exceed these minimum requirements where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the grant of the license, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet the future cable related needs of the city and interests or to serve the public interest. 
(1)  Any cable system that commences construction, including but not limited to initial construction, rebuild, upgrade, or reconstruction after the effective date of this chapter shall have a minimum capacity of at least 750 MHZ providing no less than 78 activated video channels or its digital equivalent, including two-way capability as defined in subsection 11-2 hereof. The construction, rebuild, upgrade or reconstruction of any cable system must be completed within a 24-month construction schedule. A license agreement may provide for a larger minimum channel capacity requirement as well as upgrades during the term of a license. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $1,050.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  The city may require in a license agreement that a licensee provide access channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and/or governmental use, in excess of the minimum requirement of this chapter. Licensee's failure to comply with the terms of a license agreement with respect to the provision of access channel facilities and other support for public, educational and/or governmental use shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $1,575.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(3)  A cable system shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(4)  If required by the terms of a license agreement, a licensee shall, at minimum, provide at least one cable outlet and shall provide cable service, including basic and cable programming service tier, with the exception of digital and premium/pay-per-view, or its equivalent, without charge, to each and every floor of all public buildings including, but not limited to city buildings, parks, community and day-care centers, and any other public building designated by resolution of the city commission. In addition, licensee agrees to provide one outlet of cable service without charge to each and every floor of all buildings of the city that may be constructed, opened or annexed within the city after the effective date of the license agreement, subject to the service policy set forth below. In new locations and remodels of existing locations, licensee shall have access to "pre-wire." Such cable service shall at a minimum include the basic cable service tier, and all programming offered without additional charge on the cable programming service tier offered by licensee over the cable system. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(5)  If required by the terms of a license agreement, licensee shall, upon request, provide to each and every floor of all public buildings including, but not limited to city buildings, parks, community and day-care centers, and any other public building designated by resolution of the city commission, with, at minimum, one free connection to an on-line service provided by licensee. Such on-line service will provide access to the Internet. Upon request, each city building, park, community center and daycare center within the city, and any other public building designated by resolution of the city commission, shall receive, at minimum, one free cable modem which will be allowed to be networked, and free, unlimited access to the on-line service. All services requested shall be provided not later than one year after licensee makes commercially available an on-line service for personal computers within the city. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(6)  Licensee shall, at a minimum, provide at least one cable outlet and shall provide cable service, including basic and cable programming service tier, with the exception of digital and premium/pay-per-view, or its equivalent, without charge, to each floor, not to exceed three floors, in all public and private schools (as defined by, and which receives funding pursuant to, Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 421(a) et seq., as amended), (grades K—12). Licensee will make arrangements for each school to receive school materials for teachers and other facility administrators, to the extent they are available, that explain the educational applications of the broadband cable systems and services offered on the cable system. The materials will be provided to all connected schools. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(7)  Licensee shall, upon written request from the school, provide all schools (as defined in subsection (6) above) within the city which receive cable service with, at minimum, one free connection to an on-line service provided by licensee. Such on-line service will provide access to the Internet. Upon request, each connected school shall receive, at minimum, one free cable modem which will be allowed to be networked, and free, unlimited access to the on-line service. All services requested shall be provided not later than one year after licensee makes commercially available an on-line service for personal computers within the city. Additional cable modems and operational support and services (for example, assisting schools in setting up and maintaining reliable Internet connections) shall be provided to connected schools upon written request and at the actual and direct costs of licensee. In addition, licensee shall sponsor local workshops in each region to educate teachers and other facility administrators about its on-line service and to provide connected schools, city parks, community centers and day-care centers with an opportunity for hands-on training. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(8)  A cable system shall include an "emergency alert" capability, which shall permit the city manager or designated representative, to the extent permitted by applicable law, to remotely override the audio of all channels on the cable system or to allow for video crawl over all channels. 
(9)  The city may seek the use of a portion of the cable system's bandwidth for collecting data from subscribers for purposes including but not limited to a fire, police or other alarm system, or reading water meters, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  Licensee has excess capacity on its system, at each location the city wishes to utilize at the time of the request and, as of the date of the city's request, has not allocated such excess capacity, as evidenced by a written agreement with a third party for such bandwidth for provision of services during the 12 months following the date of city's request; 
b.  The city purchases the necessary equipment according to the reasonable technical specifications provided by licensee; 
c.  Attachment of the necessary equipment is performed by the licensee owning the cable system, and the city reimburses the labor and material cost of such attachment to said licensee at the direct, actual costs to licensee; 
d.  The city pays to the licensee the direct and actual costs of the bandwidth usage, but in no event to exceed the lowest rate offered by the licensee to an unaffiliated third party for similar bandwidth usage; and 
e.  No sooner than one year after city commences use of the bandwidth, a licensee may thereafter reclaim the excess bandwidth, upon no less than 120 calendar days notice, if it plans to provide an additional product or service to its customers utilizing said bandwidth within six months of reclaiming the bandwidth, provided that city shall have a right of first refusal for use of the bandwidth on terms and conditions equal to those at which the licensee proposes to offer the capacity to a third party. To the extent a licensee is providing an institutional network for the city, at no cost to the city, such provision may be in lieu of the licensee's obligations under this section. 
(10)  A licensee shall make available to its subscribers equipment capable of decoding closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. 
(11)  The cable system operator shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby powering for headend transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two hours. The equipment shall be constructed so as to automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. All utility safety regulations must be followed to prevent a standby generator from powering the "dead" utility line, with possible injury to an unwitting lineman. 
(b)  Most favored nation. 
(1)  Pursuant to the requirements of a license agreement, a licensee shall provide, at a minimum, the same facilities, services, products and benefits available on any system serving any other similarly sized city or other community in the state, or other such communities outside the state, owned and operated by the licensee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary. 
(2)  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $1,575.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(c)  Universal service. Upon request and payment of all applicable charges and provided that the requesting person grants the licensee access to his or her premises in order to furnish, maintain, and continue to offer cable service to that person, a licensee shall, throughout the term of a license, offer any person at his or her place of residence or place of business within the license area, all cable services distributed over the cable system, except as otherwise set forth in a license agreement. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(d)  Upon licensee's acquisition of facilities in any city right-of-way, or upon the annexation to the city of any area in which licensee owns or operates any facility, licensee shall, at the city's request, submit to the city a statement describing all facilities involved, whether authorized by license, permit, franchise or other prior right, and specifying the location of all such facilities to the extent licensee has possession of such information. Such facilities shall immediately be subject to the terms of licensee's license granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  Pursuant to the requirements of a license agreement, in the event licensee offers cable Internet services over its cable system in the city, it shall, taking into account technical feasibility, provide access to its cable modem platform to providers of Internet access and on-line services on comparable terms and conditions to those terms and conditions on which access is provided by licensee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary in any other community. Licensee shall comply with all lawful requirements with respect to access to licensee's cable modem platform for providers of Internet access and on-line services. 
(f)  A licensee granted a license under this chapter shall make a proposal to the city for the installation, operation and maintenance of or provide funding for an institutional network ("I-NET"). The I-NET shall, at minimum, take into consideration the interconnection of all government and other public buildings, schools, or persons as designated by the city, with minimum technical facilities as shall be specified subject to negotiation between the city and the licensee. A licensee may provide the city, subject to city approval, with an equivalent of an I-NET, based on current technology, in lieu of the obligation set forth herein. 
(g)  Where an I-NET already exists in the city, an applicant for a license shall provide the city with a capital grant in an amount which represents the cost of an institutional network, or, at the city's sole option, alternative facilities, equipment and support, including but not limited to a new institutional network, in satisfaction of licensee's obligation to provide the city with an I-NET pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 13142, § 6, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 11-14. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Any cable system within the city shall at minimum meet the technical standards of the FCC or other applicable federal, state, county or city technical standards, including any and all applicable rules, regulations, codes, and standards as hereinafter amended or adopted. All television signals transmitted on a cable system shall include any closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. Antennas, supporting structures, and outside plants used in the system shall be designed to comply with all generally accepted industry practices and standards and with all federal, state, county and city ordinances, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the city zoning code. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with federal and state codes, as well as the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, the South Florida Building Code, all local codes and ordinances and any and all applicable rules, regulations and codes, as hereinafter may be amended or changed. 
(c)  At the times specified in the license agreement or as required by FCC rules, the licensee shall perform, at its expense, proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the license agreement, and FCC requirements. The licensee shall provide, upon written request, the proof of performance test results to the city within ten (10) calendar days after completion. The city shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the license agreement, this chapter, and FCC standards. 
(d)  The city may require any other tests as specified in a license agreement, or required by applicable law or regulation, or where there have been extensive complaints made, or where there exists other demonstrative evidence which in the reasonable judgment of the city casts doubt upon the reliability or technical quality of the cable system to be performed at the expense of the licensee; provided that if the results of such tests indicate that licensee is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and/or the license agreement, the expenses incurred by the licensee in conducting said tests shall be borne by the city. The licensee shall provide the test results to the city within ten calendar days of completion of the proof of performance or other tests. 
(e)  The licensee shall provide the city ten calendar days advance written notice when a proof of performance test required in subsections (c) and (d) above is scheduled, in order that the city may have an observer present. 
(f)  A licensee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that shall interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the facilities of the city, the facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another licensee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. In the event any such interference is discovered, licensee shall take all actions necessary to remedy the problem as quickly as is technically feasible. 
(g)  In any license granted pursuant to this chapter, a licensee shall agree to maintain that level of technology to satisfy the state-of-the-art as defined in subsection 11-2, subject to qualifications, conditions, and terms that may be expressly identified in a license agreement, if any. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $1,575.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(h)  Licensee shall provide access channels, equipment and facilities, and capital support, in accordance with section 11-15, as well as such other benefits and services required by a license agreement. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the licensee to the city in the amount of not less than $1,575.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(i)  In the event that the city commission determines that it is in the public interest of the residents of the city to renew or approve the transfer of a license where the licensee is not in compliance with the requirements of this section at the time of the grant, the city may agree in an agreement, or an amendment to a license agreement, to a program whereby the licensee is permitted a specified period of time, not to exceed 24-months, to come into compliance. However, the city's approval of any such plan shall be contingent upon licensee's agreement to provide the city and any subscribers with fines, refunds, credits or service vouchers as liquidated damages for the harm suffered due to licensee's non-compliance. The city may grant extension of the time period herein, for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 13142, § 6, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 11-15. - Public education and government support. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of the city to require that all licensees provide access channels, facilities, equipment and support sufficient to meet the needs and interests of the community with respect to public, education and government activities. 
(b)  A licensee granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall provide to the city, a grant per subscriber, as represented in the subscriber base as defined in subsection 11-2, per month for PEG capital support, as set forth in a license agreement. The actual amount of the per subscriber, per month charge shall be determined based upon the city's needs as identified in a projected budget to be prepared by the city manager and submitted to licensee not later than September 30 of each year during the term of the license agreement. 
(c)  A licensee shall provide a minimum of one access channel, and facilities dedicated to the exclusive use of the city and such other capital support for public, educational and/or governmental use as required in a license agreement and allocated at the sole discretion of the city. The licensee shall provide one upstream channel for each access channel then used by the city to the headend, as technically necessary for the operation of access channels referred to herein or as otherwise required by a license agreement. The city may increase the number of PEG channels to a number not to exceed five, so long as a threshold use requirement is met for each channel the city then utilizes. In order to request an additional PEG access channel, the existing PEG access channel(s) must be programmed at least eight hours a day with non-repetitive, locally produced programming, Monday through Friday, for a minimum of six consecutive weeks. For purposes of calculating the eight hour programming requirement, the live cablecast of all commission and board meetings, in their entirety, shall be included for not more than one channel. Character-generated programming shall not be included for purposes of calculating the programming requirement. Once the threshold is met and an additional access channel given, the initial access channel(s) must maintain the threshold requirement. After attaining the threshold requirement, if the initial access channel fails to meet the threshold for four consecutive months, the additional access channel may be reclaimed by licensee upon 60 calendar days written notice. Under no circumstances shall the city lose the right to its first initial access channel. However, at all times after a second access channel is provided to the city, the initial access channel shall maintain the threshold requirement a minimum of 50 percent of the time, to be measured every four months based on usage for the preceding 12 months. In addition, a licensee shall cablecast to all subscribers in the city, all Miami-Dade County public, educational, and/or government channels provided however that the total number of access channels shall not exceed the number set forth in a license agreement. 
(d)  During the term of the license, the licensee shall provide, as specified in a license agreement or otherwise agreed to, such equipment, facilities and technical support as the city commission may determine is useful for the production and cable casting of programming on the public, education and government channels. Applications for initial grants, renewals or transfers of licenses shall include a proposal to provide such support. 
(e)  As may be required in a license agreement, a licensee shall tape or cablecast live events held in the city as may be designated by the city subject to no less than four weeks advance notice in writing to the licensee. The number of events designated by the city hereunder shall be no less than 24 in any given calendar year. A license agreement may provide for a maximum number of designated events. Unless specified by the city, the live cablecast of a commission or board meeting shall not be counted as a designated event. 
(f)  Applications for an initial or renewed license may, and at the request of the city, shall include proposals for the provision of an institutional network interconnecting city, educational institutions, and/or other public facilities as designated by the city from time to time. 
(g)  Applications for an initial license shall include a proposal for the interconnection of licensee to any or all other cable systems operating within the county for purposes of providing or sharing PEG access channels. In the case of an application for renewal or transfer of a license, applicant shall include in its application a statement outlining the status of the interconnection of licensee's cable system to any and all cable systems operating within Miami-Dade county. 
(h)  A license may provide for additional financial grants in lieu of or in addition to some or all of the facilities, equipment, and services referenced in this section. 
(i)  A licensee shall agree that the facilities, equipment, monetary grant, and all other support to be provided by a licensee pursuant to this section, and as set forth in a license agreement constitute capital costs which are required by the license to be incurred by licensee for public, educational, or government access facilities within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(C) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(C), that such grant does not constitute a license fee or tax within the meaning of Cable Act, state law, this Code, or a license agreement; and that the licensee shall waive, and will not assert in any proceeding, any claim to the contrary. The city shall use the facilities, equipment, monetary grant and all other support to be provided by licensee pursuant to this section in a manner consistent with Section 622(g)(2)(C) of the Cable Act. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-16. - License fee. 
(a)  A licensee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a license for the use of the streets of the city to construct and operate a cable system to provide cable services in the city, shall pay to the city a license fee in an amount up to a maximum of either: 
(1)  Five percent of the licensee's gross revenues derived directly or indirectly from the operation of its cable system within the city during the term of its license pursuant to section 11-2 hereof; or 
(2)  In the event the Cable Act or other applicable law is amended to permit the city to assess a license fee of a greater amount than that specified in subsection (1) above, the licensee agrees to pay to the city the new amount after a public hearing in which the public and licensee are given an opportunity to comment on the impact of the higher fee. Moreover, licensee shall conclude any such agreement with respect to a fee increase with the city prior to finalizing an agreement with Miami-Dade County. 
(b)  Licensee's payment of the license fee to the city shall be reduced only by that amount the licensee is required to pay Miami-Dade County pursuant to any cable license, license or ordinances of the county. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, licensee shall pay to the city the full amount of all fees to which it is entitled pursuant to part a of this section, on revenues not expressly included in the definition of "gross revenues" pursuant to chapter 8 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, or as such chapter may be amended. 
(c)  A licensee shall pay the license fee due to the city on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than 30 calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(d)  A licensee shall file with the city, on a quarterly basis with the payment of the license fee, a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the license fee for the preceding quarter and a detailed explanation of the method of computation. The statement shall include but not be limited to identification of all revenue streams directly or indirectly connected with the cable system, in accordance with the definition of gross revenues, section 11-2, whether or not involved in license fee computation. The statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or the chief financial officer or other duly authorized officer of the licensee. The licensee shall bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. 
(e)  Subject to applicable law, no acceptance by the city of any license fee payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. 
(f)  The license fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee or assessment. 
(g)  The city may, from time to time, and upon reasonable notice, inspect and audit any and all books and records of the licensee relevant to the determination of gross revenues and the computation of license fees due, and may recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the license. If, as a result of the audit, the city determines that the licensee has underpaid the quarterly license fees owed in an amount equal to or exceeding two percent of the license fees actually paid based on components of gross revenues as specifically defined herein, the cost of the audit shall be paid by the licensee to the city within 30 calendar days of receipt of demand for payment, unless licensee can show the audit is materially incorrect. A licensee shall make all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available to the auditors in Miami-Dade county, for inspection and copying or in the alternative, licensee shall pay all incremental costs and fees incurred by the city for the city to perform the audit at a location outside of Miami-Dade county. A licensee shall provide any and all materials within 30 calendar days of receipt of a request from the city. 
(h)  In the event that a license fee payment is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth in subsection (c) above, or is underpaid, the licensee shall pay a late charge of 18 percent per annum of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid license fee payment, provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under Florida law. Any such failure to remit payment on a timely basis, after written notice and failure to cure, shall be considered a material violation of this chapter and any license granted pursuant hereto. Any interest and/or late charges paid by licensee is intended to be a charge incidental to the enforcing of a license within the meaning of Section 622 (g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542 (g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the license fee imposed by this chapter or any license agreement nor passed through to subscribers. 
(i)  When a license terminates for any reason, the licensee shall file with the city within 90 calendar days of the date its operations in the city cease, a financial statement, certified by the chief financial officer of the licensee, showing the gross revenues received by the licensee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments shall be made at that time for license fees due to the date that the licensee's operations ceased. 
(j)  The licensee's use of city private property for the placement or attachment of equipment used in the provision of cable services (e.g., generators, power supply units, concrete environmental closures (CEC), etc.) shall be in accordance with city policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-17. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The licensee shall submit reports to the city quarterly according to the following schedule: January through March are due on or before April 25; April through June are due on or before July 25; July through September are due on or before October 25; and October through December are due on or before January 25 of each year. The quarterly report shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Number of homes passed, number of cable plant miles, number of new installs, number of disconnects, and net result of new installs and disconnects. 
(2)  Customer service and repair telephone statistics, broken down by month, indicating the number of calls received, number of calls abandoned, number of calls receiving a busy signal, percentage of total calls for which a busy signal was received, average duration of each call handled by a customer service representative, average length of time each caller waits before speaking directly to a customer service representative and number of customer service representatives staffed to handle telephone calls. 
(3)  To the extent compiled by the licensee in the normal course of its business, statistics by month for the number of total standard installations performed, number of standard installations performed within seven calendar days, number of service interruptions, number of planned service interruptions, number of service interruptions by day part (1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 6:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., or, upon request of the city, based on shorter measurement intervals as licensee has available), number of service interruptions by duration, number of service interruptions responded to within 24 hours, number of other service problems responded to within 36 hours, preventative measures to reduce or eliminate service interruptions, and any other information which may be reasonably required to monitor the licensee's compliance with this chapter. A licensee may comply with the requirements of this subsection by providing to the city a copy of the actual complaint and/or service interruption log(s) kept by licensee. 
(4)  Revenue information, including, but not limited to: number of subscribers for each type of cable service offered, and the gross revenue from all sources attributable to the operations of the cable system by the licensee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary in the city, stating separately by category each source and the amount of revenue attributable thereto. 
(b)  Within six months of the close of its fiscal year, the licensee shall provide an annual report to the city that includes the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the activities of the previous year in development of the system, including but not limited to, products and services, video and nonvideo, initiated or discontinued, policy changes enacted during the previous year, number of cable subscribers for each tier or type of service or product (including gains and losses), homes passed, and miles of cable distribution plant in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of any construction, including system upgrades, during the year with any projections previously provided to the city, as well as rate and charge increases and/or decreases for the previous fiscal year. The report shall provide a comparison to other systems operated by licensee, its parent, affiliate, or subsidiary sufficient to determine licensee's compliance with its obligation pursuant to this chapter and the license agreement. 
(2)  An annual financial report to include a statement of sources of revenues for the licensee, or the smallest operational unit closest to the level of the licensee for which data is available, and licensee's parent; provided that the city may request, in writing, and licensee shall provide, additional information at the system or license level, as reasonably necessary. The licensee shall provide an audited financial report if licensee has a report in its normal course of business. If not, the statements shall be certified by the chief financial officer of the licensee. The financial report shall include notes to the financial statements that specify all significant accounting policies and practices upon which it is based. 
(3)  Where applicable, a copy of updated maps depicting the location of all trunk lines and feeder lines and associated devices in the city to the extent such locations have changed. Upon request of the city, such maps shall be provided in digitized form at the expense of the licensee. 
(4)  A summary of written subscriber or resident complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition, including an annual summary of statistics provided in the quarterly report. Where complaints involve recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information concerning complaints shall be submitted upon written request of the city. 
(5)  Upon written request, a summary of the number of service interruptions, number of planned service interruptions, and number of service interruptions by duration, along with preventative measures to eliminate reoccurrence. 
(6)  Upon written request, if the licensee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors; the officers and members of the board of directors of any parent corporation; and if the licensee or parent corporation stock or ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(7)  Upon written request, if the licensee is a partnership, a list of the partners, including any limited partners, and addresses; and if the general partner is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors or the corporate general partner, and the officers and directors of any parent corporation; and where the general partner or parent corporation ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(8)  Upon written request, a list of all persons holding five percent or more ownership or otherwise cognizable interest in the licensee pursuant to the Cable Act and 47 CFR 76.501. 
(9)  A copy of the rules and regulations of the licensee applicable to subscribers of the cable system. 
(10)  A report on the number of senior citizen, economically disadvantaged or disabled subscribers receiving any rate discounts pursuant to subsection 11-20(a) hereof, and the amount of any such discounts for specific services if licensee offers separate rates or discounts for those categories of subscribers. 
(11)  A report on the number of multiple dwelling buildings and units therein receiving service under bulk agreements pursuant to subsection 11-20(a) hereof. 
(12)  A full schedule and description of services, service hours and location of the customer service office of the licensee or offices available to subscribers, and a schedule of all rates, fees and charges for all services provided over the cable system. 
(13)  Upon written request, a report on the number of total subscribers served by the licensee in the cable system, with a breakdown by the types of services received by the subscribers. 
(14)  Upon written request, a report on the number of personnel employed by the licensee by area of responsibility, including any ethnic reporting pursuant to equal employment opportunity commission requirements. 
(c)  Upon each written request by the city made not more than once annually, a licensee shall within 45 calendar days of receipt of the request, provide the following documents to the city, without regard to whether the documents are filed by the licensee or an affiliate: 
(1)  Annual financial report of the licensee or its parent or any affiliate of licensee which controls licensee and issues an annual financial report. 
(2)  Copyright filings reflecting the operation of the system; 
(3)  Any pleadings, petitions, applications, communications, reports and documents (collectively referred to as "filings") submitted within the previous 12 months by or on behalf of the licensee to the FCC, SEC or any state or federal agency, court or regulatory commission which filings may adversely impact the operation of the cable system of the licensee in the city or that may impact the rights or obligations of the city under this chapter or the license agreement issued pursuant to this chapter and any and all responses, if any, to the above mentioned filings. 
(4)  Any and all notices of deficiency, forfeiture, or documents instituting any investigation, civil or criminal proceeding issued by any state or federal agency regarding the system, licensee, or any affiliate of licensee, provided, however, that any such notice or documents relating to an affiliate of licensee need be provided only to the extent the same may directly or indirectly affect or bear on operations of the licensee in the city. For example, a notice that an affiliate which has a management contract for the city's system was not in compliance with FCC EEO requirements would be deemed to affect or bear on operations in the city. 
(5)  A copy of any cable licenses or franchises entered into by licensee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary. A licensee shall provide a copy of such documents as soon as reasonably possible but no later than within 30 calendar days of such request. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the licensee agrees to provide the city, within ten calendar days of filing or receipt of such, any document that may, in the reasonable judgment of the licensee, adversely impact the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system of the licensee. 
(e)  The licensee shall furnish to the city such additional reports as a licensee may prepare as a customary business practice with respect to its operations, which in the discretion of the city manager are reasonable and necessary for the administration and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
(f)  Within ten calendar days of filing by licensee, its parent, subsidiary, or affiliate, licensee shall provide notice to the city manager of any petitions, filings, reports and correspondence filed with any federal, state, or local agencies or courts, which may, in the reasonable judgment of the licensee, adversely affect city and/or subscribers with regard to the chapter or a license agreement, including, but not limited to, any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. In any administrative or legal proceeding in which licensee is a party, licensee shall provide a copy of any filed document, upon written request of the city, within five calendar days. To the extent the city desires and may properly participate in the proceeding, licensee agrees that it will not oppose any necessary extension or tolling of time which may allow the city's participation in said matter. However, the licensee may oppose or object to any extension of time that exceeds the period of time used by licensee to provide a copy of the requested filing to the city. 
(g)  A licensee shall make a complete set of books and records available for inspection, copying and audit by the city in Miami-Dade county, for purposes of ascertaining compliance with requirements of this chapter and the license agreement, subject to subsection (h) below. Such inspection, copying and audit shall be upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. 
(h)  The city shall accord all books and records that it inspects under this section the degree of confidentiality such books and records are entitled to under federal and state law. A licensee's books and records shall not constitute public records, except to the extent required by federal and state law. To the extent a licensee considers any books or records that it is required to produce to be confidential or otherwise protected from public disclosure, licensee shall designate which documents it views as protected and provide a written explanation to the city of the legal basis for licensee's claim of protection. 
(i)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, within 30 calendar days of the third annual anniversary of the effective date of a license agreement and no more often than every two years thereafter, the licensee shall upon written notice of the city, submit a report to the city, in a form reasonably acceptable to the city, discussing technological advances and other information necessary to evaluate licensee's compliance with state-of-the-art obligations under a license agreement or this chapter, except as otherwise set forth in a license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-18. - Customer service requirements. 
(a)  A licensee shall at a minimum maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with FCC standards. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe service for all of its customers and facilities as set forth in this chapter and a license agreement. The customer service requirements set forth herein are applicable to all services subject to the chapter. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a refund order in the amount of a subscriber's monthly bill, and a fine in the amount of $525.00, per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(b)  A licensee shall maintain at least two conveniently located business offices and/or service centers within the city limits, unless licensee offers free pick-up and delivery of rental equipment, in which case licensee shall maintain at least one such location. This business office shall be open at minimum from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. Further, licensee shall locate, staff, operate and maintain said office(s) so as to provide all subscribers, including but not limited to those subscribers who may be elderly, disabled or otherwise impaired, with access to its office. The office shall make available for all customers 1) parking within reasonable proximity of the office and 2) sufficient covered waiting areas and adequate seating capacity in an air-conditioned space. Such office must have adequate counter personnel to keep wait time to an average of ten minutes or less. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection, under normal operating conditions, shall result in a fine in the amount $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(c)  Licensee shall maintain a listed local, toll-free telephone number under the name by which licensee is doing business in the city, and employ a sufficient number of telephone lines, personnel and answering equipment or service to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public to contact the licensee on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, seven calendar days per week including holidays. Knowledgeable, qualified licensee representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries, 24 hours per day, seven days per week including holidays in, at minimum, English, Spanish and Creole languages. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a refund order in the amount of a subscriber's monthly bill, and a fine in the amount of $315.00, per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(d)  Licensee shall answer all customer service and repair telephone calls made under normal operating conditions within 30 seconds, including wait time and within an additional 30 seconds to transfer the call. Customers shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions except for the period from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., where a licensee and the city have mutually agreed in writing to an alternative standard measured on a quarterly basis. Licensee shall employ automatic call distribution technology, or its equivalent, to compile and generate the information required to establish compliance with these standards. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(e)  A licensee shall employ and maintain sufficient qualified personnel and equipment to be available to: 
(1)  Accept payments; 
(2)  Exchange or accept converters or other equipment; 
(3)  Receive subscriber complaints or requests for service or repairs on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, seven days per week; 
(4)  Initiate service installations, undertake normal repairs, initiate action with respect to any subscriber service complaints within 24 hours; 
(5)  Enable a service technician to respond to service calls 24 hours per day, seven days a week including holidays when more than 25 subscribers served from the same nearest active electronic device, such as an amplifier or node, call with the similar complaint. 
Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(f)  Licensee must meet each of the following standards no less than 95 percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installation work shall be performed within seven calendar days after an order has been placed except in those instances where a subscriber specifically requests an installation date beyond the seven calendar day period. If scheduled installation is neither started nor completed as scheduled, the subscriber shall be telephoned by an employee of the licensee the same day. Evening personnel shall also attempt to call subscribers at home between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on the day prior to any appointment as a reminder of scheduled installation work. If the call to the subscriber is not answered, an employee of the licensee shall telephone the subscriber the next day. 
(2)  Licensee shall respond to service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known to licensee. Other service problems shall be responded to promptly and in no event later than 48 hours after the problem becomes known to licensee. All service interruptions, and service problems within the control of licensee, shall be corrected within 48 hours after receipt of a complaint. 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives made available for installations, service calls, repairs, and other installation activities shall be either a specific time, a four-hour time block during normal business hours, or at the election and discretion of the subscriber, "all day." These options shall be clearly explained to the customer at the time of scheduling. 
(4)  Licensee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If at any time an installer or technician is running late for a scheduled appointment, an attempt to contact the customer shall be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(6)  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a bill credit in an amount prorated on a daily basis, with a minimum of one day, and a fine in the amount of $315.00, per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(g)  Subscribers who have experienced two missed installation or service appointments due to the fault of licensee shall receive installation free of charge. If the installation was to have been provided free of charge or if the appointment was for service or repair, the subscriber shall receive a credit on the next bill of not less than $20.00. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $105.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(h)  Disconnection. 
(1)  Voluntary disconnection. 
a.  A subscriber may terminate service at any time. 
b.  A licensee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests from the cable system of the licensee. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers by any licensee. So long as the subscriber returns equipment within five business days of the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any licensee for such voluntary disconnection, or for any cable services delivered after the date of disconnect request. 
c.  A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect the equipment of the licensee and return it to the business office, subject to subsection b. above. 
d.  Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after any customer premises equipment including all converters but excluding wiring have been recovered by the licensee. The refund process shall take a maximum of 45 calendar days from the date equipment is returned to licensee to the date the customer receives the refund. 
(2)  Involuntary disconnection. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber or other fee or charge, the licensee may disconnect the service outlet of the subscriber; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until 35 calendar days after the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or other charge, and ten calendar days advance written notice of intent to disconnect to the subscriber in question. If the subscriber pays within 35 calendar days of the due date and after notice of disconnection has been given, the licensee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the licensee shall reinstate service as soon as practicable. Licensee reserves the right to deny service to any customer who has been repeatedly disconnected for non-payment of services to the extent such rights are consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
(3)  With respect to any disconnection, whether requested or involuntary, a licensee shall comply with the rules and regulations of the FCC and applicable law with respect to ownership, sale, removal and abandonment of home wiring. Failure to comply with such rules including, but not limited to providing applicable notice to subscribers and property owners shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(i)  Licensee shall intentionally interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible and shall use its best efforts to minimize the number of service interruptions between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. Licensee shall maintain a written log for all intentional service interruptions and all other service interruptions. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(j)  Licensee shall notify the city manager or designee immediately if a service interruption affects fifty or more subscribers for a time period greater than one hour. The city manager, in his or her discretion, shall establish appropriate methods for the notification required herein, including any procedures for notification after normal business hours. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(k)  Licensee shall cause all of its field employees to wear a picture identification badge indicating employment by licensee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. All company vehicles shall display the company name, telephone number and logo, if any, in a manner clearly visible to the public. Contractor vehicles shall display the contractor name, telephone number, contractor license number, if applicable, as well as the cable operator's name. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(l)  A licensee shall develop written procedures for the investigation and resolution of all subscriber or city resident complaints, including, but not limited to, those regarding the quality of service and equipment malfunction, which procedures shall be subject to the review and approval by the city manager. A subscriber or city resident who has not been satisfied by following the procedures of the licensee may file a written complaint with the office of the city manager, who shall investigate the matter and, in consultation with the licensee as appropriate, attempt to resolve the matter. The good faith or lack thereof of the licensee in attempting to resolve subscriber and resident complaints in a fair and equitable manner shall be considered in connection with the renewal application of the licensee. Licensee shall maintain a complete list of all complaints not resolved within three calendar days of receipt and the measures taken to resolve those complaints. This list shall be compiled in a form to be approved by the city. It shall be compiled on a monthly basis. The list for each calendar month shall be supplied to the city no later than the 15th day of the next month. Licensee shall also maintain a list of all complaints received, which list shall be provided to the city within three calendar days of request by the city manager or designee, as part of an inquiry by the city regarding licensee's compliance with this section. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(m)  Licensee shall permit the city designee to inspect and test the technical equipment and facilities of the system upon reasonable notice not to be less than 72 hours, except in an emergency. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(n)  Licensee shall abide by the following requirements governing communications with customers, bills and refunds: 
(1)  Each licensee shall provide to subscribers written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation, at least once annually, and at any future time upon request by the subscriber: 
a.  How to use the cable service; 
b.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
c.  All products and services offered; 
d.  Prices and service options; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; 
f.  The procedures of the licensee for the receipt and resolution of customer complaints, the address of the licensee and telephone number to which complaints may be reported, and the hours of operation; 
g.  The telephone number and address of the city, and as required by county ordinance, the county office designated to handle cable complaints and inquiries shall be printed on the back of the bill. The information shall be placed so as to not be confused with similar information for licensee or the county; 
h.  The availability and costs of a "lock-out" device and other parental control mechanisms; 
i.  The information of the licensee, collection, and disclosure policies for the protection of the privacy of the subscriber. 
j.  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  In addition, each licensee shall provide written notice in its monthly billing, at the request of the city, of any events or public service announcements. The city shall make such a request in writing, with reasonable notice prior to the mailing of any billing by licensee, such that licensee's regular billing cycle shall not be interrupted. City shall pay printing costs and incremental postage expenses for said notices. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $525.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(3)  Licensee bills shall be clear, concise and understandable to subscribers. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(4)  Credits for service shall be issued no later than the next billing cycle of the customer following the determination that a credit is warranted. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(5)  A licensee shall provide subscribers, the city commission, and the city manager with at least 30 calendar days advance written notice of any changes in rates, charges, channel lineup, or initiations or discontinuations or changes of service or services offered over the cable system whenever practicable. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $210.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(o)  Upon a subscriber's request, a licensee shall provide a credit to the account of the subscriber, prorated on a daily basis, with a minimum of one day, for any period of two hours or more within a 24 hour period during which a subscriber experienced an interruption of service or substantial impairment of service, whether due to a system malfunction or other cause within the licensee's control. No refunds shall be due for service interruptions directly related to a rebuild, upgrade or routine maintenance of the cable system which is planned, noticed properly to the city and subscribers, and occurs during a time other than between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. and lasts for four hours or less. Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(p)  Billing. 
(1)  The first billing statement of the licensee after a new installation or service change shall be pro-rated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit. 
(2)  The billing statement of the licensee must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Invoices shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(3)  Any balance not received within ten calendar days after the due date may be assessed an administrative charge not to exceed the average actual fixed and variable cost to administer a delinquent account, subject to applicable law, except that a late charge of not more than five dollars shall be presumed to comply with this subsection. The charge shall appear on the billing statement of the following month. In the event it is determined that a licensee has assessed a late fee in violation of this section, licensee shall pay to subscribers that amount which is ordered by a governmental or judicial body which has properly asserted jurisdiction. Subscribers shall not be charged an administrative fee, a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the licensee, its employees, or contractors, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(4)  The licensee must notify the subscriber that payment can be remitted in person at the office of the licensee in the city and inform the subscriber of the address of that office where payment can be made. 
(5)  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(q)  Except as incident to a rebuild of the cable system, a licensee may not substantially alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by retiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) without the express permission of such subscriber, unless it complies with this subsection. 
(1)  If a licensee wishes to alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by retiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) in such a way that the subscriber shall no longer be able to obtain the same package of services, then the licensee must provide the subscriber with 30 calendar days notice of such alteration, explain the substance and the full effect of the alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the 30-day period following notice, to opt to receive within the same 30 calendar days any combination of services offered by the licensee. 
(2)  Except as provided under applicable federal, state, or local law, no charge may be made for any service or product which the subscriber has not affirmatively indicated, in a manner separate and apart from payment of the regular monthly bill, that the subscriber wishes to receive. 
(3)  Licensee's failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine in the amount of $315.00 per violation, per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(r)  If the city reasonably questions a licensee's compliance with any provision of this section, the city may request that the licensee certify in writing to the city, based upon internal due diligence by the licensee, that to the best of knowledge of the licensee it is in compliance with the standards set forth in this section; provided, however, that the city specifically shall identify the performance of licensee that is questioned, and requests certification not more often than semi-annually. At the request of the city, in the event of a discrepancy between the reports provided to the city pursuant to this section and the certification required herein, the licensee shall submit such documentation as may be required to demonstrate compliance with this section. This documentation shall be submitted within 30 calendar days of the receipt by the licensee of the city's request. 
(s)  Responsibility for the administration of this chapter, and any license granted pursuant to this chapter, and for the resolution of all complaints against a licensee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and related matters, including the authority to order refunds or fines, is hereby delegated to the city manager, who is empowered, among other things, to settle, or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the licensee, on behalf of the city, in accordance with the best interests of the public. In cases where requests for service have been ignored or in cases where the service provided is unsatisfactory for whatever reason, the city manager or designee, hereafter referred to jointly as city manager, shall have the power to require the licensee to provide service, if in the opinion of the city manager or designee such request for service is reasonable. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, including the licensee, may appeal the matter to the city commission for hearing and determination. The city commission may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether instituted by the city manager or by the city commission shall be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any license agreement issued pursuant to this chapter, and neither the city manager nor the city commission, in the adjustment, settlement, or compromise of any controversy shall have the right or authority to add to, modify or delete any provision of this chapter or of the license, or to interfere with any rights of subscribers or any licensee under applicable federal, or state law or private contract. 
(t)  (1)  In addition to the powers delegated in subsection 11-18(s) above, the city manager shall have the authority to order credits from a licensee to individual cable subscribers who have submitted a written complaint to the city and to assess fines against a licensee for any violation of this chapter or any license issued pursuant to this chapter, which fines shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  In ordering credits to cable subscribers, the city manager shall be governed as set forth throughout this section, in which the refund indicated is expressed as a percentage of the monthly bill of the subscriber. The credits set forth are to be made on a per violation basis with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation. The credit ordered by the city manager pursuant to this section shall not exceed 100 percent of a monthly bill of the subscriber, unless a violation has continued at least 30 calendar days from the date first reported to the licensee. 
(3)  The fines set forth in this section are to be assessed on a per violation basis, with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation. Where a credit required by this section is not possible because service has been terminated, licensee shall issue a refund to the former subscriber for the appropriate amount, provided that the licensee can locate the former subscriber after using reasonable efforts to do so. 
(4)  Prior to ordering any credit and/or assessing a fine pursuant to this chapter, the city manager shall mail to the licensee a written notice, by hand delivery or certified or registered mail, of the proposed credit and/or fine, specifying the violation at issue. The licensee shall have ten calendar days from the date of receipt of the written notice to demonstrate the violation has been cured or to file a written response to the notice of the city manager describing the plan to cure. In the sole discretion of the city manager, a fine, credit or refund may be waived, if the issue has been cured or the city manager believes the issue will be cured according to the proposed plan. Written response of the licensee shall be signed by management level personnel of licensee and all statements contained therein shall be regarded as material representations of the licensee to the city. 
(5)  Prior to ordering a credit, refund and/or assessing a fine, the city manager shall consider any justification or mitigating factor advanced in the written response of the licensee, including but not limited to rebates or credits to the subscriber or a cure of the violation. The city manager may, after consideration of the response of the licensee, waive or reduce any proposed credit, refund and/or fine. In the case of a complaint from a single subscriber or a violation of this chapter or any license issued pursuant to this chapter in which only a single subscriber has been affected, the city manager may not assess any fine if the licensee has reasonably resolved the complaint or cured the violation within a reasonable time frame not to exceed ten calendar days. However, said subscriber may be entitled to a credit as provided herein. 
(6)  Subsequent to the notice of proposed credit, refund and/or fine to licensee and consideration of the response of the licensee, if any, the city manager may issue an assessment of credit, refund and/or fine. The credit, refund and/or fine shall be paid within 30 calendar days of written notice to the licensee. If said credit, refund and/or fine is not paid by licensee in the next bill cycle or within such 30-day period, as the case may be, the city may, at its discretion, withdraw immediately the amount thereof from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the city shall notify licensee of the withdrawal amount, after which licensee shall have ten calendar days from the date of such notice to deposit in the security fund an amount sufficient to restore the security fund to the amount specified in the license agreement. This credit, refund and/or fine shall constitute liquidated damages to the subscriber and city for the violation and the city may enforce payment of the credit, refund and/or fine in any court having jurisdiction. It is the intent of the city to determine fines as a reasonable estimate of the damages suffered by the city and/or its subscribers, whether actual or potential, and may include without limitation, increased costs of administration and other damages difficult to measure. 
(7)  Licensee may appeal any decision of the city manager directly to the city commission within 30 calendar days of notice of the decision to the licensee. 
(8)  Intentional misrepresentation by a licensee in any response to a notice of proposed credit, refund and/or fine, whether oral or written, shall be considered a material breach of the license agreement, subject to a penalty of no less than $5,250.00 in liquidated damages to the city, and shall be grounds for license revocation. 
(9)  In addition to complying with the customer service standards set forth in this chapter or in any license issued pursuant to this chapter, a licensee shall, at minimum, comply with all customer service standards applicable to cable systems of the FCC and any other applicable federal, state or county law concerning customer service standards, consumer protection, and unfair or deceptive trade practices. 
(10)  The city expressly reserves the right to consider violations of the customer service requirements in evaluating any renewal, modification or transfers of any license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 13142, § 6, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 11-19. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  A licensee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers to the full extent required by section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, and state law. A licensee shall not condition subscriber or other service on the grant of permission of the subscriber to disclose information which, pursuant to federal or state law, cannot be disclosed without the explicit consent of the subscriber. No penalties or extra charges may be invoked by the licensee for a failure of the subscriber to grant consent. 
(b)  Unless otherwise permitted by federal or state law, neither the licensee nor its agents or employees shall, without the prior and specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell, or otherwise make available for commercial purposes the names, addresses or telephone numbers of any subscriber or subscribers, or any information which identifies the individual viewing habits of any subscriber or subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-20. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee may, in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers, nor subject any such persons or group of persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage. A licensee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for senior citizens, the economically disadvantaged or disabled that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A licensee may also offer bulk discounts to multiple dwelling buildings to the extent such discounts are otherwise permissible by law. 
(b)  A licensee shall not deny cable service to any potential subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscriber resides. 
(c)  A licensee shall not refuse to employ, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation. The licensee shall comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-21. - Use of streets. 
(a)  A licensee shall, at all times, comply with other applicable provisions of this Code, or as such may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a licensee shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city under permits issued for work by the proper officials of the city, and shall be completed in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city. A licensee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also prepare, maintain and provide to the city's resilience and public works department full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways, and easements of the city. A construction plan with strand maps is required 30 calendar days prior to commencement of construction in a particular area. 
(c)  A licensee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any of its property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or widening, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal or public utility improvements. 
(d)  A licensee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the licensee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance, except in the case where the requesting person is the city or other government agency, in which case no such payment shall be required. The licensee shall be given not less than five calendar days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(e)  A licensee shall, upon notice to the city of not less than seven calendar days, emergency situations excepted, have the authority to trim the trees or other natural growth upon and overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and other equipment of the licensee, except that, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the licensee. 
(f)  A licensee shall use, with the permission of the owner, existing underground conduits (if applicable) or overhead utility facilities whenever and wherever practicable as determined by the city, provided that nothing herein shall constitute a waiver of licensee's obligations under other applicable sections of the Code. Copies of agreements between a licensee and third party for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the city, provided that the licensee shall have the right to redact proprietary and confidential information in such agreements as it pertains to financial arrangements between the parties. 
(g)  All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights of property owners. The city may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a cable system installed in, on, or over the streets, as may be consistent with this chapter and the license agreement. 
(h)  All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system. A licensee shall not place facilities, equipment or fixtures where any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or other utility facilities shall interfere, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(i)  A licensee shall, at all times: 
(1)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in an orderly and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements of federal, state, county and city laws, as well as the South Florida Building Code and Electrical Safety Ordinances and any other applicable building or electrical safety code, and all other applicable rules, regulations, and orders, as they may be hereinafter amended or enacted, and in such manner that the installations of the city shall not receive interference. 
(2)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located. 
(j)  On streets where both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground, either at the time of initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, the cable of a licensee shall also be located underground at the expense of the licensee, consistent with chapter 54 of this Code, as amended. Between a street and a residence of a subscriber, the cable of the licensee must be located underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground. The city shall encourage, to the extent feasible, that the public utility and the licensee cooperate in opening of trenches and making such trenches available to all parties with the understanding that the costs of opening and refilling of such trenches would be shared equally by all users of such trenches. 
(k)  In the event the use of any part of a cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street without complying with the requirements of this chapter or a license agreement, or the license has been terminated, canceled, or expired, the licensee, within 30 calendar days after written notice by the city, shall commence removal from the streets of all such property as the city may require. 
(l)  The city may extend the time for the removal of equipment of the licensee and facilities for a period not to exceed 180 calendar days, and thereafter such equipment and facilities may be deemed abandoned. 
(m)  In the event of such removal or abandonment, the licensee shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior to such removal or abandonment. 
(n)  All licensee cable system distribution devices to be located on streets or private city property shall be installed, pursuant to this Code, in such a way as to eliminate or minimize any potentially adverse impact. All proposed locations shall be reviewed by the city Neighborhood Enhancement Team (NET) to ensure compliance with these and all other applicable policies and procedures relating to the placement of distribution devices on streets or city private property. Proposed locations may require review and approval by various city departments, as appropriate. 
(o)  In no case shall distribution devices be placed in the following locations: 
(1)  Within scenic transportation corridors. 
(2)  Within historical preservation districts. 
(3)  Within a specified 25-foot corner visibility triangle. 
(4)  Within a specified ten-foot driveway visibility triangle. 
(5)  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox, police callbox, or other emergency facility. 
(p)  The city may require that these distribution devices located on streets and city private property be installed with the following: 
(1)  Landscaping. 
(2)  Visual screening. 
(3)  Fencing, barriers, or other security features. 
When required, the licensee shall ensure that all landscaping, visual screening, fencing, barriers, or other security features are compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding landscape and architectural features and require minimal maintenance. The city shall not unreasonably require landscaping, visual screening, fencing, barriers, or other security features that are inconsistent with the character of the immediate area in which the distribution devices are to be installed. 
Recognizing that even minimal landscaping, visual screening, fencing, barriers, or other security features may be susceptible to overgrowth, disease, decay and disrepair, the city shall require the licensee to maintain and/or repair/replace this landscaping, visual screening, fencing, barriers, or other security features. 
(q)  Placement of distribution devices on city private property shall conform to all city Charter, Code, and administrative requirements. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 11-22. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, or in any license agreement, the city may impose a fine in the amount of $500.00 per violation per day or part thereof for any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity or provided in this chapter or in any license agreement, the city may apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a licensee violates this chapter, its license agreement, applicable state or federal law, or applicable local law or order: 
(1)  Revoke the license pursuant to the procedures specified in section 11-25 hereof. 
(2)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Before imposing any fine pursuant to this section or any other section herein, the city shall give licensee written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such damages, which notice shall contain a specific description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, licensee shall have 30 calendar days to cure the violation, or to reach agreement with city manager or designee on a program to cure the violation, and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist the licensee in resolving the violation. If the violation is not cured, or an agreement to cure is not reached, within that 30 day period, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning with the date of the notice of violation by the city, either by removing such amount from the security fund or through any other means allowed by law. 
(d)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate in the public interest. 
(e)  Failure by the city to enforce any requirements of a license agreement or this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(f)  In any proceeding wherein there exists an issue, properly noticed by the city pursuant to the terms of this chapter, with respect to a licensee's performance of its obligations pursuant to this chapter or a license agreement, the licensee has, throughout any such proceedings and appeals thereof, the burden of proof that said licensee is in compliance with the terms of the chapter. The city commission may find a licensee that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter in default and apply any one or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-23. - Renewal of license. 
Renewal shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. 546. To the extent such additional requirements are consistent with applicable law, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Upon completion of the review and evaluation process set forth in Section 626(a)(1), (2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. 546, should that process be invoked, the city shall notify the licensee, by certified or registered mail that it may file a formal renewal application including a renewal proposal. The notice shall specify the minimum information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application, which shall be no earlier than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the notice. 
(1)  The application shall comply with the requirements of section 11-8 hereof and provide the specific information requested in the notice or such other information as is designated by the city in the notice requesting a formal renewal proposal. If the licensee does not submit a formal renewal application by the date specified in the notice to the licensee by the city, given pursuant to this subsection, the licensee shall be deemed not to be seeking renewal of its license. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the formal renewal application, the city shall publish notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The city, following public notice of no less than ten calendar days, may hold one or more public hearings on the renewal application. 
(b)  With regard to any renewal application, in the event a public hearing on such application is held, or in the event that the city commission considers such application without a public hearing, the city commission shall either: 
(1)  Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the license; or 
(2)  Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the license should not be renewed; or 
(3)  In the case of an informal proposal, pass a resolution to enter into informal negotiations of a license agreement. 
(c)  If a preliminary assessment is made that a license should not be renewed, at the request of the licensee or on its own initiative, the city shall commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c) to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)—(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A)—(D). Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in compliance with subsection (b) of § 546 shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in § 546(c)(1)(A)—(D), pursuant to the record of proceedings under § 546(c). The city shall not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the license under § 546(c)(1)(A) or on events considered under § 546(c)(1)(B) unless the city has provided the licensee with notice and opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the city has waived its right to object, or the licensee gives written notice of a failure or inability to cure and the city fails to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice. 
(d)  Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal not submitted within the time period set forth in Section 626(a) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(a), or submitted within such time frame and the parties agree that the informal process shall be first initiated, shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal and shall be governed in accordance with Section 626(h) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(h). The city may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the city commission shall determine whether the license should be renewed and the terms and conditions of any renewal. 
(e)  If the city commission grants a renewal application, the city and the licensee shall agree on the terms of a license agreement, pursuant to the procedures specified in section 11-9 of this chapter, before such renewal becomes effective. 
(f)  If renewal of a license is lawfully denied, the city may acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person upon approval of the city commission. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the license itself. The city may not acquire ownership of the system while an appeal of a denial for renewal is pending in any court pursuant to the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(e). 
(g)  If renewal of a license is lawfully denied and no appeal to a court is pending, and the city does not purchase the cable system or approve or effect a transfer of the cable system to another person, the city may require the former licensee to remove its facilities and equipment at the expense of the former licensee. If the former licensee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal completed at the expense of the former licensee and/or surety. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-24. - Transfer, sale, and assignment. 
(a)  No transfer, sale or assignment of any interest in a license shall occur without prior approval of the city. 
(b)  An application for a transfer, sale or assignment of any interest of a license shall meet the requirements of section 11-8 hereof, and provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including but not limited to details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. Except in the case of a pro forma transfer as defined in section 11-2, the application shall provide, at a minimum, the information required in section 11-8 or such other information as is specified in a license agreement in lieu of the information required in section 11-8. In addition, the applicant shall provide to the city any and all information provided to Miami-Dade County in connection with the transfer. 
(c)  An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a license shall be considered granted on the 61st calendar day following the filing of such application with the city unless, prior to that date, the city notifies the licensee to the contrary. An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a license shall clearly identify the application as such, describe the proposed transaction, and explain why the applicant believes the transfer is pro forma. Unless otherwise requested by the city within 30 calendar days of the filing of an application for a pro forma transfer, the applicant shall be required only to provide the information required in subsections 11-8(e)(1), (3), (12) and (14) with respect to the proposed transferee. 
(d)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a transfer of a license, the city commission shall consider the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; whether the incumbent cable operator is in substantial compliance with the material terms of its license agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed commitment of the transferee to cure such noncompliance; and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect cable services to subscribers, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
(e)  No application for a transfer of a license shall be granted unless the transferee, if the holder of the license, agrees in writing to abide by and accept all terms of this chapter, as amended, and the license agreement, and to assume all obligations and liabilities of the previous licensee, whether known or unknown, under this chapter, as amended, and the license agreement. If such transferee will not be the holder of the license, such transferee will sign an acknowledgment ensuring compliance by the licensee with the license agreement and the chapter. The city shall certify to licensee, upon request, all issues of licensee's performance which are known and pending. 
(f)  Subject to applicable law, approval by the city of a transfer of a license does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this chapter or the license agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-25. - Revocation or termination of license. 
(a)  A license may be revoked by the city commission for failure of the licensee to construct, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this chapter or the license agreement, or for any other material violation of this chapter or material breach of the license agreement. To invoke the provisions of this subsection (a), the city shall give the licensee written notice, by certified mail at the last known address, that licensee is in material violation of this chapter or in material breach of the license agreement and describing the nature of the alleged violation or breach with specificity. If within 30 calendar days following receipt of such written notice from the city to the licensee, the licensee has not cured such violation or breach, or has not entered into a written agreement with the city manager or designee on a program to cure the violation, or has not demonstrated that the violation cannot be cured, the city may give written notice to the licensee of its intent to revoke the license, stating reasons. 
(b)  Prior to revoking a license under subsection (a) hereof, the city commission shall hold a public hearing, upon no less than ten calendar days written notice to the licensee, at which time the licensee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing the city commission may determine whether to revoke the license based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other evidence of record. If the city commission determines to revoke a license, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the licensee. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, any license may, at the option of the city following a public hearing before the city commission, be revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the licensee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that 120-day period: 
(1)  Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
(2)  Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license agreement. 
(d)  In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a licensee, the city may revoke the license, following a public hearing before the city commission, by serving notice upon the licensee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the license and all rights and privileges of the license shall be revoked and shall terminate 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
(1)  The city has approved the transfer of the license to the successful proposer; and 
(2)  The successful proposer has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the license agreement and this chapter. 
(e)  If the city revokes a license, or if for any other reason a licensee abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers for a period of six months, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
(1)  The city may require the former licensee to remove its facilities and equipment at the expense of the former licensee. If the former licensee fails to remove facilities and/or equipment within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the expense of the former licensee and/or surety. 
(2)  The city, by resolution of the city commission, may acquire ownership, or effect a transfer, of the cable system at an equitable price. 
(3)  If a cable system is abandoned by a licensee, the city may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system. 
(f)  Where the city has issued a license specifically conditioned in the license agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified date, failure of the licensee to complete such construction or upgrade, may result in the revocation of the license as set forth in this section, unless the city, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the licensee, grants an extension of time. 
(g)  No adverse action against a licensee may be taken by the city pursuant to this section except after a noticed public hearing at which the licensee is given an opportunity to participate. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-26. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services requested from the licensee as long as all financial and other obligations to the licensee are satisfied. 
(b)  In the event of a termination or transfer of a license for whatever reason, the licensee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. The licensee shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. The temporary period shall not exceed 12 months without the written consent of the licensee. During such period the cable system shall be operated under such terms and conditions as the city and the licensee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that shall continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator. 
(c)  In the event a licensee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive calendar days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the licensee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the licensee, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs or damages resulting from the failure of the licensee to perform, including city's costs for city staff, consultants and other professionals necessary to continue operation of the system. Additionally, the licensee shall cooperate with the city to allow city employees and/or city agents free access to the facilities and premises of the licensee for purposes of the licensee of continuing system operation. To the extent that revenues are collected as a result of operation of the system under this subsection, the city shall have the right to collect license fees on such revenues subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-27. - Rates. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from regulating rates for cable services to the full extent permitted under federal law, as it may be amended in the future. The city reserves the right to implement future legislation consistent with applicable law, and to petition the FCC for relief as may be permitted by law. 
(b)  Any rate or charge established for cable service, equipment, repair and installation shall be reasonable to the public and, to the extent applicable, in compliance with FCC guidelines. Where FCC guidelines exist, licensee's compliance with such guidelines shall be considered reasonable. Upon written request from the city or its agent, licensee shall provide all requested data, records and documentation to show the reasonableness of the rates so long as such requests comply with FCC guidelines or other applicable law. 
(c)  Should a licensee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall submit a written notice of the amounts and effective date of such changes to the city manager in a manner consistent with Federal Communications Commission cable rate regulation standards or other applicable law in effect at the time. Prior to the implementation of a change in rates, the city may require the licensee to notify each subscriber, by (1) placing an announcement of not less than one quarter page in a newspaper(s) of general circulation, (2) via the cable system, or (3) through bill inserts, of the proposed rate change and the date the new rates will be effective. 
(d)  A licensee granted a license pursuant to this chapter may provide reasonable discount rates consistent with section 623(e)(1) of the Cable Act, in a manner acceptable to the city, for qualified subscribers over 62 years of age and/or residing in government funded housing pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1437f. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-28. - Area-wide interconnection. 
(a)  Upon request of the city, a licensee shall interconnect with any or all other cable systems located within the city or serving subscribers within the city. Interconnection of systems shall be for the sole purpose of permitting interactive transmission and reception of public, government and education program material, and may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method, as mutually agreed by the affected cable operators and approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Licensee shall, where it does not own the affected system or systems, immediately initiate good faith negotiations with the operators of the other affected system or systems in order to facilitate the construction and operation of the interconnection link and the equitable sharing of costs among the participants. Licensee shall report to the city the results of such negotiation no later than 30 calendar days after the date of receipt of request from the city. Where licensee owns the affected system, licensee shall report to the city on the timing and, method of interconnection within 15 calendar days of receipt of the city's request. 
(c)  The licensee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect if the city finds that: 
(1)  The licensee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection; or 
(2)  The cost of the interconnection would be unreasonably high. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-29. - Performance evaluation. 
(a)  The city may conduct periodic performance evaluations of a licensee as the city determines is necessary. A licensee shall fully cooperate with these evaluations in good faith. Evaluation session shall be properly noticed and open to the public. 
(b)  Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, cable service; application of new technologies; cable system performance; cable services provided; programming offered; subscriber complaints; privacy; modifications to license; judicial and FCC rulings; and the city or licensee rules; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the renegotiation of a license. 
(c)  If the city implements a survey of cable subscribers in connection with a performance evaluation, the city may require a licensee to distribute a city questionnaire to its subscribers at licensee's expense, provided however that such distribution at licensee's expense shall not occur more than once every two years. The city shall provide a licensee with no less than four months notice of its intent to implement a survey as set forth herein. The city and a licensee shall cooperate and mutually agree on the content of such a survey. 
(d)  Upon request and upon reimbursement of the city's copying costs, the licensee may receive copies of all responses. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-30. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this chapter and license agreements. The city manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those actions specified in this chapter that are reserved to the city commission. The city manager may recommend that the commission take certain actions with respect to the license. The city manager shall keep the commission updated of developments in cable technology and provide the city commission with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  Subject to federal and state law, the city commission shall have the sole authority to regulate rates for cable services, grant licenses, authorize the entering into of license agreements, modify license agreements, renew or deny renewal of licenses, revoke licenses, and authorize the transfer of a license. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-31. - Force majeure. 
In the event the performance of the licensee of, or compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter or the license agreement is prevented by a cause or event not within the control of the licensee, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no fines or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that licensee uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this chapter and any license agreement granted or renewed hereunder, causes or events not within the control of the licensee shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within control of the licensee, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, the financial inability of the licensee to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-32. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all cable licenses granted, renewed or transferred on or after the effective date of this chapter, and shall apply to all cable licenses granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-33. - Municipal cable system ownership authorized. 
(a)  To the full extent permitted by law, the city may acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the ability or authority of the city to acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-34. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  Any additional regulations adopted by the city shall be incorporated into this chapter and complied with by all licenses within 30 calendar days of the date of adoption of such additional regulations unless imposition of such regulations would be otherwise prohibited by applicable law or the regulation provides for a longer time to comply. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire the property of the cable system of the licensee, consistent with applicable federal and state law. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, this section shall not enlarge or restrict the exercise of eminent domain of the city except to the extent provided by applicable law. 
(d)  The city shall at all times have the right, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, to examine records and to inspect the facilities of the licensee to the extent needed to monitor the compliance of the licensee with and performance under this chapter and the license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 11936, § 3, 6-8-00)  
Sec. 11-35. - Florida Consumer Choice Act of 2007. 
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the Florida Consumer Choice Act of 2007 ("the Act") so that the city shall retain all rights and obligations permitted by the Act to be retained by the city as of June 30, 2007, and so that the obligations and rights of all persons which have previously obtained permits and previously entered into agreements with the city and all persons which shall obtain permits in the future and enter into agreements with the city in the future for work to be performed or conducted within and any related maintenance and restoration of the city's public right-of-way as defined in section 54-1, as amended, and for any other continuing obligation to the city as permitted by law, shall be construed as in force as of June 30, 2007, and so as to comply with the nondiscriminatory mandate of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 12928, § 2, 6-28-07)  
Chapter 11.5 - CIVILIAN COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION AND REVIEW[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12188, § 1, adopted February 14, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as §§ 11.5-1—11.5-12. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 11.5-25—11.5-37. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11.5-1—11.5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - THE CITY OF MIAMI CIVILIAN INVESTIGATIVE PANEL 
 
Sec. 11.5-26. - Created; established. 
The Civilian Investigative Panel ("CIP") is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02)  
Sec. 11.5-27. - Purposes, powers and duties. 
The purpose, powers and duties of the CIP are to: 
(1)  Act as independent civilian oversight of the sworn officers of the city's police department; 
(2)  Exercise its powers so as to not interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigations or prosecutions and conduct its activities consistent with applicable law, including but not limited to the Florida Government in the Sunshine Law, and with applicable labor contracts; 
(3)  Engage the services of trained investigators and secure adequate training for its members, including training in police policies and practices; 
(4)  Conduct investigations consistent with the procedures set forth in section 11.5-31, reviews, inquiries, audits, and public hearings to make factual determinations, facilitate resolutions, and propose recommendations as to disposition or other outcome to the police chief, city manager, or, where appropriate, other city officials regarding: 
a.  Allegations of misconduct by officers of the city's police department; 
b.  Incidents of uses of force by officers of the city's police department resulting in death or great bodily harm to a person, with the mandatory duty to automatically investigate police shootings or other uses of force resulting in the death of a person; and 
c.  incidents, events, or systemic problems involving officers of the city's police department that affect the community. 
(5)  Promote community understanding and utilization of the process by which complaints are submitted and reviewed or investigated by the CIP and/or the city's police department; 
(6)  Forward complaints alleging criminal activity to the city's police department; 
(7)  Request issuance of subpoenas after consultation with the state attorney of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit in and for Miami-Dade County for the purpose of obtaining evidence from witnesses and production of books, papers, and other evidence, which subpoenas shall be signed, served, and enforced pursuant to applicable law, provided that no immunity be conferred by the CIP, and further, that no actions of the CIP may interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution; 
(8)  Make written recommendations to the police chief as to current and proposed city police department policies, procedures, and practices concerning but not limited to training, recruitment, and disciplinary procedures; 
(9)  Issue reports, requests, and recommendations to the mayor, city commission, city attorney, city manager, police chief, and the public concerning any matter within the CIP's authority; 
(10)  Establish, in collaboration with the executive director, written rules and standard operating procedures for internal governance and standards for training for CIP members and staff; and 
(11)  Evaluate the performance of the executive director and of the independent counsel annually pursuant to written criteria established by the CIP. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-28. - Membership; qualifications; nomination of members; nominating committee; appointment and filling vacancies; terms of office. 
(a)  Membership. The CIP shall consist of 13 members who should reflect the diversity of the city. 
These 13 members shall be selected, approved, and appointed as follows: 
(1)  The city commissioners shall approve the appointment of ten members from a pool of nominees selected and submitted by the CIP. These ten members shall include at least two members from each of the five city commission districts who permanently reside in, own real property in, or work or maintain a business in that city commission district. 
(2)  The mayor shall recommend two members from a pool of nominees selected and submitted by the CIP for approval and appointment by the city commission. These two members shall permanently reside in, own real property in, or work or maintain a business in the city; 
(3)  The police chief shall appoint one member, who shall serve at the will of the police chief. 
(b)  Qualifications for members of the CIP. 
(1)  All members of the CIP shall be either permanent residents of the city, own real property in the city, or work or maintain a business in the city, except for the appointee of the police chief, and shall have good reputations for integrity and community service and shall have no record of a felony conviction. 
(2)  No appointee to the CIP, nor any member of the appointee's immediate family, except for the appointee of the police chief, shall be currently employed by the city nor be a sworn former employee of the city's police department. No person who is currently, or has been previously, a party or party's legal representative in litigation against the city may serve on the CIP for at least two years from the conclusion of such litigation, including any appeals. The filing of a legal claim or lawsuit against the city alleging liability of the city through actions of any police or other sworn or enforcement personnel shall disqualify any person from serving on the CIP. 
(3)  Upon assuming their duties, all members of the CIP shall complete training in ethics, conflicts of interest, and the Florida Sunshine Law. All members of the CIP, except the appointee of the police chief, shall also commit to complete Citizens Police Academy Training or approved training through NACOLE (National Association of Citizens' Oversight of Law Enforcement) or equivalent programs, unless the member has completed such training within one year prior to appointment to the CIP. 
(c)  Nomination of members to fill vacancies. 
(1)  The CIP shall appoint a CIP nominating committee to solicit and screen applications for vacancies, interview candidates, and select nominee(s) to submit to the CIP, which shall, upon majority vote, submit nominations to the city commission for approval and appointment to fill vacancies on the CIP pursuant to subsection 11.5-28(a) of the City Code. 
(2)  The CIP nominating committee shall solicit applications for vacancies on the CIP by disseminating public notices in English, Spanish, and Creole throughout the community and through the media and the city's NET Offices. In addition, applications may be submitted to the CIP directly by members of the city commission and community based, civic, and social service groups, leagues, and organizations, provided that any such application shall be evaluated without regard to the individual or entity that solicited or submitted the application. 
(d)  Appointment of the CIP nominating committee. 
(1)  The CIP nominating committee shall be composed of five members of the CIP, with one member representing each of the five city commission districts, except as set forth in subsection (2)a. below. The nominating committee shall be appointed annually by the chairperson, subject to approval by a majority vote of the CIP, to serve a one-year term, which term may be extended if necessary to permit completion of the process described in subsection (c)(2) with respect to a given set of vacancies. 
(2)  The CIP nominating committee shall reflect the diversity of the city. 
a.  In the event the CIP does not include at least one member representing each of the five city commission districts, then the CIP shall fill vacancies on the nominating committee with members of the general public who permanently reside in, own real property in, or work or maintain a business in the unrepresented districts. To fill such vacancies, the CIP shall solicit applications by disseminating public notices in English, Spanish, and Creole throughout the community and through the media and the city's NET Offices with an emphasis on the unrepresented district or districts. In addition, applications may be submitted by community based, civic, and social service groups, leagues, and organizations. 
b.  When the composition of the CIP includes at least two members from each of the five city commission districts, any member of the nominating committee who is serving pursuant to subsection (2)a. shall be replaced by a CIP member representing the same city commission district. 
(3)  No CIP member shall serve on more than two consecutive nominating committees. 
(e)  Appointment and filling vacancies by majority vote. The city commission shall approve and make all appointments to fill any vacancies on the CIP (except the appointee of the police chief) by majority vote exclusively from the nominations submitted to it by the CIP. 
(f)  Terms of office. The terms of office of the members of the CIP appointed by the city commission shall be for three years and shall be unaffected by the terms of the mayor and city commissioners. No CIP member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms, provided that such CIP members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed but in no event for more than two additional months. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 12315, § 1, 1-23-03; Ord. No. 12379, § 1, 6-12-03; Ord. No. 13186, § 1, 6-24-10; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-29. - Officers. 
The CIP shall elect, by majority vote, from its members, a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as deemed necessary. The chairperson of the CIP shall have the power to appoint, with the approval by majority vote of the CIP, all members serving on the various committees that the CIP may establish from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-30. - Meetings, quorum and voting; attendance requirements; parliamentary procedures and rules of procedure; recordation. 
(a)  Meetings, quorum and voting. All meetings of the CIP shall be open to the public. The chairperson or three members of the CIP may call a meeting, provided that the meeting is noticed for at least seven days prior to the meeting date and pursuant to the provisions set forth in section 11.5-36. A quorum shall consist of seven members of the CIP. An affirmative vote of not less than 51 percent of the members present and voting at any meeting is required for any action to be taken by the CIP unless otherwise set forth herein. 
(b)  Attendance requirements. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this Code shall apply to all members of the CIP. 
(c)  Parliamentary authority and rules of procedure. The parliamentary authority of the CIP shall be Robert's Rules of Order (Current Edition) unless the CIP adopts its own order of business and rules of procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. Copies of minutes of all CIP meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners, city manager, city attorney and chief of police. 
(d)  Recordation. The CIP shall be responsible for the recordation and transmittal of its minutes and may request the city clerk to carry out recordation functions. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-31. - Procedures for investigation of direct filed cases, investigation, or review of internal affairs' closed cases; timeframes for and completion of investigations and reviews; review of police policies, procedures, and practices; and issuance of reports. 
The following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Directly filed cases. Complaints concerning allegations of police misconduct, police uses of force, or other matters pertaining to repeated issues of police misconduct may be directly filed with the CIP by anyone, including a member of the CIP or its staff. 
a.  All complaints shall be reduced to writing using a form approved by the CIP for that purpose; 
b.  The police department shall be notified of complaints received by the CIP within two working days; 
c.  All complaints must be submitted within a year of the date of the incident or event, or within one year of the complainant becoming aware of the systemic problem, giving rise to the complaint. Complaints filed more than one year thereafter may, however, be accepted by the CIP only if approved by a majority vote of its members. 
(2)  Investigation or review of CIP cases. 
a.  Investigation of directly filed cases. Investigation of complaints directly filed with the CIP shall proceed as follows: 
1.  Where a directly filed complaint involves potentially criminal conduct by a police officer, the CIP may proceed with an investigation upon receipt of a written determination by its independent counsel, who shall be required to consult with the appropriate prosecutorial agencies, that such an investigation will not interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution. A decision of the CIP to proceed with such an investigation may be challenged by any prosecutorial agency engaged in investigating or prosecuting the same matter by seeking a judicial order. Written notification of such a legal challenge shall stay the CIP's investigation for 48 hours permitting the prosecuting agency to obtain such a judicial order. 
2.  Upon determination by the executive director, in consultation with the independent counsel as needed, that a directly filed complaint does not involve potentially criminal conduct by a police officer, or upon the independent counsel's written determination that a CIP investigation will not interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution, the CIP may proceed with an independent investigation of the complaint in accordance with the time frames specified in subsection (3) below. 
b.  Police use of force involving death or great bodily harm to a person. Upon a written determination by the independent counsel that an investigation will not interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation, and without waiting for the conclusion of any internal affairs' investigation, and, further, regardless of whether any allegation of misconduct is made, the CIP must automatically commence an independent investigation into any incident in which a police shooting or other uses of force resulted in death of a person and may commence an independent investigation into any use of force resulting in great bodily harm to a person. 
c.  Investigation or review of internal affairs closed cases. The close-out reports of all investigations of police misconduct conducted by internal affairs of the city's police department shall be transmitted to the CIP within three working days of the police chief's final decision. Thereupon, internal affairs shall make its entire investigative file available to CIP staff for inspection and copying. The CIP may then proceed to conduct either an independent investigation of the matter or a review of the internal affairs' file, in accordance with the time frames specified in subsection (3) below. 
d.  Notice of commencement. Affected officers, and complainants shall be notified of the commencement of the CIP's investigation or review. 
(3)  Timeframes for investigations and reviews. The following timeframes shall govern the investigation or review process: 
a.  Upon determination that a directly filed complaint does not involve potentially criminal conduct by a police officer, the CIP's investigation must commence within ten working days of the filing of the complaint and must be completed and presented to the members of the CIP for their final consideration at a regular or special meeting within 180 days of the investigation's commencement. 
b.  With respect to directly filed complaints that involve potentially criminal conduct by a police officer, the following timeframes shall apply: 
1.  Within three working days of the filing of such complaint, the CIP shall forward the complaint to the city's police department. 
2.  Within three working days of the filing of such complaint, the CIP shall forward the complaint to its independent counsel. 
3.  The independent counsel shall, within ten working days of receiving the complaint, provide the CIP with a written determination as to whether its independent investigation of the complaint will interfere with a pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution. 
4.  If the independent counsel's written determination is that the CIP's independent investigation will not interfere with a pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution, the CIP's investigation must commence within seven working days of the receipt of that determination and must be completed and presented to the members of the CIP for their final consideration at a regular or special meeting within 180 days of the investigation's commencement. 
c.  With respect to internal affairs' closed cases, the following timeframes shall apply: 
1.  The executive director must decide within ten working days of receipt of the internal affairs' close-out report and access to the internal affairs' investigative file whether to conduct an independent investigation of the matter or a review of that file. 
2.  Where the executive director's decision is to independently investigate the matter, such investigation must be completed and presented to the CIP for its final consideration at a regular or special meeting of the CIP within 180 days of the investigation's commencement. 
3.  Where the executive director's decision is to review the file, such review must be concluded and presented to the CIP for its final consideration at a regular or special meeting of the CIP within 60 days of the review's commencement. 
d.  If the CIP fails to complete its investigation or review within these timeframes, the CIP's file on the complaint shall be closed as out-of-time. However, in the case of a directly filed complaint, the CIP may extend the timeframe for the investigation to be completed and presented to the CIP for its final consideration by 60 days after receipt of the internal affairs' investigative file. 
(4)  Standards for CIP consideration of completed investigation or review. In its consideration of a completed investigation or review, the CIP's proceedings shall be as informal as is compatible with the essential requirements of law, and shall not be governed by courtroom rules and procedures. Further, strict rules of evidence, as in courts of law, shall not apply and evidence is to be admitted at the discretion of the chairperson. However, fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings and pertinent information shall be considered for the purposes of providing substantial justice for all parties. 
(5)  Results of investigation or review. Upon presentation to the CIP of the results of an investigation or review, the CIP may: 
a.  Remand the matter to the executive director for further investigation or review, the results of which are to be presented to the CIP for its consideration at its next regular meeting. 
b.  Render one of the following findings based on the preponderance of evidence: 
1.  Unfounded where the investigation or review shows that the act or acts that provide the basis for the complaint did not occur or were misconstrued; 
2.  Exonerated where the act or acts that provide the basis for the complaint occurred, but the investigation or review shows that such acts were proper; 
3.  Not sustained where the investigation or review fails to disclose sufficient facts to prove or disprove the claim(s) made in the complaint; 
4.  Sustained where the investigation or review discloses sufficient facts to prove the claim(s) made in the complaint; 
5.  No finding where the executive director recommends summary disposition of the complaint for such reasons as the complainant failed to produce information to further the investigation; the investigation or review revealed that another agency was responsible and the complaint has been referred to that agency; the complainant withdrew the complaint; the complainant is unavailable to clarify the complaint; or the officer is no longer employed by the city. 
c.  Formulate recommendations to the police chief as to disposition, including recommendations as to training of police officers, revision of city police department policies or procedures, or where a complaint has been sustained, consequences for the subject officer(s). 
d.  Place an officer who has been the subject of three or more complaints within the past year on a monitoring list accessible to the public. 
(6)  Notification of results of investigation or review. At the conclusion of its investigation or review, the CIP shall forward its findings and recommendations in writing to the police chief, all affected officers, and complainants and, where appropriate, to the mayor, city manager, and/or city commission, to which the police chief must respond to the CIP in writing within 45 days, explaining why the CIP's recommendations were or were not accepted. 
(7)  Review of police policies, procedures, and practices. 
a.  The CIP may, at any time, review and make written recommendations to the police chief as to current city police department policies, procedures, and practices concerning but not limited to training, recruitment, and disciplinary procedures to which the police chief must respond to the CIP in writing within 45 days explaining why the CIP's recommendations were or were not accepted. 
b.  Whenever the police chief proposes to revise established city police department policies, procedures, or practices, the police chief must transmit the proposed revisions to the CIP 45 days prior to implementation, except if an emergency requires a more expeditious implementation. Within 30 days of the receipt of the proposed revisions, the CIP may make written recommendations to the police chief as to those revisions, to which the police chief must respond to the CIP in writing within 45 days, explaining why the CIP's recommendations were or were not accepted. 
(8)  Issuance of reports. The CIP may, when appropriate, issue reports, which may contain requests and recommendations, concerning any matter within the CIP's authority, to the mayor, city commission, city attorney, city manager, police chief, and the public, to which the appropriate official must respond in writing within 45 days, explaining why the CIP's requests or recommendations were or were not accepted. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-32. - Subpoena power. 
(a)  The CIP may subpoena witnesses and documents as part of any independent investigation, review, inquiry, audit, or public hearing it conducts, as follows: 
(1)  A request for a subpoena must be reviewed by the CIP independent counsel; for compliance with legal requirements, including but not limited to federal and state statutes and prevailing case law, and the appropriateness of issuance of the subpoena. Further, in cases that involve criminal conduct by a police officer, the independent counsel must consult with the state attorney of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit in and for Miami-Dade County as to whether the issuance of the subpoena will interfere with any pending criminal investigation or prosecution. 
(2)  After receiving advice from its independent counsel as to whether a requested subpoena complies with legal requirements and is appropriate to issue, and in cases that involve potentially criminal conduct of a police officer, after receiving the independent counsel's advice as to whether the subpoena will interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution, the CIP may issue the subpoena upon approval of a majority of its seated members. 
(3)  However, nothing herein authorizes the CIP to issue a subpoena to a law enforcement officer(s) who is the subject of an investigation, review, inquiry, audit, or public hearing. 
(b)  The subpoena shall be valid only within the jurisdictional limits of the city. However, the CIP may seek enforcement and extraterritorial domestication of its subpoenas in accordance with general law. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17; Ord. No. 13719, § 2, 12-14-17)  
Sec. 11.5-33. - Procedures related to city employees and witnesses. 
(a)  When a city employee appears before the CIP in response to a subpoena, such employee shall be formally advised prior to the commencement of testimony that if the employee has a good-faith belief that the testimony would tend to be self-incriminating, and if, in reliance upon that good-faith belief, the employee declines to answer any question, that the employee's decision not to provide testimony will not subject him or her to any adverse employment consequences. Any employee who, after receiving such advice, decides to testify or provide evidence, must sign a statement acknowledging that the employee understands the advice and is testifying or providing evidence voluntarily and knowingly. 
(b)  A police officer who is the subject of an investigation shall be informed of the nature of the investigation and provided with a copy of the complaint prior to being interrogated. 
(c)  A person who appears before the CIP in response to a CIP request for testimony may be represented by counsel or any other representative of his or her choice, which representative may be present at all times during the subject's appearance before the CIP. 
(d)  The CIP may hold evidentiary hearings requiring witnesses in the manner set forth in section 11.5-30. Only the subject of the complaint, witnesses, their attorneys or representatives and CIP members may participate in evidentiary hearings. 
(e)  Policies and procedures shall be established to ensure compliance with Chapters 112 and 119 of the Florida Statutes and any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-34. - Executive director; independent counsel; assistance from city officials. 
(a)  Executive director. 
(1)  The CIP office shall be headed by a full-time professional executive director with education or experience in criminal justice who is appointed by and subject to removal by the CIP, with the approval of the city commission. The executive director, serving as the CIP's chief executive officer, shall oversee the operations of the CIP and shall perform the following specific duties: 
a.  Recruit, hire, supervise, terminate, and make all other employment decisions regarding investigators and administrative staff; 
b.  Ensure that all members of the CIP receive training in ethics, conflicts of interest, the Florida Sunshine Law, and the opportunity to attend a police policies and procedures program as set forth in subsection 11.5-28(b)(3); 
c.  Establish priorities and objectives for the CIP; 
d.  Manage the implementation and evaluation of the CIP's functions; 
e.  In collaboration with the members of the CIP, establish written rules and standard operating procedures for internal governance and standards for training for CIP members and staff; and 
f.  In collaboration with the members of the CIP, promote community understanding and utilization of the process by which complaints are submitted and reviewed or investigated. 
(2)  The executive director's performance shall be evaluated annually by the CIP pursuant to written criteria established by the CIP. 
(b)  Independent counsel. 
(1)  The CIP shall hire an experienced and competent attorney-at-law in good standing admitted to the practice of law in the State of Florida for at least seven years and generally knowledgeable in municipal law as independent counsel with the approval of the city commission. The CIP shall have the power to remove the independent counsel with the approval of the city commission. The independent counsel shall provide legal advice and assistance to the CIP as requested and shall perform the following specific duties: 
a.  Issue written determinations, after consulting with the appropriate prosecutorial agencies, as to whether an investigation by the CIP of a directly filed complaint involving potential criminal conduct will interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution; 
b.  Review CIP requests for subpoenas for compliance with legal requirements, including but not limited to federal and state statutes and prevailing case law, and the appropriateness of issuance of the subpoena; in cases that involve potentially criminal conduct by a police officer, issue written determinations after consultation with the appropriate prosecutorial agencies as to whether the issuance of the subpoena will interfere with any pending or potential criminal investigation or prosecution; and advise the CIP of the results of such review and consultation. 
c.  Prepare subpoenas as directed by the CIP in accordance with subsection 11.5-32. 
(2)  The independent counsel's performance shall be evaluated annually by the CIP pursuant to written criteria established by the CIP. 
(c)  Assistance from city officials. When requested by the CIP, the city manager, city attorney, and city clerk shall provide full cooperation and assistance to the CIP, but are not required to attend its meetings. The city clerk and the city attorney may conduct annual workshops to advise the CIP of the procedural laws and regulations related to public records, the Sunshine Law, and any other requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17; Ord. No. 13719, § 2, 12-14-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13688, § 2, adopted June 8, 2017, amended section 11.5-34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 11.5-34 pertained to administrative assistance; independent counsel, and derived from Ord. No. 12188, § 1, adopted February 14, 2002.  
Sec. 11.5-35. - Review and approval of annual budget. 
(a)  The CIP shall be operated on an annual budget that shall be no less than one percent of the approved regular salaries and wages line item of the city's police department general fund budget except as otherwise required by the city manager's declaration of a fiscal emergency, financial urgency, or financial emergency. The CIP shall submit to the city commission, in a form acceptable to the city manager, and no later than April 1 preceding the commencement of each fiscal year, a CIP budget request detailing how the CIP will spend its budgeted allotment. The city manager shall assign appropriate personnel to assist in the preparation of the budget for the CIP and provide administrative support to the CIP. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the CIP from submitting a supplemental budget and appearing before the city commission to request approval. 
(b)  No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the city commission of the CIP budget for that year and all expenditures shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500 through 18-503 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-36. - Notices and filing of records. 
Notice of meetings shall be posted by the city clerk at city hall and other appropriate locations after being apprised by the CIP of an upcoming meeting(s). Advertisements of meetings shall be posted on the city's website no less than seven days prior to the meeting. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to comply with applicable laws related to filing of records. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 11.5-37. - Annual reports. 
The CIP shall, at least annually, provide a report in writing to the city manager, the city commission, the police chief and the mayor, to include statistics and summaries of the results of the CIP's investigations and reviews, a comparison of those results with the actions taken by the police chief, any recommendations related to changes in policies and procedures and any recommended changes to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12188, § 1, 2-14-02; Ord. No. 13688, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Chapter 12 - AMUSEMENT GAMES OR MACHINES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13213, § 2, adopted October 14, 2010, amended chapter 12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 12, §§ 12-1—12-3 pertained to coin-operated machines and establishments and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 11-1—11-3; the Code of 1980, §§ 12-1—12-3, and Ord. No. 11086, § 1, adopted September 27, 1993. 
Cross reference— Amusements, ch. 5. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Nothing in this section may be construed contrary to state law. 
Amusement game or machine means any machine, game, contrivance, or device that provides for the bona fide entertainment or amusement of the public and that, as a result of the payment of a fee, money, compensation, or exchange of anything of value or insertion of a coin, slug, token, credit card, or paper currency, the machine, game, contrivance, or device is set in motion, permitted to function or operate and that by application of skill, may entitle the person playing or operating the machine to receive points or coupons that may be exchanged for merchandise only, (limited to noncash prizes, toys, or novelties, excluding cash, alcoholic beverages, beer, or wine), provided the cost value of the merchandise or prize awarded in exchange for such points or coupons does not exceed $0.75 on any game played. 
The definition of amusement game or machine shall not be interpreted to include: 
(1)  Any game, machine, contrivance or device whose content, theme, design, or graphics depict, exhibit, illustrate, describe, or relate to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Pool or billiard tables, vending machines, laundry machines, kiddie rides, and automatic music machines; 
(3)  Any game, machine, contrivance, or device that may be construed as a gambling device under state law, including any amusement game or machine that includes an element of chance and may allow the user to become entitled to receive any money, credit, allowance, or additional chance to use the game or machine. 
Arcade amusement center means a place of business that has at least 50 amusement games or machines on premises which are operated for the entertainment of the general public and tourists as a bona fide amusement facility. Examples of such facilities include, but are not limited to, Chuck E. Cheese, Gameworks, or Dave and Busters. 
Mini-arcade amusement center means a place of business accessory or incidental to another business (i.e. a restaurant, theater, bowling alley, billiards, etc.) that has ten to 49 amusement games or machines on premises which are operated for the entertainment of the general public and tourists as a bona fide accessory amusement facility. 
Operator means any person, firm, corporation, association, owner or agent, who shall own, operate, or otherwise control an amusement game or machine; an arcade amusement center; or a mini-arcade amusement center. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10)  
Sec. 12-2. - Location of amusement games or machines; exception required. 
(a)  An operator shall not locate and operate an amusement game or machine within a room or enclosed area not open to the general public. If a room where an amusement game or machine is being operated is locked or barricaded, a rebuttable presumption is created that the area is not open to the general public in violation of this section. 
(b)  There shall be no more than four amusement games or machines issued to an operator per location. More than four amusement games or machines at a particular location will require further review from the planning and zoning departments. Moreover, the location shall require approval by the city commission by a four-fifths vote. 
(c)  Amusement games or machines, up to four per location, shall only be allowed in zoning transects T5-O and above, as of right. More than four machines at a location are only allowed in zoning transects T6-O or above, and must obtain city commission approval as described above. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10)  
Sec. 12-3. - Business tax receipts (BTR). 
In addition to the requirements of chapter 31 of this Code, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Prior to being issued a BTR from the city, the operator must present a state amusement game or machine certificate from the department of revenue and any applicable county BTR for each amusement game or machine in operation at every location. Operator will need to provide the city with proof of a certificate issued by the department of revenue for an arcade amusement center or a mini-arcade amusement center and any applicable county BTRs for such use. 
(2)  The operator of a one BTR per amusement game or machine at each location shall be issued in the name of the operator. The operator must provide to the city a notarized affidavit from the business owner and the property owner allowing operation of amusement games or machines within the business and property, respectively. Prior to the issuance of the BTR, the operator shall provide the city the affidavits of consent from the business owner and the property owner. All BTRs must be displayed within public view and accessible in an area within five feet from the physical site of the amusement game or machine. BTRs for amusement games or machines are not transferable from one operator to another. If an operator wishes to relocate an amusement game or machine covered under a current BTR from one location to another, then the operator must submit a new application together with the corresponding transfer fee to change locations. A new business tax receipt will be issued identifying the new location of that amusement game or machine and a corrected BTR shall be issued reflecting the removal of the amusement game or machine at the previous location. The name, address, and telephone number of the operator must be attached to the front of the amusement game or machine in a location easily read by amusement game or machine users with the size of lettering equal to or greater than 12-point type. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessor, manager, or person in charge of any business premises to permit any such amusement game or machine upon such premises unless such amusement game or machine has the BTR required by this Code displayed thereon. 
(4)  For purposes of this subsection, each individual animated screen shall constitute one amusement game or machine regardless of whether the screen is encased in a console, cabinet, or other fixture, with other screens which receive electric power, through one source or cord, or are set into motion or permitted to function through the use of one bill acceptor, where the player may select a game at any one screen, such that at any one time you may have more than one person playing or operating games, at different screens independently from another. No artifice or scheme shall be used to circumvent the intent of this subsection. 
(5)  City staff shall be responsible for the placement of a BTR on each individual amusement game of machine. The BTR shall be of a material approved by the city that cannot be tampered with or removed once affixed to the amusement game or machine and will self-destruct, pull apart, or become void upon removal from any amusement game or machine. No BTR may be transferred from any one amusement game or machine to another amusement game or machine. Any operator who attempts to remove a BTR from an amusement machine or game without prior authorization from the city shall be subject to the provisions described in section 12-6. 
(6)  No BTR shall be issued for any machine, contrivance, or device that may be construed as a gambling device under state law, including any amusement game or machine that simulates a slot machine, casino card game, or any electronic casino game, if such game or machine includes an element of chance and may entitle the user to receive any money, credit, allowance, or additional chance to use the amusement game or machine. 
Notwithstanding the language in this provision, paragraph (6) shall not apply to para-mutual facilities properly allowed under referendum or federal law. Moreover, paragraph (6) shall not apply to children's amusement games or machines located in bona fide arcade amusement centers and allowable under F.S. ch. 849. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10)  
Sec. 12-4. - Failure to obtain a business tax receipt (BTR); seizure and disposition of machines. 
(a)  In the event of nonpayment of the fee for a BTR required for any amusement game or machine, authority is hereby given and granted to the city manager or his/her designee to seize the amusement game or machine, and, in the event any amusement game or machine is seized for the nonpayment of any BTR, there shall be added, charged and collected by the city an additional hauling fee of $125.00 for each amusement game or machine seized and an additional storage fee of $10.00 per day for each amusement game or machine stored. In the event any amusement game or machine has been seized for the nonpayment of any BTR, such amusement game or machine shall not be released or returned until and unless the operator thereof has paid to the city the necessary BTR, storage fee, and hauling charges. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed, in all cases where there has been a seizure made for the nonpayment of the BTR for amusement games or machines, to notify the operator, where possible, that the same are being retained under the provisions of this Code, and he/she shall, within 90 days from the date of seizure, permit the operator to regain possession thereof by submission of proof of ownership and the payment of all charges connected with seizure and storage of the machines. 
(c)  After the expiration of such 90-day period, the city manager or designee shall sell any such amusement games or machines not claimed or reduced to possession by the operator thereof at public sale after ten days' notice in writing to the operator, if he/she can be found, and by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  Out of the proceeds of the sale of any such amusement games or machines, all costs and storage shall be first paid, and any balance remaining shall be retained by the city in a fund in possession of the city for a period of one year in order to enable the operator to prove ownership of the amusement games or machines so sold, and when such ownership is proven, such surplus fund shall be paid to the operator. 
(e)  After the expiration of one year, as provided in this section, any sums arising from the sale of the amusement games or machines in accordance with the provisions of this section, if unclaimed by the operator, shall be transferred to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 12-5. - Payment of certificate of authorization fee. 
An operator shall obtain a certificate of authorization from the city for one year by submitting a payment of a regulatory fee in the amount of $500.00 per amusement game or machine. Each year, the operator shall obtain a new certificate of authorization from the city by submitting a renewal fee in the amount of $500.00 per amusement game or machine. No BTR shall be issued until the certificate of authorization has been obtained, including the payment of any other outstanding regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10)  
Sec. 12-6. - Prohibited uses and enforcement. 
(a)  Amusement games or machines shall not be used for gambling or as a game of chance as stated in F.S. §§ 849.15—849.22. Violations of these provisions shall be subject to penalties stated in F.S. § 849.23 and to a city-imposed fine in the amount of $500.00. 
(b)  No amusement game or machine shall depict, exhibit, illustrate, describe, or otherwise relate to sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or other adult entertainment as further defined in the city zoning ordinance. Such an amusement game or machine is strictly prohibited in the city. 
(c)  No amusement game or machine shall allow replays without the exchange of anything of value or insertion of a coin, slug, token, credit card, or paper currency. Such an amusement game or machine is strictly prohibited in the city. 
Notwithstanding the language in this section, paragraph (c) shall not apply to para-mutual facilities properly allowed under referendum or federal law. Moreover, paragraph (c) shall not apply to children's amusement games or machines located in bona fide arcade amusement centers and allowable under F.S. ch. 849. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be prosecuted pursuant to this section and any other remedy available by law, including but not limited to, chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement, of this Code. No amusement game or machine shall operate at a particular business location or site for one year from the date of any court order, order of the city commission, order of a code enforcement board, or order of a special master that determines or upholds that a business owner at any location or operator operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be placed or operated an amusement game or machine at that particular location or site in violation of any city, county, state, or federal statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13213, § 2, 10-14-10)  
Chapter 12.5 - COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION  
ARTICLE I. - COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12.5-1. - Intent. 
The community redevelopment strategy is to ensure a comprehensive revitalization in city neighborhoods to establish quality of life standards for residents of each community revitalization district through various methods including, but not limited to, the support of commercial redevelopment. The defined perimeters of the revitalization initiatives may be expanded to create social, housing and economic opportunities within contiguous commercial corridors to better serve the redevelopment area and neighboring communities. 
(Ord. No. 12082, § 3, 7-10-01)  
Secs. 12.5-2—12.5-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIBERTY CITY COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION TRUST[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12859, § 4, adopted October 12, 2006, repealed and reenacted division 2, §§ 12.5-26—12.5-39 to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 2 pertained to the model city community revitalization district trust, and derived from Ord. No. 12082, § 3, adopted July 10, 2001; Ord. No. 12110, § 2, adopted September 13, 2001; Ord. No. 12139, § 2, adopted October 11, 2001; Ord. No. 12201, § 1, adopted March 14, 2002; Ord. No. 12222, § 1, adopted April 18, 2002; Ord. No. 12257, § 1, adopted July 9, 2002; Ord. No. 12806, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 11, 2006. 
 
Sec. 12.5-26. - Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust created. 
A limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust" is created and established. Use of the term "Liberty City Trust" in this division shall mean the Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-27. - Liberty City Trust—Jurisdictional authority. 
The Liberty City Trust shall exercise the powers and duties for the area in Liberty City ("area") described as follows. Using the City of Miami Boundary on the north and I 95 as a point of beginning ("POB"), running south on I 95, to SR 112, west on SR 112 to NW 17th Avenue, north on NW 17th Avenue to NW 58 Street, west on NW 58 Street to the City of Miami Municipal Boundary, then running along the City of Miami Municipal Boundary north, then east, then north then east to I95, POB, all in the City of Miami, Miami-Dade County, Florida as depicted in attachment "A". 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06) 
Editor's note— Attachment "A" referenced above may be found in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 12.5-28. - Purpose; powers and duties. 
(a)  Purpose. The Liberty City Trust, in cooperation with the city manager, the department of community development and other city departments, shall be responsible for oversight of and shall facilitate, the city's revitalization efforts for the redevelopment of the area in a manner consistent with the strategy identified in the Five Year Consolidated Plan, adopted by the city commission in June, 2004. The Liberty City Trust shall promote economic development, business and commerce in the area. The Liberty City Trust shall develop and execute a plan to create jobs, attract industry and facilitate the production of goods and services in the area for residents and non-residents. It will facilitate the development of affordable housing, engage in homebuyer assistance programs and market the area to encourage former residents and others to locate to the area. 
(b)  Powers and duties. Subject to city commission approval and compliance with the terms and conditions of any existing contractual obligations, the Liberty City Trust shall be empowered to take all actions necessary including, but not limited to, the following activities: 
(1)  Establish policy for the revitalization efforts in the area; 
(2)  Advocate the purposes of the Liberty City Trust; 
(3)  Assist and advise the city commission, the department of community development; other departments and other public officials and entities concerning the revitalization initiative in the area; 
(4)  Promote, oversee and assist in the redevelopment activities and develop increased public awareness and interest in the area; 
(5)  Solicit and accept grants in cooperation with the office of grants administration. The Liberty City Trust shall contact the office of grants administration for assistance in project planning, proposal writing, application assembly, and monitoring financial and budgetary compliance with grantor agency guidelines. All grant applications shall be submitted to the office of grants administration for review, and will subsequently be forwarded to the director of grants administration for approval, and final signature. The Liberty City Trust shall be responsible for implementing and managing all of its grants. Any and all other contributions and financial support from individuals, private business interests, the general public, governmental entities, corporations and organizations, foundations and other philanthropic entities shall require city commission approval; 
(6)  Implement full and active participation and cooperation with public and private entities in furtherance of the Liberty City Trust's purpose to oversee and facilitate the revitalization of the area to improve the quality of life for residents of this neighborhood; 
(7)  Participate in any other fundraising activity, whether solely involving the Liberty City Trust or involving partnerships with other persons or public or private organizations, which furthers the Liberty City Trust's purpose, with the approval of the city commission; and 
(8)  In addition to complying with subsection 18-85(h) of the City Code, the Liberty City Trust shall contract and be contracted with, for administrative purposes only, not to exceed $5,000.00 per item, goods, services, and/or anything of value in one transaction or multiple transactions concerning the same subject matter. Any and all contracts above $5,000.00 shall require city commission approval. 
(9)  To sue and be sued, plead and implead. 
(10)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the Liberty City Trust shall exercise only such powers as are expressly granted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-29. - Scope. 
(a)  The Liberty City Trust may review and evaluate issues related to the major development of real property in the area and may provide recommendations and advice to the city commission concerning those issues and only such other matters as are referred to it by the city commission in regard to real property in the area. The city commission shall not be bound by any recommendation or advice received from the Liberty City Trust. The Liberty City Trust is expected to be aware of city policies concerning the major development of real property in the area and coordinate its endeavors with city departments, committees and boards which will be affected by the Liberty City Trust's recommendations and advice. 
(b)  The Liberty City Trust may be informed of issues concerning the major development of real property in the area for its input and advice at the conceptual planning stage for such development, "major development" shall be defined as such activities that require public notice and hearings pursuant to the city Charter and Code and shall not encompass minor changes, renovations and/or alterations to any existing real property in the area. Nothing herein is intended to interfere or conflict with any existing provisions in the city Charter and Code setting forth procedures concerning the development of real property. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-30. - Governing body-composition and appointments; terms of office and vacancies; membership qualifications; procedures for appointment of members; oath; quorum and voting; meetings; attendance requirements; indemnification. 
(a)  Governing body-composition and appointments. The Liberty City Trust shall consist of five voting members and one youth, non-voting member. The voting members shall consist of individuals from professional disciplines. Four of the voting members shall be appointed by the district five commissioner and one to be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the city commission, as hereinafter set forth. The one youth, non-voting member shall be appointed by the members of the Liberty City Trust, and confirmed by the city commission, as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Terms of office and vacancies. Four voting members and one youth, non-voting member shall be appointed by the district five commissioner for a term of two years or until the nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first. One voting member shall be appointed by the city manager for a term of one year or until the city manager leaves office, whichever occurs first. The district five commissioner shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation or removal of his or her appointees to the Liberty City Trust, which person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. The city manager shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation or removal of his or her appointee to the Liberty City Trust, which person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member shall serve more than four consecutive years on the Liberty City Trust. Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed after a hiatus of two years. 
(c)  Membership qualifications. 
(1)  The Liberty City Trust voting members shall be 18 years of age or older and broadly reflect the diversity of the community and share technical, professional expertise or experiential knowledge and interest in the following areas, residential construction, development, architecture and engineering, planning, zoning and land use law, economic development, historic preservation and restoration, administration, fiscal management, and community involvement. 
(2)  The Liberty City Trust youth, non-voting member shall be no less than 15 and no more than 18 years of age. 
(3)  Each member of the Liberty City Trust shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and commitment to serving the community, have a demonstrated interest in the revitalization of the area and the vision of the Liberty City Trust, and is expected to participate actively in the functioning of the Liberty City Trust. 
(4)  No member of the Liberty City Trust shall become a candidate for elective political office during his or her term. Should any member of the Liberty City Trust qualify as a candidate for elective political office, such qualification shall be deemed a tender of resignation from the Liberty City Trust. 
(e)  Procedure for appointment of members. 
(1)  No appointment shall be made until notice has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the appointments to be made to the Liberty City Trust at least 30 days prior to the making of an appointment, and shall have solicited and encouraged the public and professional or citizen organizations within the area having interest in and knowledge of the area to submit names of persons and their qualifications for consideration as prospective appointees of the Liberty City Trust. At least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, the appointing party shall cause the city clerk to have available to the public, and shall publicly make announcement of the fact, that the list of names thus submitted, together with a short statement of the qualifications of each person, is prepared and available for public inspection and consideration. In reaching a decision on appointments, the appointing party shall give due consideration to the names submitted. 
(2)  In addition, the appointing party shall, at least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, direct the city clerk to have available to the public, and shall publicly announce that the names of prospective appointees a short statement of qualifications of such persons are available for public inspection and consideration. No person shall be appointed to membership on the Liberty City Trust whose name and qualifications have not been made publicly available in the manner set out. 
(f)  Oath. Upon the effective date of appointment, or as soon thereafter as practicable, each member of the Liberty City Trust shall assume the duties of a member of the Liberty City Trust, but before doing so, shall take an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, that he or she will support, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the state. 
(g)  Officers. The voting members of the Liberty City Trust shall elect from its voting members a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and designate a secretary and such other officers deemed necessary. The chairperson of the Liberty City Trust shall have the power to appoint all members serving on the various committees which the Liberty City Trust shall establish from time to time. 
(h)  Quorum and voting. At all meetings of the Liberty City Trust, a majority of the then appointed voting members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and each voting member shall have one vote on every issue submitted to a vote of the Liberty City Trust. The act of a majority of the voting members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the Liberty City Trust. The voting members of the Liberty City Trust shall make and adopt bylaws and rules and regulations for the Liberty City Trust's governance and for the operation and management of the revitalization initiative. 
(i)  Meetings. The Liberty City Trust shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. At least one of the meetings of the Liberty City Trust per year shall be held in the area. All meetings of the Liberty City Trust shall be public. Recorded minutes of the proceedings of all actions taken at the meeting of the Liberty City Trust shall be maintained by the Liberty City Trust and shall be promptly and properly recorded and submitted to the city clerk. The city clerk shall transcribe the recorded minutes of the meetings of the Liberty City Trust and provide a copy of the transcribed minutes to the president/chief executive officer of the Liberty City Trust. 
(j)  Attendance requirements. A member shall be automatically removed if: 
(1)  In a given calendar year he or she is absent from three consecutive meetings, or 
(2)  He or she is absent from four properly noticed meetings within an eight-month period without an excused absence. 
(k)  Insurance. The Liberty City Trust shall maintain officers and directors liability insurance coverage at all times, in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the city's insurance manager. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 12887, § 1, 2-8-07)  
Sec. 12.5-31. - President/chief executive officer; appointment, term, qualifications, compensation, general powers and responsibilities. 
At its inception, the president/chief executive officer of the Model City Trust, approved by the city commission on June 22, 2006, shall serve as the president/chief executive officer of the Liberty City Trust, commencing from the date of the final approval of this division. Each successor president/chief executive officer shall be appointed by the Liberty City Trust and approved by the city commission, and receive such salary and benefits as shall be fixed by the Liberty City Trust, and approved by the city commission. The Liberty City Trust shall have the option of appointing a president/chief executive officer who is not affiliated with the city or they may appoint, with the written approval of the city manager, a city employee who is assigned by the city to the Liberty City Trust for the purpose of managing the revitalization initiative. After the hiring of the president/chief executive officer, the Liberty City Trust shall submit monthly quarterly status reports on the Liberty City Trust's operations and expenses to the city commission. The president/chief executive officer shall be a person of good moral character and have an excellent reputation for integrity, responsibility, and business ability, but no Liberty City Trust member shall be eligible for appointment as president/chief executive officer. The president/chief executive officer shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the Liberty City Trust, and approved by the city commission. The president/chief executive officer shall take an oath before assuming any duties. The president/chief executive officer shall act as the chief executive officer of the Liberty City Trust. Subject to the policy directives of the Liberty City Trust, the president/chief executive officer shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the management and operation of all Liberty City Trust activities, and facilities. The president/chief executive officer shall execute all contracts on behalf of the Liberty City Trust after approval by the Liberty City Trust. The president/chief executive officer shall attend all meetings of the Liberty City Trust, shall furnish the Liberty City Trust a quarterly report with respect to the management and operation of the revitalization initiative, and the financial condition of the Liberty City Trust, and shall from time to time have prepared and shall furnish such reports, audits and other information relating to the revitalization initiative to the Liberty City Trust as may be required by the Liberty City Trust or the city. In the absence or disability of the president/chief executive officer or if no president/chief executive officer is currently employed by the Liberty City Trust, the Liberty City Trust may designate a qualified person as interim president/chief executive officer on a part-time temporary basis for a period of time less than six months, subject to city commission approval. The president/chief executive officer may be removed at any time by the liberty city trust or the city commission in their sole discretion and without notice. If the president/chief executive officer is removed, the city manager is hereby authorized to execute contracts and other documents on behalf of the Liberty City Trust until such time that a president/chief executive officer or an interim president/chief executive officer is appointed by the Liberty City Trust, and approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-32. - Employment of assistants. 
Subject to the policy directives of the Liberty City Trust and budget limitations, the president/chief executive officer may employ such assistants as are necessary to provide for the efficient operation of the Liberty City Trust. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-33. - Compliance with federal, state and local laws. 
The Liberty City Trust shall comply with and observe all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes and ordinances, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-34. - Counsel. 
The city attorney's office shall provide legal counsel to the Liberty City Trust as may be necessary and requested by the Liberty City Trust. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-35. - Transfer of assets. 
Any and all personal property under the control of the Model City Trust, shall transfer, upon the creation of the Liberty City Trust, to the Liberty City Trust. Any and all real property under the control of the Model City Trust shall transfer, upon the creation of the Liberty City Trust, to the city. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-36. - Approval of budget. 
(a)  Effective immediately, the Liberty City Trust shall establish a fiscal year which coincides with that of the city. The Liberty City Trust shall submit to the city commission a budget, in a form acceptable to the city manager, and no later than April 1 preceding the commencement of each fiscal year. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the Liberty City Trust from submitting a supplemental budget to the commission for approval. 
(b)  No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the City Commission of the Liberty City Trust budget for that year and all expenditure shall comply with city procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  In conjunction with the submission of the budget, the Liberty City Trust shall submit a master plan reflecting the proposed operations, activities, and improvements of the revitalization initiative for the forthcoming fiscal year. The city commission may review and deny any item contained in the master plan within 30 days from the date of its submission by the Liberty City Trust. 
(d)  No provision contained in this division shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, as set forth in sections 18-500—18-503. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-37. - Annual report and audit. 
(a)  The Liberty City Trust shall submit to the mayor and city commission an annual report and an annual audit. The audit shall be performed by an external auditor who is a certified public accountant. 
(b)  The city commission and/or the city manager shall have the right to audit any books, accounts, expenditures, receivables, and contracts of the trust at any time. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-38. - Sunset review of trust. 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 2-892, the trust shall be initially reviewed in 2010. Thereafter the trust shall be reviewed every four years. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
Sec. 12.5-39. - Abolishment of the Liberty City Trust. 
The city commission may, by an affirmative vote of three commissioners, abolish the Liberty City Trust, at which time the powers and duties of the Liberty City Trust shall revert to the city and the city shall resume responsibility for the revitalization initiative. 
(Ord. No. 12859, § 4, 10-12-06)  
DIVISION 3. - LITTLE HAITI REVITALIZATION TRUST[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 3 by Ord. No. 13834, § 2, adopted April 25, 2019, Ord. No. 12982, § 1, adopted April 10, 2008, repealed the former division 3, §§ 12.5-56—12.5-65 in its entirety, which pertained to the Little Havana homeownership advisory board, and derived from Ord. No. 12404, § 4, adopted September 11, 2003. 
 
Sec. 12.5-40. - Little Haiti Revitalization Trust created. 
A limited agency and instrumentality of the city to be known as the "Little Haiti Revitalization Trust" is created and established. Use of the term "Little Haiti Trust" in this division shall mean the Little Haiti Revitalization Trust. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-41. - Little Haiti Trust—Jurisdictional authority. 
The Little Haiti Trust shall exercise the powers and duties for the area in Little Haiti ("area") described as follows: beginning at the intersection of Northeast 54th Street and Northeast 4th Avenue, traveling westward along the midblock line between Northeast 54th Street and the street parallel to the south until it meets Interstate I-95, then traveling northward along the center line of Interstate I-95 until meeting the boundary of the city, then turning and traveling eastward along the midblock line to include the frontage of Northwest 79th Street until reaching North Miami Avenue, then traveling northward along North Miami Avenue until it reaches the Little River, then traveling eastward following the northern boundary of the city along the Little River until reaching Northeast 2nd Avenue, then traveling southward along the midblock line between Northeast 2nd Avenue and the street running parallel to the east including the eastern frontage of Northeast 2nd Avenue until reaching the northern boundary of Little Haiti Park, then following the park boundary until reaching Northeast 4th Avenue, then traveling south along the center line of Northeast 4th Avenue until reaching the beginning, all as further described in Exhibit "A," attached and incorporated. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19) 
Note— The exhibit referred to in this section is not set out at length herein, but may be found in the offices of the city.  
Sec. 12.5-42. - Purpose; powers and duties. 
(a)  Purpose. The Little Haiti Trust, in cooperation with the city manager, the department of housing and community development and other city departments shall be responsible for oversight of and shall facilitate, the city's revitalization efforts for the redevelopment of the area in a manner consistent with the strategy identified in the Five-Year Consolidated Plan, adopted by the city commission in February 2014. The Little Haiti Trust shall promote economic development, business and commerce in the area. The Little Haiti Trust shall develop and execute a plan to create jobs, attract industry and facilitate the production of goods and services in the area for residents and non-residents. It will facilitate the development of affordable housing, engage in homebuyer assistance programs and market the area to encourage former residents and others to locate to the area. 
(b)  Powers and duties. Subject to city commission approval and compliance with the terms and conditions of any existing contractual obligations, the Little Haiti Trust shall be empowered to take all actions necessary including, but not limited to, the following activities: 
(1)  Establish policy for the revitalization efforts in the area; and 
(2)  Advocate the purposes of the Little Haiti Trust; and 
(3)  Assist and advise the city commission, the department of housing and community development, other departments and other public officials and entities concerning the revitalization initiative in the area; and 
(4)  Promote, oversee and assist in the redevelopment activities and develop increased public awareness and interest in the area; and 
(5)  Solicit and accept grants in cooperation with the office of grants administration. The Little Haiti Trust shall contact the office of grants administration for assistance in project planning, proposal writing, application assembly, and monitoring financial and budgetary compliance with grantor agency guidelines. All grant applications shall be submitted to the office of grants administration for review and will subsequently be forwarded to the director of grants administration for approval, and final signature. The Little Haiti Trust shall be responsible for implementing and managing all of its grants. Any and all other contributions and financial support from individuals, private business interests, the general public, governmental entities, corporations and organizations, foundations and other philanthropic entities shall require city commission approval; and 
(6)  Implement full and active participation and cooperation with public and private entities in furtherance of the Little Haiti Trust's purpose to oversee and facilitate the revitalization of the area to improve the quality of life for residents of this neighborhood; and 
(7)  Participate in any other fundraising activity, whether solely involving the Little Haiti Trust or involving partnerships with other persons or public or private organizations, which furthers the Little Haiti Trust's purpose, with the approval of the city commission; and 
(8)  Establish independent city line items in the budget for deposit of revenues generated by the Little Haiti Trust and for disbursement of trust expenses; and 
(9)  In addition to complying with subsection 18-85(h) of the City Code, the Little Haiti Trust shall contract and be contracted with, for administrative purposes only, not to exceed $5,000.00 per item, goods, services, and/or anything of value in one transaction or multiple transactions concerning the same subject matter. Any and all contracts above $5,000.00 shall require city commission approval; 
(10)  To sue and be sued, plead and implead; 
(11)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the Little Haiti Trust shall exercise only such powers as are expressly granted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-43. - Scope. 
(a)  The Little Haiti Trust may review and evaluate issues related to the major development of real property in the area and may provide recommendations and advice to the city commission concerning those issues and only such other matters as are referred to it by the city commission in regard to real property in the area. The city commission shall not be bound by any recommendation or advice received from the Little Haiti Trust. The Little Haiti Trust is expected to be aware of city policies concerning the major development of real property in the area and coordinate its endeavors with city departments, committees and boards which will be affected by the Little Haiti Trust's recommendations and advice. 
(b)  The Little Haiti Trust may be informed of issues concerning the major development of real property in the area for its input and advice at the conceptual planning stage for such development; "major development" shall be defined as such activities that require public notice and hearings pursuant to the City of Miami Charter and Code and shall not encompass minor changes, renovations and/or alterations to any existing real property in the area. Nothing herein is intended to interfere or conflict with any existing provisions in the City of Miami Charter or Code setting forth procedures concerning the development of real property. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-44. - Governing body-composition and appointments; terms of office and vacancies; membership qualifications; procedures for appointment of members; oath; quorum and voting; meetings; attendance requirements; indemnification. 
(a)  Governing body-composition and appointments. The Little Haiti Trust shall consist of five voting members and one youth, non-voting member. Four of the voting members and one youth, non-voting member shall be appointed by the district 5 commissioner and confirmed by the city commission. One voting member shall be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the city commission. 
(b)  Terms of office and vacancies. Four voting members and one youth, non-voting member shall be appointed by the district 5 commissioner for a term of two years or until the nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first. One voting member shall be appointed by the city manager for a term of one year or until the city manager leaves office, whichever occurs first. The district 5 commissioner shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation, or removal of his or her appointees to the Little Haiti Trust, which person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. The city manager shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy due to the death, resignation, or removal of his or her appointee to the Little Haiti Trust, which person shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and confirmed. No member shall serve more than four consecutive years on the Little Haiti Trust. Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit any individual from being reappointed after a hiatus of two years. 
(c)  Membership qualifications. 
(1)  The Little Haiti Trust voting members shall be 18 years of age or older and broadly reflect the diversity of the community and share technical, professional expertise, or experiential knowledge and interest in the residential construction, development, architecture and engineering, planning, zoning and land use law, economic development, historic preservation and restoration, administration, fiscal management, or community involvement. Members shall be subject to section 2-884 of the City Code. 
(2)  The Little Haiti Trust youth, non-voting member shall be no less than 15 and no more than 18 years of age. 
(3)  Each member of the Little Haiti Trust shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility, and commitment to serving the community, have a demonstrated interest in the revitalization of the area and the vision of the Little Haiti Trust, and is expected to participate actively in the functioning of the Little Haiti Trust. 
(4)  No member of the Little Haiti Trust shall become a candidate for elective political office during his or her term. Should any member of the Little Haiti Trust qualify as a candidate for elective political office, such qualification shall be deemed an immediate resignation from the Little Haiti Trust. 
(5)  No employee of Miami-Dade County or any municipality therein other than city employees shall serve on or be appointed to the Little Haiti Trust. 
(d)  Procedure for appointment of members. No appointment shall be made until notice has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the appointments to be made to the Little Haiti Trust at least 30 days prior to the making of an appointment and shall have solicited and encouraged the public and professional or citizen organizations within the area having interest in and knowledge of the area to submit names of persons and their qualifications for consideration as prospective appointees of the Little Haiti Trust. At least ten days prior to the making of any appointment, the appointing party shall cause the city clerk to have available to the public and the city clerk shall publicly make announcement of the fact that the list of names thus submitted, together with a short statement of the qualifications of each nominee, is prepared and available for public inspection and consideration. In reaching a decision on appointments, the appointing party shall give due consideration to the names submitted. 
(e)  Oath. Upon the effective date of appointment, or as soon thereafter as practicable, each member of the Little Haiti Trust shall assume the duties of a member of the Little Haiti Trust but before doing so, shall take an oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the Office of the city clerk that he or she will support, protect, and defend the constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Florida. 
(f)  Officers. The voting members of the Little Haiti Trust shall elect from its voting members a chairperson and vice-chairperson and designate a secretary and such other officers deemed necessary. The chairperson of the Little Haiti Trust shall have the power to appoint all members serving on the various committees which the Little Haiti Trust shall establish from time to time. All officers shall serve a term of one year or until a successor is elected. 
(g)  Quorum and voting. All meetings of the Little Haiti Trust shall be open to the public. Quorum requirements shall be consistent with section 2-887 of the City Code. The voting members of the Little Haiti Trust shall make and adopt bylaws and rules and regulations for the Little Haiti Trust's governance and for the operation and management of the revitalization initiative. 
(h)  Meetings. The Little Haiti Trust shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. At least one of the meetings of the Little Haiti Trust per year shall be held in the area. All meetings of the Little Haiti Trust shall be public. Recorded minutes of the proceedings of all actions taken at the meeting of the Little Haiti Trust shall be maintained by the Little Haiti Trust and shall be promptly and properly recorded and submitted to the city clerk. The city clerk shall transcribe the recorded minutes of the meetings of the Little Haiti Trust and provide a copy of the transcribed minutes to the president/chief executive officer of the Little Haiti Trust. 
(i)  Attendance requirements. It is expected that members of the Little Haiti Trust attend each and every meeting. Members shall be subject to the attendance requirements of section 2-886 of the City Code. 
(j)  Insurance. The Little Haiti Trust shall maintain officers and director's liability insurance coverage at all times in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the city's director of risk management. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-45. - President/chief executive officer; appointment, term, qualifications, compensation, general powers, and responsibilities. 
The president/chief executive officer shall be appointed by the Little Haiti Trust and approved by the city commission and receive such salary and benefits as shall be fixed by the Little Haiti Trust and approved by the city commission. The Little Haiti Trust shall have the option of appointing a president/chief executive officer who is not affiliated with the city or they may appoint, with the written approval of the city manager, a city employee who is assigned by the city to the Little Haiti Trust for the purpose of managing the revitalization initiative. After the hiring of the president/chief executive officer, the Little Haiti Trust shall submit monthly quarterly status reports on the Little Haiti Trust's operations and expenses to the city commission. The president/chief executive officer shall be a person of good moral character and have an excellent reputation for integrity, responsibility, and business ability, but no Little Haiti Trust member shall be eligible for appointment as president/chief executive officer. The president/chief executive officer shall take an oath before assuming any duties. Subject to the policy directives of the Little Haiti Trust, the president/chief executive officer shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the management and operation of all Little Haiti Trust activities and facilities. The president/chief executive officer shall execute all contracts on behalf of the Little Haiti Trust after approval by the Little Haiti Trust. The president/chief executive officer shall attend all meetings of the Little Haiti Trust, shall furnish the Little Haiti Trust a quarterly report with respect to the management and operation of the revitalization initiative and the financial condition of the Little Haiti Trust, and shall from time to time have prepared and shall furnish such reports, audits, and other information relating to the revitalization initiative to the Little Haiti Trust as may be required by the Little Haiti Trust or the city. In the absence or disability of the president/chief executive officer or if no president/chief executive officer is currently employed by the Little Haiti Trust, the Little Haiti Trust may designate a qualified person as interim president/chief executive officer on a part-time temporary basis for a period of time less than six months subject to city commission approval. The president/chief executive officer may be removed at any time by the Little Haiti Trust or the city commission in their sole discretion and without notice. If the president/chief executive officer is removed, the city manager is hereby authorized to execute contracts and other documents on behalf of the Little Haiti Trust until such time that a president/chief executive officer or an interim president/chief executive officer is appointed by the Little Haiti Trust and approved by the city commission pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-46. - Employment of assistants. 
Subject to the policy directives of the Little Haiti Trust and budget limitations, the president/chief executive officer may employ such assistants as are necessary to provide for the efficient operation of the Little Haiti Trust. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-47. - Compliance with federal, state, and local laws. 
The Little Haiti Trust shall comply with and observe all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, codes, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-48. - Counsel. 
The city attorney shall provide legal counsel to the Little Haiti Trust as may be necessary and requested by the Little Haiti Trust and shall designate attorney(s) to act on his or her behalf. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-49. - Approval of budget. 
(a)  Effective immediately, the Little Haiti Trust shall establish a fiscal year which coincides with that of the city. The Little Haiti Trust shall submit to the city commission a budget, in a form acceptable to the city manager, no later than April 1 preceding the commencement of each fiscal year. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the Little Haiti Trust from submitting a supplemental budget to the commission for approval. 
(b)  No expenditure shall be made in any given year without approval by the city commission of the Little Haiti Trust's budget for that year and all expenditures shall comply with the city's procedures for acquisition of goods and services. 
(c)  In conjunction with the submission of the budget, the Little Haiti Trust shall submit a master plan reflecting the proposed operations, activities, and improvements of the revitalization initiative for the forthcoming fiscal year. The city commission may review and deny any item contained in the master plan within 30 days from the date of its submission by the Little Haiti Trust. 
(d)  Pursuant to subsection 12.5-42(b)(8), the Little Haiti Trust shall establish an independent line item in the city's budget for the deposit of revenues generated by the Little Haiti Trust and for disbursement of Trust expenses. 
(e)  No provision contained in this division shall be construed to violate the Anti-Deficiency Act as set forth in sections 18-500 through 18-503 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-50. - Annual report and audit. 
(a)  The Little Haiti Trust shall submit to the mayor and city commission an annual report and an annual audit. The audit shall be performed by an external auditor who is a certified public accountant. 
(b)  The city commission and/or the city manager shall have the right to audit any books, accounts, expenditures, receivables, and contracts of the Little Haiti Trust at any time. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-51. - Sunset review of Trust. 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 2-892 of the City Code, the Little Haiti Trust shall be initially reviewed in 2023 for possible sunset. Thereafter, the Little Haiti Trust shall be reviewed every four years for possible sunset. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Sec. 12.5-52. - Abolishment of the Little Haiti Trust. 
The city commission may, by an affirmative vote of three commissioners, abolish the Little Haiti Trust, at which time the powers, duties, and all responsibilities of the Little Haiti Trust shall revert to the city and the city shall resume responsibility for the revitalization initiative. 
(Ord. No. 13834, § 2, 4-25-19)  
Secs. 12.5-53—12.5-55. - Reserved.  
Chapter 13 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT AND OTHER RELATED FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Improvement districts, § 2-726 et seq.; downtown development, ch. 14; subdivision, ch. 55; planning and zoning, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12750, § 2, adopted December 15, 2005, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10426, § 2, adopted April 28, 1988; the Code of 1980, §§ 13-1—13-22; Ord. No. 11814, § 2, adopted July 13, 1999; Ord. No. 12295, § 2, adopted November 19, 2002; Ord. No. 12311, § 2, adopted December 12, 2002; Ord. No. 12542, § 1, adopted June 10, 2004, and Ord. No. 12589, § 2, adopted September 23, 2004. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Miami development impact fee ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-2. - Findings. 
(a)  The city commission (hereinafter "commission") hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  New development generates increased demands upon city public facilities and services and requires additional facilities, facility capacity, and capital equipment in order to accommodate those demands. 
(2)  The potential for development of properties is a direct result of city policy as expressed in the city comprehensive plan and as implemented via the city zoning ordinance and map. 
(3)  New development should bear its share of the costs of providing public facilities, facility capacity, and capital equipment needed to accommodate the demand generated by new development. 
(4)  The amount of the "impact fee" to be imposed shall be based upon the average amount of public facility capacity demand attributable to new development and the average cost of additional capital facilities, capital improvements, and capital equipment needed to provide additional capacity. 
(5)  The impact fees established in this article applicable to development submitting building permit applications accepted as complete by the city on or after January 15, 2006 are based on the methodology and data presented in "Growth-Related Capital Improvements & Impact Fees" by TischlerBise, Fiscal, Economic & Planning Consultants, dated September 16, 2005 (hereinafter "impact fee report - 2005"). The city commission hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the impact fee report - 2005. A copy of the impact fee report - 2005 was submitted as part of the record of the public hearings on the ordinance, and a copy of the impact fee report - 2005 shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city commission hereby finds and declares that the impact fees imposed herein upon new development as further described below, in order to finance public facilities and capital equipment needed to accommodate the demand created by new development are in the best interest of the city and its residents, are equitable, and do not impose an unfair burden on such development. The city commission hereby finds and declares that all new development, as defined herein, within the city generates an increased demand for system improvements for police, fire-rescue and general services facilities and that all new residential development within the city also generates an increased demand for parks and recreation facilities. The city commission hereby finds and declares that the system improvements to be funded by the impact fees imposed herein will provide benefit to all new development in the city. 
(c)  The city commission hereby finds and declares that there is a long-term need to encourage the provision and retention of owner-occupied and rental affordable housing throughout the city. To encourage such development, the city commission hereby finds and determines that an impact fee deferral program for affordable housing within the city fulfills a public purpose and will help advance the provision of owner-occupied and rental affordable housing. The city commission declares its intent that the affordable housing deferral program not significantly delay the provision of public facilities funded in whole or in part by impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-3. - Intent. 
This article is intended to impose impact fees, payable at the time of building permit issuance, in order to fund capital improvements capital facility capacity, and capital equipment needed to address demand for public facilities attributable to new development. This article is not intended to authorize imposition of fees related to capital facility or equipment needs attributable to existing development. This article is intended to allow new development in compliance with the comprehensive plan and to provide a mechanism for new development to help address the burdens created by new development. It is the city commission's intent to suspend imposition of the street impact fee to provide for coordination with Miami-Dade County regarding transit-related transportation system improvements and the development of an appropriate city transportation/transit impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-4. - Authority. 
The city commission is authorized to establish and adopt an impact fees pursuant to the authority granted by the Florida Constitution, article VII, sections 1(f), 1(g) and 2(b), the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166, as amended, the City of Miami Charter, and the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., as amended). In addition, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. F.S. § 163.3202(3), as amended, encourages the use of innovative land development regulations, including impact fees. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt such ordinance pursuant to any other source of local authority nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-5. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended: 
Affordable housing shall mean, solely for purposes of this article, owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards as determined by the department of community and economic development in relation to the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program provided for in this article. 
Applicant shall mean the property owner, or duly designated agent of the property owner, of land on which an application for a building permit is submitted and impact fees are due pursuant to this article, or shall mean the property owner or duly designated agent of the property owner of land identified in a credit agreement pursuant to subsection 13-16(e) where such property owner or agent is responsible for the provision of system improvement(s). 
Appropriation shall mean, for purposes of this article, funds identified in the capital budget related to a system improvement. 
Building permit shall mean the permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to this Code. The term "building permit," as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for demolition of an existing structure. For purposes of this article, a building permit application shall be considered complete and accepted by the city as of the date and time of original submittal if complete building plans have been filed as prescribed by the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, and as specified in a November 30, 2005 Memorandum regarding Building Permit Application from Jose L. Ferras, City Building Official, to the Director of the City Building Department. 
Capital budget shall mean the city's current fiscal year capital budget which is the first year of the six-year capital improvements program and which identifies capital projects that are proposed to be initiated in that fiscal year or to receive any changes in funding in that fiscal year. 
Capital improvement program (CIP) shall mean the city's current six-year program of proposed capital improvements which identifies all capital projects that are proposed to be initiated during the six-year period. 
Capital improvement projects shall mean all projects for which funds are appropriated in the CIP. Capital improvement projects, including, but not limited to, capital equipment, land, facilities and site improvements, that are funded in whole or in part with impact fee funds must cost at least $13,000.00 and have a useful life of at least five years. 
Central business district means properties having the zoning classification of "CBD" (Central business district) as of November 19, 2002. 
City shall mean the City of Miami, Florida. 
Commission shall mean the city commission of Miami, Florida. 
Comprehensive plan shall mean the city's plan for future development adopted by city ordinance number 10544, and as may be amended and updated from time to time, and any successor comprehensive plan. 
Development shall have the meaning given it in F.S. § 380.04, subject to exclusions contained herein. 
Dwelling unit shall mean one or more interconnected rooms with a single kitchen facility and sanitary facilities provided for the exclusive use of a single household. The term dwelling unit as used in this article shall be deemed to include mobile home and manufactured home dwellings. 
Fire-rescue system improvement means system improvements that add capacity to the city's fire and rescue system, including facilities, fire suppression vehicles and equipment, and emergency medical services vehicles and equipment. 
General Services System Improvement means system improvements that add capacity to the city's administrative office space capital equipment and vehicle fleets for the following departments: Building, code enforcement, NET, economic development, city attorney, CIP, GSA, innovation and technology, parks, public works and solid waste. 
Governmental uses shall mean buildings or facilities owned and operated by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the state or any agency thereof, a county, a special district, a school district, a municipal corporation, or a charter school organized and approved as a public school under F.S. § 228.056. 
Gross floor area (GFA) shall mean the total square footage of a building measured in feet from the exterior faces of exterior walls or other exterior boundaries of the building, excluding parking areas within the interior of the building. If a site contains multiple buildings, the gross floor area shall be computed separately for each building. The definition of gross floor area in the ITE Trip Generation Manual shall be used to resolve any questions regarding calculation of gross floor area. 
High rise residential development shall mean development of residential buildings with ten or more dwelling units per building. 
Impact fee shall mean a fee imposed at building permit issuance and calculated based upon a new development's proportionate share of the average cost of new development. 
Impact fee coefficient shall mean the charge per square foot of development applicable to development for which a building permit application is submitted to and accepted as complete by the city prior to 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006 and imposed pursuant to section 13-7 and sections 13-22 through 13-27. 
ITE Trip Generation Manual shall mean and refer to the report entitled "Trip Generation" (Seventh Edition, 2003) of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and any official updates thereto, as approved and accepted by the city. 
Low rise residential development shall mean development of residential buildings with two to nine dwelling units per building. 
New development shall mean the carrying out of any building activity or the making of any material change in the use of a structure or land that requires the issuance of a building permit and which generates demand for capital facilities and equipment over and above the previously existing documented use of the structure or land, but excluding governmental uses and de minimis development under section 13-6. 
Nonresidential development shall mean all new development other than residential development and governmental uses, as herein defined, and including, but not limited to, industrial, manufacturing, warehousing, mini-warehousing, lodging, schools and daycare, hospital, nursing home, general office, medical-dental office, business park, and commercial uses, and which includes those uses specified in the ITE Trip Generation Manual under Land Use Code Series 100, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800 and 900. 
Owner-occupied units means dwelling units for individual sale by a developer and intended for occupancy by an owner, as opposed to rental residential development. 
Parks and recreation system improvement means land, capital improvements, capital facilities, and capital equipment that add capacity to the city-wide park system, waterfront park system or public pools/gymnasiums, including but not limited to improvements to city-wide parks that will enhance and/or expand park use to all residents, site improvements that encourage self-directed use of passive parks, and recreation based improvements that enhance community parks and allow expansion of programming led by the parks department. Capital improvements can include, but are not limited to, new playground equipment; ball fields for league play; swimming pools and buildings used for recreation programs; site furnishings such as benches, picnic tables, and shade structures; and program equipment such as computers, water sport equipment, soccer goals, and fitness equipment. City-wide parks include those parks that have capital improvements that draw patrons from the entire geographic area of the city, including but not limited to, ball fields used for league play, swimming pools, and buildings used for recreation programs. Waterfront parks are city-wide parks, generally passive recreation areas, which provide public access to the bay, the Miami River and other bodies of water, including linear improvements or trails that connect waterfront parks. 
Police system improvement means land, capital improvements, capital facilities, and capital equipment that add capacity to the city's police system. 
Rental residential development shall mean dwelling units intended for long-term rental occupancy, as opposed to short-term rentals such as hotel/motel development. 
Single-family residential development shall mean development of detached buildings with one dwelling unit per building intended for occupancy by a single household. 
System improvements shall mean capital improvement projects in the CIP, with a cost of at least $13,000.00 and a useful life of at least five years, that provide additional capacity serving multiple development projects, multiple neighborhoods or the entire city. System improvements may include, but are not limited to, land, facilities, site improvements, furnishings, park program equipment, capital equipment, and vehicles. System improvements shall not include property dedications, capital facilities or capital equipment needed solely to serve a specific development. System improvements shall not include replacement, rehabilitation, operations or maintenance of land, facilities or equipment. 
System improvement cost shall mean amounts spent or appropriated in connection with the planning, financing, acquisition, construction and development of a system improvement including, without limitation, the costs of land acquisition and development, surveying, site testing, construction, design, engineering, construction management and inspection, permitting, legal services, financial services and administrative costs. Ancillary improvements directly related to a system improvement, including but not limited to, parking, drainage improvements, landscaping, and capital equipment and furnishings shall be considered part of the cost of the system improvement. System improvement costs shall not include costs related to operations, maintenance, rehabilitation or replacement of capital facilities or equipment. 
Site shall mean a legally described property capable of development pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Workforce housing shall mean, solely for purposes of this article, owner-occupied and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 80 percent to 140 percent of area median income as determined by the department of community and economic development in relation to the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 12929, § 2, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 13475, § 2, 7-24-14; Ord. No. 13564, § 1, 10-22-15; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 13-6. - Applicability of impact fee. 
This article shall be uniformly applicable to all new development, and the appropriate impact fees shall be collected prior to issuance of a building permit except where a building permit is issued for: 
(1)  Additions, remodels, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing structure and reconstruction of a demolished structure which result in: 
a.  Net increase of less than 1,000 square feet for a nonresidential structure which development is deemed to have a de minimis impact on the need for pubic facility capacity, or 
b.  No net increase in the number of residential dwelling units for residential structures. 
(2)  Any development which is a government-owned and -operated facility. 
(3)  Any development of regional impact (DRI) (excluding the downtown DRI and the Southeast Overtown/Park West area-wide DRI), for which a development order has been issued by the city before the effective date of this chapter, providing that the building permit for such DRI is obtained within 15 months of the initial effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-7. - Imposition of impact fees and establishment of impact fee benefit districts. 
(a)  Except as set forth in sections 13-6 and 13-8, no building permit shall be issued for a new development as herein defined unless the applicant therefor has paid the impact fees imposed by and calculated pursuant to this article. Building permit applications submitted to and accepted as complete by the city prior to 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006, shall pay the impact fees calculated by the zoning department pursuant to sections 13-24—13-27. Building permit applications submitted to and accepted as complete by the city after 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006, shall pay the impact fees calculated by the zoning department pursuant to sections 13-7 through 13-12. Should a valid building permit issued by the city for an application submitted prior to 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006, expire after that time, the impact fees set forth in sections 13-7—13-12 shall apply to the subsequent issuance of any building permit for that development. 
(b)  Impact fees shall be calculated by the zoning department based on the development included in the building permit application using: 
(1)  The land use category or categories applicable to the development, 
(2)  The number of dwelling units for residential, the gross square footage for nonresidential, or the specific units of development for certain types of nonresidential development, and 
(3)  The applicable impact fee in each sections 13-9—13-12. 
If the land use applicable to a development is not listed in the fee schedules in sections 13-9—13-12, the fees for the most appropriate land use in the fee schedules, based on the characteristics of the proposed development, shall be imposed. When multiple types of development are included in a building, the impact fees shall be calculated for each type of development and included in the total impact fees due. When multiple buildings are included in a building permit application, the impact fees shall be calculated individually for each building and included in the total impact fees due. Where a final petition determination has been made by the city manager or a final decision issued by the city commission after a timely appeal, the impact fees due shall be calculated based on the petition determination or city commission decision. 
(c)  In furtherance of the implementation of this article, the city commission hereby establishes the following benefit districts and subdistricts for the identified impact fees: 
(1)  Police impact fee benefit district which boundary is identical with the boundary of the city, as may be adjusted from time to time; 
(2)  Fire-rescue impact fee benefit district, which boundary is identical with the boundary of the city, as may be adjusted from time to time, with two subdistricts for collection, accounting and expenditures. Fire-Rescue Impact Fee North Subdistrict, defined by the Miami River and the boundary of the city lying northward of the Miami River and Fire-Rescue Impact Fee South Subdistrict, which boundary is defined by the Miami River and the boundary of the city, lying southward of the Miami River; 
(3)  General services impact fee benefit district which boundary is identical with the boundary of the city, as may be adjusted from time to time; and 
(4)  Parks and recreation impact fee benefit district which boundary is identical with the boundary of the city, as may be adjusted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-8. - Deferral of impact fees for affordable housing and workforce housing; waivers of contributions into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. 
13-8.1 Deferral of impact fees for affordable housing. 
(a)  In order to encourage the provision and retention of affordable housing and workforce housing for owner-occupancy and for rental, the city commission hereby establishes a program for the deferral of impact fees due on affordable housing and workforce housing dwelling units developed within the city. The city may require, under the program, annual reporting and any other requirements deemed necessary or appropriate for participation in the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program. An applicant shall submit a petition for affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program determination under section 13-16 for a determination of eligibility under this program prior to or in conjunction with the submittal of an application for a building permit. If the petition for affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program determination is submitted incomplete and/or too close in time to allow determination prior to issuance of the building permit, then the total impact fees due shall be paid prior to issuance of the building permit, and a petition for refund under subsection 13-16(d) may be submitted if the development is approved for the deferral program. 
(b)  Affordable housing or workforce housing impact fee deferral shall apply only to the dwelling units that qualify as affordable housing or workforce housing. Impact fees due on all portions of the development that do not qualify for deferral shall be paid in full prior to issuance of a building permit. A covenant running with the land or a deed restriction, shall be recorded on each dwelling unit by the applicant, or by the current property owner if the applicant is not the owner, which confirms to the requirements of the resolution establishing the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program. The city may use all available legal mechanisms for collection of the impact fees due. The covenant or deed restriction language and form shall be acceptable to the office of the city attorney, which office may provide standardized forms for use in the affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program. 
13-8.2 Waiver of contribution into affordable housing trust fund for affordable housing. In addition to the program for deferral of impact fees for qualified affordable housing established in subsection 13-8.1, the city manager is hereby authorized to approve a waiver of contribution into the city's affordable housing trust fund as set forth in section 914 of the city's zoning ordinance, for affordable housing development that complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such development shall consist of 100 percent affordable housing units for families and/or individuals; 
(2)  If the project is providing affordable rental housing, then such development shall have secured its necessary low-income housing tax credits from Florida Housing Finance Corporation and shall submit proof of such to the city manager or his designee; and 
(3)  If the project is providing affordable home ownership, then, prior to the issuance of building permits, the applicant shall provide the city with a covenant and deed restrictions, in forms acceptable to the city attorney, which assure that such units remain affordable for a period of at least 30 years and that the home owner(s) be responsible for submitting proof of such to the city manager, or his designee, on an annual basis, the required covenants shall include enforcement and penalty language to address non-compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12929, § 2, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 13564, § 1, 10-22-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12929, § 2, adopted July 10, 2007, amended § 13-8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 13-8 pertained to deferral of impact fees for affordable housing, and derived from Ord. No. 12750, § 2, adopted December 15, 2005.  
Sec. 13-9. - Police impact fee schedule. 
Land Use 	ITE 
Code 	Police 
Impact 
Fee 
Residential (per dwelling unit) 
Single-family detached 	210 	$164.00 
Low rise* 	230 	144.00 
High rise** 	220 	95.00 
Nonresidential (per sq. ft. gfa) 
Light industrial 	110 	0.107 
Manufacturing 	140 	0.059 
Warehousing 	150 	0.076 
Mini-warehouse 	151 	0.038 
Hospital 	610 	0.271 
General office (50,000 sf or less) 	710 	0.242 
General office (50,001—100,000 sf) 	710 	0.206 
General office (100,001—200,000 sf) 	710 	0.176 
Medical-dental office 	720 	0.559 
Business park 	770 	0.197 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,000 sf or less 	820 	0.751 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,001—50,000 sf 	820 	0.696 
Commercial/shop ctr. 50,001—100,000 sf 	820 	0.609 
Commercial/shop ctr. 100,001—200,000 sf 	820 	0.527 
Commercial/shop ctr. 200,001—400,000 sf 	820 	0.452 
Other nonresidential (per indicated unit) 
Lodging (per room) 	320 	87.00 
Elementary school (per student) 	520 	19.00 
Secondary school (per student) 	530 	26.00 
Day care (per student) 	565 	69.00 
Nursing home (per bed) 	620 	36.00 
NOTE: 
* Low rise includes townhouses, duplexes, 3—4 and 5—9 units per building or structure, plus mobile homes and other (e.g. boats, recreational vehicles). 
** High rise includes 10—19, 20—49, and 50+ units per building or structure. 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-10. - Fire-rescue impact fee schedule. 
Land Use 	ITE 
Code 	Fire and 
Rescue 
Impact 
Fee 
Residential (per dwelling unit) 
Single-family detached 	210 	$704.00 
Low rise* 	230 	619.00 
High rise** 	220 	409.00 
Nonresidential (per sq. ft. gfa) 
Light industrial 	110 	0.210 
Manufacturing 	140 	0.162 
Warehousing 	150 	0.116 
Mini-warehouse 	151 	0.003 
Hospital 	610 	0.307 
General office (50,000 sf or less) 	710 	0.355 
General office (50,001—100,000 sf) 	710 	0.336 
General office (100,001—200,000 sf) 	710 	0.317 
Medical-dental office 	720 	0.368 
Business park 	770 	0.287 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,000 sf or less 	820 	0.302 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,001—50,000 sf 	820 	0.260 
Commercial/shop ctr. 50,001—100,000 sf 	820 	0.227 
Commercial/shop ctr. 100,001—200,000 sf 	820 	0.201 
Commercial/shop ctr. 200,001—400,000 sf 	820 	0.181 
Other nonresidential (per indicated unit) 
Lodging (per room) 	320 	40.00 
Elementary school (per student) 	520 	7.00 
Secondary school (per student) 	530 	8.00 
Day care (per student) 	565 	14.00 
Nursing home (per bed) 	620 	32.00 
NOTE: 
* Low rise includes townhouses, duplexes, 3—4 and 5—9 units per building or structure, plus mobile homes and other (e.g. boats, recreational vehicles). 
** High rise includes 10—19, 20—49, and 50+ units per building or structure. 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-11. - General services impact fee schedule. 
Land Use 	ITE 
Code 	General 
Services 
Impact 
Fee 
Residential (per dwelling unit) 
Single-family detached 	210 	$413.00 
Low rise* 	230 	$363.00 
High rise** 	220 	$239.00 
Nonresidential (per sq. ft. gfa) 
Light industrial 	110 	$0.087 
Manufacturing 	140 	$0.068 
Warehousing 	150 	$0.048 
Mini-warehouse 	151 	$0.001 
Hospital 	610 	$0.128 
General office (50,000 sf or less) 	710 	$0.148 
General office (50,001—100,000 sf) 	710 	$0.140 
General office (100,001—200,000 sf) 	710 	$0.132 
Medical-dental office 	720 	$0.153 
Business park 	770 	$0.120 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,000 sf or less 	820 	$0.126 
Commercial/shop ctr. 25,001—50,000 sf 	820 	$0.108 
Commercial/shop ctr. 50,001—100,000 sf 	820 	$0.095 
Commercial/shop ctr. 100,001—200,000 sf 	820 	$0.084 
Commercial/shop ctr. 200,001—400,000 sf 	820 	$0.076 
Other nonresidential (per indicated unit) 
Lodging (per room) 	320 	$16.00 
Elementary school (per student) 	520 	$3.00 
Secondary school (per student) 	530 	$3.00 
Day care (per student) 	565 	$6.00 
Nursing home (per bed) 	620 	$13.00 
NOTE: 
* Low rise includes townhouses, duplexes, 3—4 and 5—9 units per building or structure, plus mobile homes and other (e.g. boats, recreational vehicles). 
** High rise includes 10—19, 20—49, and 50+ units per building or structure. 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-12. - Parks and recreation impact fee schedule. 
Land Use 	ITE 
Code 	Parks 
and 
Recreation 
Impact 
Fee 
Residential (per dwelling unit) 
Single-family detached 	210 	$6,818.00 
Low rise* 	230 	$5,998.00 
High rise** 	220 	$3,959.00 
NOTE: 
* Low rise includes townhouses, duplexes, 3—4 and 5—9 units per building or structure, plus mobile homes and other (e.g. boats, recreational vehicles). 
** High rise includes 10—19, 20—49, and 50+ units per building or structure. 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-13. - Administration of impact fee. 
(a)  Collection of impact fee. Impact fees due pursuant to this article shall be collected by the building department prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Transfer of funds to finance department. Upon receipt of impact fees, the building department shall transfer such funds to the city finance department which shall be responsible for placement of such funds into the appropriate separate accounts by type of impact fee and applicable benefit district, or applicable subdistrict for fire-rescue impact fees. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account. The funds of these accounts shall not be commingled with other funds or revenues of the city. 
(c)  Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The city finance department shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each such account, whereby impact fees collected are segregated by type of impact fee and by benefit district or applicable subdistrict. A separate account shall be maintained for each type of impact fee by benefit district or subdistrict as follows: fire-rescue impact fee north subdistrict, fire-rescue impact fee south subdistrict, police impact fee district, general services impact fee district and parks and recreation impact fee district. Accounts established in 1988 for the original impact fee benefit/planning districts shall be maintained through FY2008. The city shall use its best efforts to appropriate and expend those funds within the appropriate benefit/planning district, however, the fund balances for the fire-rescue. Police, general services, solid waste, and parks and recreation impact fee funds remaining at the end of FY2008 may be transferred to the appropriate impact fee benefit district or subdistrict established in subsection 13-7(c) and expended within that district or subdistrict. 
(d)  Maintenance of records. The city finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received, including revenue by building permit, and which shall document and ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively in accordance with provisions of this article. For purposes of petitions for refunds under section 13-16 of this article, the expenditure and appropriation of impact fees shall be deemed to occur in the same sequential order as the collection of impact fees, in other words, the first fee in shall be the first fee out. 
(e)  Impact fee expenditures. Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be expended only for the type of system improvements for which the impact fee was imposed and only within the impact fee benefit district or subdistrict where the impact fee was collected, except as provided in subsection (c) above. Impact fees shall not be expended to eliminate any deficiencies in facilities, land or equipment that may result from adoption of an increased level of service. 
(f)  Annual review and modification. The city, acting through appropriate staff or agents, shall annually, no later than 120 days after the annual capital budget and capital improvements program adoption process, review the impact fee ordinance procedures, assumptions, formulas, benefit district and subdistrict designations, and fee calculations, and issue an annual report. The first annual report shall be issued after September 2006. The annual report shall be distributed to the city commission by the city manager. The annual report should, at a minimum, include information by individual benefit district or subdistrict for the fire-rescue impact fee, on account balances, annual collections annual expenditures and system improvement projects funded in whole or in part with impact fees. The annual report should provide information on the number of owner-occupied units and rental units participating in the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program, the number of units added annually, and the number of units no longer meeting the affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program criteria. The report should evaluate the effectiveness of the deferral program in encouraging the provision and retention of affordable housing and workforce housing and the effect, if any, of the deferral program on the provision of impact fee funded public facilities. The annual report should present any recommendations related to the impact fee system including but not limited to, the need for any updates to the impact fee calculations district boundaries and ordinance. In reviewing the impact fee system, the city may consider: 
(1)  Development occurring in the prior year; 
(2)  Construction of proposed public facilities; 
(3)  Changing facility needs; 
(4)  Inflation and other economic factors; 
(5)  Revised cost estimates for public facilities, land and/or improvements; 
(6)  Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to impact-fee-related capital improvements; and 
(7)  Such other factors as may be relevant. The data in the annual report may be organized based on the city's fiscal year or calendar year. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the city commission's authority to amend this article at any time. 
(g)  Triennial review and modification. The city shall conduct a complete review of the impact fees every three years to determine if changes in costs, facility needs, development patterns, demographics and any other relevant factors indicate a need to update the impact fee calculations, data, methodology or other components of the impact fee system. The triennial report issued based on this review shall be distributed to the city commission by the city manager. Changes to the impact fee system, including updated fee calculations, should be adopted within a year of completion of the triennial report. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 13564, § 1, 10-22-15)  
Sec. 13-14. - Administrative fees. 
Expenses to be incurred by the city in connection with the administration of the development impact fee ordinance have been estimated and budgeted and have been determined to be of benefit to the properties therein and shall be reimbursed to impact fee administration fund of the city out of the revenues accruing through the imposition of a service charge in the amount of three percent of the impact fee due. The nonrefundable service charges are in addition to and shall be paid separately from the impact fees but shall be payable at the time of application for the building permit and shall be for the sole purpose of defraying expenses as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-15. - Bonding of capital improvement projects. 
The city may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in furtherance of the provision of impact fee funded projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other city revenues as may be allocated by the city commission. Impact fees paid pursuant to this article, however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for financing, directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness for, the cost of system improvements. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-16. - Administrative procedures for petitions for impact fee determinations and affordable housing and workforce housing deferrals, refunds and credits. 
(a)  Petition process. 
(1)  Petitions for an impact fee determination and affordable housing or workforce housing impact fee deferral refund of impact fees and/or credit against impact fees shall be submitted using the petition process, requirements and time limits provided herein. All petition requests except petitions for refunds under subsections (c) and (d), shall be accompanied by a fee of $250.00. Any officer department board commission or agency of the city (collectively referred to as city "entities") submitting a petition shall not be required to pay said fee. 
(2)  All petitions shall be submitted to the city manager's designee for processing and preparation of a staff report and recommendations on the petition, and the final determination on the petition shall be issued by the city manager. The city manager's designee is authorized to request analysis of the petition request by any and all appropriate city departments and staff in order to provide a complete and detailed review of and recommendations on the petition request to the city manager. The staff report and recommendations shall be forwarded to the city manager no later than 60 days after filing of a complete petition. The city manager shall, no later than 90 days of filing of the complete petition issue a written determination on the petition, with the reasoning for the determination based upon the petition data, the provisions of this article and applicable laws, and, if needed, direct the appropriate city staff to take the actions necessary to implement the determination. 
(3)  Upon written agreement by the city manager's designee and the petitioner the time limits in this section may be waived for any reason, including, but not limited to, the submittal of additional data and supporting statements by the petitioner. The city manager's designee is authorized to determine whether a petition is complete and whether additional data or supporting statements by appropriate professionals are needed. If the city manager's designee determines that the petition is not complete, a written statement detailing the insufficiencies of the petition shall be provided to the petitioner within 30 days of initial filing of the petition. The date of such written determination of insufficiency shall toll the time limits established in the section until submittal of a complete petition. Any insufficiency not corrected during such time will cause the petition to not be considered, and it will be returned without the necessity of further action. 
(4)  The filing of a petition shall stay action by the city on the application for building permit and any other city action related to the development. No building permit shall be issued for development for which a petition has been filed and is pending unless the total impact fees due have been paid in full or a sufficient bond or letter of credit satisfactory to the city attorney has been filed with the city. 
(b)  Petitions for impact fee determination. Any applicant, prior to in conjunction with the submission of an application for a building permit, or within 30 days of the date of payment of impact fees, may petition the city manager for a determination that the amount of the impact fees imposed on the new development is inappropriate based on any or all of the following factors the specific land use category applied to the residential or nonresidential development and the amount of development (dwelling units and/or gross square footage). The petition shall specify in detail the basis on which the applicant asserts that the amount of the impact fees is inappropriate. The petition shall be on a form provided by the city and shall, at a minimum, include identification of the disputed factor(s), a detailed statement asserting the basis for the dispute, the data relied upon by the petition and a detailed statement by a qualified professional engineer, planner or other appropriate professional, and, if filed after payment of impact fees, a dated receipt for payment of the impact fees issued by the city's building department. Failure to timely file a petition for impact fee determination shall waive any right to review or recalculation to decrease the impact fee payment. 
(c)  Petitions for affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program determinations. Any applicant for deferral of impact fees pursuant to the affordable housing and workforce housing impact fee deferral program established in section 13-8 shall submit a petition prior to or with submittal of a building permit application. Failure to timely file a petition for affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program determination shall waive any right to participation in the affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program. Such petition shall be on a form provided by the city and shall at a minimum include the following: 
(1)  A list of all affordable and workforce housing unit numbers by building with the total number of dwelling units for each building and the anticipated sales price or rental amount for each affordable housing unit. 
(2)  A list of all anticipated affordable and workforce housing unit owner names and current addresses and other contact information. If such information is available, if the information is not available the petition may be processed without it. 
(3)  A covenant running with the land, previously recorded by the applicant in the public records of the county for each affordable or workforce housing unit. The recorded covenant shall be on a form provided by the city and shall be in a form acceptable to the office of the city attorney. A deed restriction, in a form acceptable to the office of the city attorney may be submitted in lieu of a covenant as long as it accomplishes the same goal as the covenant. 
(4)  Any other information deemed relevant by city staff to a determination of eligibility under the affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program, including criteria established in this article and the applicable city commission resolution. 
(d)  Petitions for refund of impact fees. 
(1)  The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may apply for a refund of such fee if the city has failed to appropriate or spend the collected fees by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years of the date of payment of the impact fee, if the building permit for which the impact fee has been paid has lapsed for noncommencement of construction, if the project for which a building permit has been issued has been altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due, or if the project has been approved for the affordable housing and workforce housing deferral program. 
(2)  Only the current owner of property may petition for a refund. A petition for refund must be filed within 90 days of any of the above-specified events giving rise to the right to claim a refund. Failure to timely file a petition for refund shall waive any right to an impact fee refund. 
(3)  The petition for refund shall be submitted to the city manager's designee on a form provided by the city for such purpose. The petition shall contain a notarize affidavit that petitioner is the current owner of the property, a certified copy of the latest tax records of Miami-Dade County showing the owner of the subject property, a copy of the dated receipt for payment of the impact fee issued by the city's building department and a statement of the basis upon which the refund is sought. 
(4)  Any money refunded pursuant to this subsection shall be returned with interest at a rate of three percent per annum. 
(e)  Petition for credits against impact fees. 
(1)  Any applicant as defined in this article who elects to construct or dedicate all or a portion of a system improvement as defined in this article, or, who escrows money with the city for the construction of a system improvement may, if all criteria in this article and this subsection (e) are fulfilled, be granted a credit for such contribution against the impact fees otherwise due for the same type of system improvement. The applicant must, prior to the applicant's construction, dedication or escrow of the system improvement, submit a petition on a form provided by the city, obtain a determination of credit eligibility and the amount of any credit, and enter into a credit agreement with the city. The petition for credit shall contain, at a minimum, the following a certified copy of the most recently recorded deed for the subject property preliminary engineering plans and certified costs estimates by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional for the proposed improvement legal description of any land proposed to be contributed, proposed schedule for completion of any construction/dedications identification of the proposed improvement in the current adopted CIP and the amount of impact fee funding for the improvement and identification in detail of the development against which the credits are to apply or which will pay the impact fees to be used for the credit including the land use type(s), number of units/gross floor area, anticipated development schedule, and legal descriptions of the subject property. Any appeal of petition determinations on credits must be filed, heard, and determined prior to the applicant's construction, dedication or escrow for which the credit is requested. Failure to timely file a petition for impact fee credits shall waive any right to impact fee credits. 
(2)  A credit shall be granted and the amount of the credit shall be determined by the city manager if it is determined that the system improvement is in the adopted, current capital improvements plan and is funded in whole or in part with impact fee revenue. The amount of the credit shall be based on actual costs certified by a professional engineer or architect submitted by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the appropriate city department. In no event shall the credit exceed the amount of impact fees budgeted for that system improvement or the amount of the impact fees for the same type of system improvements that are due from the development requesting the credit whichever amount is smaller. If the impact fees due exceed the amount of credit the applicant shall pay the impact fees due less the credit at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(3)  If a credit petition is approved the applicant and the city shall enter into a credit agreement which shall provide for, but is not limited to the following the process to be used to verify actual costs the value of any dedicated land or methodology to determine the value of any dedicated land the obligations and responsibilities of the applicant, including but not limited to: 
a.  Public bidding or solicitation requirements; 
b.  Engineering, design and construction standards and requirements to be complied with; 
c.  Insurance bonding and indemnification requirements; 
d.  Project inspection standards and responsibilities; 
e.  Timing of the actions to be taken by the applicant; 
f.  Transfer of title to land and improvements; 
g.  Process for submittal of credit payment requests; and 
h.  Timing of payments by the city. 
No impact fee credits shall be paid or provided until any land has been dedicated and conveyed to the city and/or the facilities have been constructed and accepted or alternatively until a bond has been posted to ensure the conveyance and/or construction. Any bond shall be issued by a state surety and in a form acceptable to the city attorney and risk manager. The city's obligation to pay impact fee credits shall be limited to the impact fees collected from the development for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of approval of the agreement. The credit agreement shall provide for forfeiture of any impact fee credit remaining at the end of such ten—year period. The credit applicant shall agree to provide recorded notice to subsequent purchasers/owners of the property regarding the credit, if any, that may be available to such purchasers and shall agree to indemnify the city for any and all costs and liabilities arising from any claims by others related to the impact fee credit. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 12929, § 2, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 13564, § 1, 10-22-15; Ord. No. 13601, § 2, 4-28-16)  
Sec. 13-17. - Appeal to city commission. 
(a)  A petition determination by the city manager shall be final unless a written notice of appeal to the city commission is filed with the director of the department of zoning within 20 days of the date of the written determination by the city manager, together with payment of a $500.00 fee. Such appeal may be filed by the applicant, the petitioner, or by any officer, department, board, commission, or agency of the city. All such appeals to the city commission shall be subject to the disclosure requirements of section 2-618. The above-specified city entities shall not be required to pay said fee. Failure to timely file a request for review of a petition determination shall waive any right to any further review of the petition determination. 
(b)  The director of zoning shall then certify such appeals through the office of the city manager. 
(c)  Appeals shall be filed on a form provided by the city and accompanied by ten copies of all documents for consideration by the city commission including but not limited to the petition submittal and all accompanying documents, the petition determination and any additional documents, exhibits, technical reports, or other written evidence the appellant wants the city commission to consider. Should the appellant want to submit additional written material after the initial filing of notice of appeal ten complete copies of such material shall be submitted to the director of zoning no later than 30 days prior to the hearing date. If any material is submitted after that date the city commission shall reschedule the hearing to a later date to provide adequate time for review of the material by city staff and the city manager notwithstanding the 90-day period established under subsection (d). 
(d)  The city commission on review shall have full power to affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the city manager so long as such commission action is based on applicable law and the provisions of this article. The appeal shall be heard by the city commission not more than 90 days after the appeal is filed by the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-18. - Judicial review. 
Any request for review of a decision by the city commission under this article shall be made by filing an appeal within 30 days of said decision with the circuit court in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-19. - Effect of impact fee on planning, zoning, subdivision, and other regulations. 
This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, or other regulations of the city, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-20. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement. 
The payment of impact fees imposed pursuant to this article is additional and supplemental, and not in substitution, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, and to be coordinated with the city's capital improvement program, and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of public facility improvements in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner be required to pay impact fees for the same improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this article, provided, however, that a property owner may be required to provide or pay, pursuant to Miami-Dade County, state and/or city ordinances, policies or regulations, for public facility improvements in addition to payment of impact fees pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a guarantee of adequate public facilities at the time of development of any particular property. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-21. - Alternative collection method. 
In the event that the appropriate amount of impact fees due pursuant to this article are not paid prior to the issuance of a building permit, the city may elect to collect the impact fees due by any other method which is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-22. - Previous impact fee schedules. 
The language presented in sections 13-22—13-27 is retained from previous sections 13-8—13-12 for the purpose of imposition of impact fees on development with building permit applications submitted and accepted as complete by the city prior to 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006. Sections 13-23—13-27 are applicable only to development with building permit applications submitted and accepted as complete by the city prior to 5:00 pm on January 15, 2006 which development proceeds to issuance of certificate of occupancy without lapse or expiration of the original building permit. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-23. - Establishment of development subareas. 
Development subareas are established as shown on the "City of Miami Planning District Maps" attached hereto and incorporated herein but not printed in the Code by reference as appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-24. - Development potential by subarea. 
Planning District 	Residential 	Nonresidential 	Total 
Edison 	772,320 	1,289,836 	2,062,156 
Downtown 	20,006,667 	10,493,783 	30,500,450 
Coconut Grove 	3,099,000 	1,057,868 	4,156,868 
Little Havana 	1,371,840 	3,231,166 	4,603,006 
Flagami 	604,800 	507,128 	1,111,928 
Allapattah 	684,000 	2,480,863 	3,164,863 
Virginia Key 	0 	310,000 	310,000 
Total square footage 	26,538,627 	19,370,644 	45,909,271 
 
*Projections are for the period April 1, 1988, through March 31, 2005. 
Note: See appendix B of Ord. No. 10426 [not printed in the Code] for a more detailed breakdown. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-25. - Impact-fee-related capital improvement program by subarea. 
Total project costs by subareas are as follows: 
Estimated Costs of Additional Facilities—Total 
Planning 
District 	Police 	Fire and Rescue 	Parks and Recreation 	Streets 	Storm Sewers 	Solid 
Waste 	General Services 
Administration 	Overall 
Cost 
Edison 	$  379,398 	$   35,580 	$  168,205 	$  608,613 	$  304,303 	$  200,994 	$  150,732 	$ 1,847,825 
Downtown 	 3,256,425 	 1,099,605 	 7,375,087 	 8,597,750 	 4,298,871 	 2,129,138 	 1,425,681 	 28,182,557 
Coconut Grove 	   352,578 	    47,410 	   539,964 	 1,862,288 	   931,141 	   277,090 	   169,499 	  4,179,970 
Little Havana 	   939,672 	    68,574 	   298,781 	   959,993 	   479,993 	   469,284 	   363,988 	  3,580,285 
Flagami 	   154,926 	         0 	   131,721 	   603,595 	   301,794 	    97,335 	    66,545 	  1,355,916 
Allapattah 	   714,410 	         0 	   148,970 	 1,053,562 	   526,778 	   337,855 	   270,536 	  3,052,111 
Virginia Key 	    87,635 	         0 	         0 	          0 	         0 	    37,019 	    31,737 	    156,391 
Total cost 	$5,885,044 	$1,251,169 	$8,662,728 	$13,685,801 	$6,842,880 	$3,548,715 	$2,478,718 	$42,355,055 
 
Residential—Estimated Costs of Additional Facilities 
Planning 
District 	Police 	Fire and Rescue 	Parks and Recreation 	Streets 	Storm Sewers 	Solid Waste 	General Services Administration 	Overall Cost 
Edison 	$314,767 	$  9,654 	$  168,205 	$  227,938 	$  113,967 	$   46,964 	$ 18,679 	$   600,174 
Downtown 	 289,863 	 394,357 	 3,137,360 	 5,639,665 	 2,819,831 	   875,977 	 351,309 	 13,508,362 
Coconut Grove 	  53,524 	  20,969 	   539,964 	 1,388,362 	   694,179 	   150,762 	  61,194 	  2,908,954 
Little Havana 	  26,232 	  11,602 	   298,781 	   286,107 	   143,052 	    83,421 	  33,178 	    882,373 
Flagami 	  11,565 	       0 	   131,721 	   328,308 	   164,153 	    36,776 	  14,627 	    687,150 
Allapattah 	  13,079 	       0 	   148,970 	   227,698 	   113,848 	    41,593 	  16,543 	    561,731 
Virginia Key 	       0 	       0 	         0 	         0 	         0 	         0 	       0 	          0 
Total cost 	$409,030 	$436,582 	$4,425,001 	$8,098,078 	$4,049,030 	$1,235,493 	$495,530 	$19,148,744 
 
Nonresidential—Estimated Costs of Additional Facilities 
Planning 
District 	Police 	Fire and Rescue 	Parks and Recreation 	Streets 	Storm Sewers 	Solid Waste 	General Services Administration 	Overall Cost 
Edison 	$ 364,631 	$ 25,926 	$        0 	$ 380,675 	$  190,336 	$  154,030 	$  132,053 	$  1,247,651 
Downtown 	 2,966,562 	 705,248 	 4,237,727 	 2,958,085 	 1,479,040 	 1,253,161 	 1,074,372 	 14,674,195 
Coconut Grove 	   299,054 	  26,441 	         0 	   473,926 	   236,962 	   126,328 	   108,305 	  1,271,016 
Little Havana 	   913,440 	  56,972 	         0 	   673,886 	   336,941 	   385,863 	   330,810 	  2,697,912 
Flagami 	   143,361 	      0 	         0 	   275,287 	   137,641 	    60,559 	    51,918 	    668,766 
Allapattah 	   701,331 	      0 	         0 	   825,864 	   412,930 	   296,262 	   253,993 	  2,490,380 
Virginia Key 	    87,635 	      0 	         0 	         0 	         0 	    37,019 	    31,737 	    156,391 
Total cost 	$5,476,014 	$814,587 	$4,237,727 	$5,587,723 	$2,793,850 	$2,313,222 	$1,983,188 	$23,206,311 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Sec. 13-26. - Development impact fee coefficients. 
  
Residential Impact Fee Coefficients by Type of Service and Planning District
(dollars per square foot) 
Planning 
District 	Police 	Fire and Rescue 	Parks and Recreation 	Streets 	Storm Sewers 	Solid Waste 	General 
Services 
Administration 	Overall Cost 
Edison 	$0.019 	$0.013 	$0.218 	$0.295 	$0.148 	$0.061 	$0.024 	$0.778 
Downtown 	0.014 	0.020 	0.157 	0.282 	0.141 	0.044 	0.018 	0.676 
Coconut Grove 	0.017 	0.007 	0.174 	0.448 	0.224 	0.049 	0.020 	0.939 
Little Havana 	0.019 	0.008 	0.218 	0.209 	0.104 	0.061 	0.024 	0.643 
Flagami 	0.019 	0.000 	0.218 	0.543 	0.271 	0.061 	0.024 	1.136 
Allapattah 	0.019 	0.000 	0.218 	0.333 	0.166 	0.061 	0.024 	0.821 
Virginia Key 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 
 
Nonresidential Impact Fee Coefficients by Type of Service and Planning District
(dollars per square foot) 
Planning 
District 	Police 	Fire and Rescue 	Parks and Recreation 	Streets 	Storm Sewers 	Solid Waste 	General 
Services 
Administration 	Overall Cost 
Edison 	$0.283 	$0.020 	$0.000 	$0.295 	$0.148 	$0.119 	$0.102 	$0.967 
Downtown 	0.283 	0.067 	0.404 	0.282 	0.141 	0.119 	0.102 	1.398 
Coconut Grove 	0.283 	0.025 	0.000 	0.443 	0.224 	0.119 	0.102 	1.201 
Little Havana 	0.283 	0.018 	0.000 	0.209 	0.104 	0.119 	0.102 	0.835 
Flagami 	0.283 	0.000 	0.000 	0.543 	0.271 	0.119 	0.102 	1.318 
Allapattah 	0.283 	0.000 	0.000 	0.333 	0.166 	0.119 	0.102 	1.003 
Virginia Key 	0.283 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.119 	0.102 	0.504 
 
The derivation of impact fee coefficients by type of service is as follows: 
a. Police—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$ 14,767 	$   289,863 	$   53,524 	$   26,232 	$ 11,565 	$ 13,079 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.019 	$0.014 	$0.017 	$0.019 	$0.019 	$0.019 	$0.000 
 
b. Police—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  364,631 	$ 2,966,562 	$  299,054 	$  913,440 	$143,361 	$  701,331 	$ 87,635 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.283 	$0.283 	$0.283 	$0.283 	$0.283 	$0.283 	$0.283 
 
c. Fire and rescue—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  9,654 	$   394,357 	$   20,969 	$   11,602 	$      0 	$      0 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.013 	$0.020 	$0.007 	$0.008 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 
 
d. Fire and rescue—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$   25,926 	$   705,248 	$   26,441 	$   56,972 	$      0 	$        0 	$      0 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.020 	$0.067 	$0.025 	$0.018 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 
 
e. Parks and recreation—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$168,205 	$ 3,137,360 	$  539,964 	$  298,781 	$131,721 	$148,970 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.218 	$0.157 	$0.174 	$0.218 	$0.218 	$0.218 	$0.000 
 
f. Parks and recreation—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$        0 	$ 4,237,727 	$        0 	$        0 	$     0 	$        0 	$     0 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.000 	$0.404 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 
 
g. Streets—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$227,938 	$ 5,639,665 	$1,388,362 	$  286,107 	$328,308 	$227,698 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.295 	$0.282 	$0.448 	$0.209 	$0.543 	$0.333 	$0.000 
 
h. Streets—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  380,675 	$ 2,958,085 	$  473,926 	$  673,886 	$275,287 	$  825,864 	$      0 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.295 	$0.282 	$0.448 	$0.209 	$0.543 	$0.333 	$0.000 
 
i. Storm sewers—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$113,967 	$ 2,819,831 	$  694,179 	$  143,052 	$164,153 	$113,848 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.148 	$0.141 	$0.224 	$0.104 	$0.271 	$0.166 	$0.000 
 
j. Storm sewers—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  190,336 	$ 1,479,040 	$  236,962 	$  336,941 	$137,641 	$  412,930 	$      0 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.148 	$0.141 	$0.224 	$0.104 	$0.271 	$0.166 	$0.000 
 
k. Solid waste—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$ 46,964 	$   875,977 	$  150,762 	$   83,421 	$36,776 	$ 41,593 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.061 	$0.044 	$0.049 	$0.061 	$0.061 	$0.061 	$0.000 
 
l. Solid waste—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  154,030 	$ 1,253,161 	$  126,328 	$  385,863 	$ 60,559 	$  296,262 	$ 37,019 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.119 	$0.119 	$0.119 	$0.119 	$0.119 	$0.119 	$0.119 
 
m. General services administration—Residential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$ 18,679 	$   351,309 	$   61,194 	$   33,178 	$ 14,627 	$ 16,543 	$    0 
Projected residential growth (sq. ft.) 	 772,320 	 20,006,667 	 3,099,000 	 1,371,840 	 604,800 	 684,000 	     0 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.024 	$0.018 	$0.020 	$0.024 	$0.024 	$0.024 	$0.000 
 
n. General services administration—Nonresidential 
Planning District 	Edison 	Downtown 	Coconut Grove 	Little 
Havana 	Flagami 	Allapattah 	Virginia Key 
Estimated cost of improvements 	$  132,053 	$ 1,074,372 	$  108,305 	$  330,810 	$ 51,918 	$  253,993 	$ 31,737 
Projected nonresidential growth (sq. ft.) 	 1,289,836 	 10,493,783 	 1,057,868 	 3,231,166 	 507,128 	 2,480,863 	 310,000 
Impact fee coefficient ($/sq. ft.) 	$0.102 	$0.102 	$0.102 	$0.102 	$0.102 	$0.102 	$0.102 
 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05) 
_____ 
Sec. 13-27. - Calculation of impact fee. 
(a)  Upon receipt and acceptance by the city of a complete application for a building permit for a new development prior to 5:00 p.m. on January 15, 2006, the zoning department shall determine the amount of the impact fee due pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Determine whether the development is exempt as follows: 
a.  Single-family residential development. 
b.  Development of less than 1,000 square feet not resulting in a net increase in the number of residential dwelling units. 
c.  Duplex in multiple family residential development located in the city's designated neighborhood development zones or their equivalent as defined within the effective community development block grant program approved by the city and accepted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as may be amended. 
d.  Duplex and multiple family residential development, outside of neighborhood development zones or their equivalent as stipulated hereinabove which is certified by the department of community development as affordable housing with the waiver calculated as a pro rata amount represented by the relationship of the number of affordable housing units in such development, as certified by the department of community development to the total number of units in such development. 
e.  Any development which is a nonprofit joint venture with the city, or city-owned or -operated facility. 
f.  Any development of regional impact (DRI) (excluding the downtown DRI and the Southeast Overtown/Park West areawide DRI) for which a development order has been issued by the city before the effective date of this article, providing that the building permit for such DRI is obtained within 15 months of the effective date of this article. 
g.  As of November 19, 2002, the first three residential development projects that include 201 or more units of multiple family owner-occupied housing valued for purchase by middle-income families located within the downtown central business district, for which a building permit for construction not merely for demolition or foundation work, is issued by the city no later than December 31, 2005 which development shall have at least 70 percent of the units in such development priced for purchase at a value not less than 121 percent and not more than 300 percent of the median value of owner-occupied dwelling units in the city as listed in the 2000 U.S. Census the exemption shall apply only to the residential portion of the development and only to the portions of the development for which the specified building permit is issued prior to December 21, 2005. 
(2)  Identify the property's development subarea (i.e., the planning district wherein it falls). 
(3)  Calculate the gross square footage of floor area of the building for residential and nonresidential, excluding any exempt portions of the development pursuant to subsection (a)(1). 
(4)  Multiply the gross square footage of the development by the appropriate subarea impact fee coefficients in section 13-26. 
(5)  Review and, if appropriate, reduce, upon written request of the applicant and verification by the zoning department, the amount of impact fee calculated and otherwise due, by the value to the city of any capital improvements provided by the applicant which are listed in the impact-fee-related capital improvement program. Evidence of capital improvement provision cost shall be submitted by the applicant and shall be subject to review by the city. In no event, however, shall a credit be given for that specific category of projects for more than the amount of the impact fee otherwise due pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Prior to making an application for a building permit, an applicant may request a nonbinding good-faith impact fee estimate from the zoning department. The estimate shall be based upon the development potential of the particular site as measured by either: 
(1)  The maximum allowable gross square footage permitted by existing zoning, or 
(2)  The total gross square footage indicated in the applicant's building plan. The square footage thus determined is then multiplied by the applicable impact fee coefficient. 
(Ord. No. 12750, § 2, 12-15-05)  
Secs. 13-28—13-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT SUPPLEMENTAL FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12678, § 2, adopted April 28, 2005, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10461, § 1, adopted July 14, 1988; the Code of 1980, §§ 13-41—13-55; Ord. No. 12295, § 3, adopted November 19, 2002. The exhibits referred to in this article are not reproduced in the Code; they can be found on file in city records in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Sec. 13-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Miami downtown development supplemental fee ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-52. - Intent. 
(a)  This article is intended to impose the downtown development supplemental fee as a supplemental fee on new development within the downtown DRI project area, utilizing the defined terms in section 13-53. The downtown development supplemental fee comprises three components including a transportation mitigation fee, a DRI/master plan recovery fee and an administration fee. The downtown development supplemental fee is payable prior to the time of building permit issuance or upon application for certain permits, as provided for herein, in an amount based upon the appropriate units of land use, in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development in the project area, as set forth in Exhibit E of Ordinance No. 13704 since the demand for the mitigation is uniquely attributable to such net new development on an area-wide basis. 
(b)  This article shall be uniformly applicable to all net new development within the project area. This fee shall not be applicable to any activity which is not classified as "net new development" as defined in section 13-53 or which has, on the effective date of the master and Increment I downtown DRI development orders, a valid building permit or currently effective DRI development order. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-53. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended. 
ADA or application for development approval shall mean the original application for development approval for the downtown Miami project area filed by the DDA on November 25, 1986, pursuant to F.S. § 380.06 (1987), as amended by the Increment II ADA filed by the DDA on February 13, 2002. 
Administration fees shall mean a fee charged to all new development to pay for the city's administrative costs for enforcing the terms and conditions of the downtown development orders, including but not limited to preparation of ordinances and procedures, review of permit applications, monitoring compliance with requirements, and enforcing violations, and which shall be a component of the downtown development supplemental fee. 
Air quality fees shall mean a fee charged to all net new development to pay for the for the city's costs for air quality monitoring, modeling and mitigation measures as required in the Increment I and II development orders for downtown Miami; and which shall be a component of the downtown development supplemental fee through in Increment I and Increment II. 
Applicant shall mean an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons acting as coapplicants, any county or state agency, any other legal entity, or the authorized representative of any of the aforementioned, signing an application for a building permit. 
Attractions/recreation use shall mean theaters, performance halls, sports arenas, museums, and similar cultural, entertainment, or recreational facilities. 
Building permit shall mean any permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to the Florida Building Code. 
By-right project shall mean a project that is designed to conform to all the applicable standards of the Ordinance No. 13114, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended ("Miami 21 Code"), and any other specific requirements that may be enumerated elsewhere in the City Code. 
CADA or consolidated application for development approval shall mean the revised ADA prepared pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 380.06 (2017). 
Central business district shall be as defined in section 13-5. 
Certificate of occupancy shall mean a permanent or temporary and/or partial certificate of occupancy issued, pursuant to the Florida Building Code. 
City shall mean the City of Miami, Florida. 
Class II special permit shall mean a special permit issued by the planning director pursuant to Ordinance No. 11000, the previous zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, and the Miami 21 Code, as amended and as applicable. 
Commission shall mean the city commission of Miami, Florida. 
Comprehensive plan shall mean the city's plan for future development adopted by city Ordinance Number 10544, and as may be amended and updated from time to time. 
Convention use shall mean meeting rooms, banquet halls, exhibition halls, auditoriums, and their auxiliary spaces intended for use by conventions, seminars, exhibitions, and the like, which shall exceed the minimum standard for ancillary facilities within the definition of "hotel use". 
DDA or downtown development authority shall mean the downtown development authority of the city. 
DO or downtown development order shall mean orders granting with conditions for a development permit, as defined by F.S. § 163.3164 (2017), for the Downtown DRI. The master development order was approved by Resolution No. 87-1148, Increment I was established by Resolution No. 87-1149, Increment II was established by Resolution No. 02-1307, and Increment III was established by Ordinance No. 13704. 
Downtown development supplemental fee shall mean a fee charged to net new development in the project area comprised of components including a transportation mitigation fee, an administration fee, and a DRI/master plan recovery fee which are assessable to the net new development according to the provisions of this article. 
Downtown development supplemental fee coefficient shall mean the charge per unit of land use as calculated for each component of the downtown development supplemental fee. 
DRI shall mean "development of regional impact" as defined by F.S. § 380.06 (2017), and includes any development which, because of its character, magnitude, or location, would have a substantial effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of citizens of more than one county. 
DRI/master plan recovery fee shall mean a fee charged to all net new development to reimburse the city and/or DDA for costs incurred in the DRI/master plan study and future related studies in accordance with the CADA and the downtown DRI development orders, and which shall be a component of the downtown development supplemental fee. 
DU or dwelling unit shall mean a residence of a single housekeeping unit as further defined in the Miami 21 Code. 
Hotel use shall mean land use functions predominantly of sleeping accommodations occupied on a rental basis for limited periods of time as further defined in the Miami 21 Code. These are measured in terms of lodging units. A lodging unit is a furnished room of a minimum 200 square feet that includes sanitary facilities and may include limited kitchen facilities. "Hotel uses" may include meeting and banquet facilities and convenience goods and services for hotel guests, provided that the total of such ancillary facilities shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross square footage of the proposed hotel. 
Industrial use shall mean land uses connected with a business or activity involving manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, distribution, disposal, warehousing, bulk storage, trucking and equipment facilities, and other businesses serving primarily industrial needs based on the Miami 21 Code. 
Institutional use shall mean hospitals, universities, schools, and post offices. 
MUSP or major use special permit shall mean a special permit issued by the city commission pursuant to Ordinance Number 11000, the previous zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, and the Miami 21 Code, as applicable. 
Net new development shall mean any construction or reconstruction which will result in a net increase, within any parcel of land, of residential dwelling units, hotel rooms, seats in attractions/recreation facilities or gross square footage for office, retail/service, convention, wholesale/industrial or institutional uses. Land uses to be removed by demolition of a building or structure may be credited against the proposed new land uses for purposes of calculating the net increase, if the planning director determines that there was a valid certificate of occupancy existing on the effective date of this development order for the land uses to be demolished. If a change of land use is proposed, the planning director may credit the prior land use against the proposed land use based upon equivalent impacts as measured by peak hour vehicle trip generation. Any activity which has, on the effective date of this development order, a valid building permit or any currently effective development order shall not be included as net new development. The planning director may exclude from net new development any small development under 10,000 square feet in floor area, if he or she finds that such development would have no regional impact as measured by peak hour vehicle trips. 
Office use shall mean space for the conduct of the administrative functions of government or business and professional activities not including sales of merchandise off the premises, and not including personal services as defined herein under "retail/service use." 
Owner-occupied units shall mean dwelling units for individual sale by a developer and intended occupancy by an owner, as opposed to rental residential developments. 
Parcel of land shall mean, pursuant to F.S. ch. 380 (2017), any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, and which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips shall mean the average number of trips per hour during the afternoon peak period from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. generated by motor vehicles, excluding public transit vehicles, that have either an origin or a destination within the project area. 
Project area shall mean the area included within the legal description as set forth in Exhibit E of Ordinance No. 13704. 
Residential use shall mean any "dwelling units" as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Retail/service use shall mean space for the sale of merchandise, eating and/or drinking establishments, and personal services such as but not limited to hair salons, travel agencies, laundries, dry cleaners, bank tellers, photographers, shoe repair, tailoring, etc. 
Room shall mean "Lodging unit." 
SF, gross square feet, or gross square footage shall mean "floor area" as further defined in the Miami 21 Code. 
Site shall mean a legally described parcel of property capable of development pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Total allowable development shall mean the quantity of net new development for which certificates of occupancy may be issued under the terms and conditions of the development order, as may be modified pursuant to F.S. § 380.06(19) (2004). 
Transportation mitigation fee shall mean a fee charged to all net new development to pay for improvements to mitigate for impacts on the regional transportation system in accordance with requirements of the CADA and the Increment I and Increment II development order for downtown Miami, and which shall be a component of the downtown development supplemental fee. 
Wholesale/industrial use shall mean manufacturing, wholesale trade, warehousing and storage, printing, automotive and heavy equipment repair, and other general commercial uses permitted within I (industrial) districts in the zoning ordinance. 
Zoning ordinance shall mean Ordinance No. 13114 and commonly referred to as the Miami 21 Code. This ordinance replaces City Ordinance Number 11000. 
Zoning permit shall mean any special permit as delineated in Section 7.1.2 of the Miami 21 Code including, but not limited to, waivers, warrants, exceptions, and variances which are necessary for the development of properties that are not developed "by-right." 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-54. - Authority. 
The city commission is authorized to establish and adopt a downtown development supplemental fee pursuant to the authority granted by the Florida Constitution, Article VII, Section 9(a) (2017) and the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166, the City Charter, the Community Planning Act (F.S. §§ 163.3161—163.3248), and the downtown Miami development of regional impact development order issued December 10, 1987, by Resolution Numbers 87-1148, 87-1149, and 02-1307 as amended, and Ordinance No. 13704. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt such article pursuant to any other source of authority nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of, or in conjunction with this article. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-55. - Imposition of fee. 
(a)  Except as may be provided section 13-58, no zoning permits, building permits or other development permits shall be issued for any net new development as defined in section 13-53 unless the applicant has paid the downtown development supplemental fee imposed by and calculated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, for any project that requires payment of downtown development supplemental fees prior to the issuance of a building permit, the director of the planning department may grant an extension of time, pursuant to a written request by an applicant, for such payment of fees from time of foundation permit to time of shell permit only, upon a finding that the time extension is warranted due to particular financing aspects of the proposed project. No building permit may be issued, however, until all fees required for the DRI are paid in full. 
(c)  Payment of required downtown development supplemental fees from governmental agencies or authorities, that do not have to obtain building permits from the city, shall be due prior to commencement of construction of the proposed project. 
(d)  Applicants with projects that qualify under section 13-8 are exempt from the imposition of payment of the proportionate share of the downtown development supplemental fee attributable only to the Downtown DRI master plan recovery fee and Downtown DRI administration fee. This exemption does not extend to the imposition of payment for the proportionate share of the transportation supplemental fee. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-56. - Downtown development supplemental fee coefficients. 
Following shall be the coefficients by land use for each of the four components of the downtown development supplemental fee. 
Table 1. Fee Coefficients 
(per gross square footage of floor area) 
Land Use 	Transportation 
Mitigation 4 	DRI/Master 
Plan Recovery 5 	DRI 
Administration 6 	Total Fee 
Coefficient 
Office 	$0.4757 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.7072 
Retail/service 	$1.3784 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$1.6098 
Convention 	$0.3174 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.5489 
Institutional 	$0.5502 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.7816 
Wholesale/industrial 	$0.2580 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.4894 
Hotel 1 	$0.3138 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.5452 
Residential 2 	$0.1531 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.3846 
Recreation 3 	$0.2733 	$0.156223 	$0.07521 	$0.5047 
 
Notes: 
1  These fee coefficients for hotel use are based upon an assumed average of 700 SF per hotel room, and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $219.65 per room. 
2  These fee coefficients for residential use are based upon an assumed average of 1,000 SF per DU, and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $153.15 per DU. 
3  These fee coefficients for attractions/recreation use are based upon an assumed average of 20 SF per seat and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $5.47 per seat. 
4  Transportation mitigation. The Increment III development order requires an updated fee of $7,785,065.08 (in 2016 dollars) to mitigate the regional transportation impacts of total allowable development. This fee is derived from the following: 
(a) Estimated improvements necessary to maintain the minimum level of service standard on regional roadways impacted by total allowable development (see Exhibit "C" of Ordinance No. 13704). The regional transportation mitigation fee of $6,005,829.00 (in 2016 dollars) is to be expended on transit projects as provided in Exhibit "C" of Ordinance No. 13704. This portion of the supplemental fee for transportation mitigation, known as the "Transit Commitment," may be modified depending on conditions that are stipulated in paragraph 14. a. of Ordinance No. 13704. In the event that this portion of the supplement fee is modified, the coefficients in Table 1 of Section 13-56 of the City Code will be modified commensurately. 
(b) Contribution of $1,180,030.00 (in 2016 dollars) to the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority ("SFRTA") to be expended on the Tri-Rail Downtown Miami Link in accordance with the First Amendment to the Interlocal Agency Agreement approved pursuant to the Resolution No. R-16-0218 on May 12, 2016. 
(c) Contribution of $374,206.08 to be expended on transportation improvements, including but not limited to pedestrian and alternative transportation mode improvements within the Downtown DRI study area, and the turn lanes described in condition 14c of the Downtown Development Order, at the city's discretion. 
5  DRI/Master Plan Recovery. The total cost to the city for the Downtown Transportation Master Plan, the Increment III DDRI Applications, the Downtown Master Plan and related studies is estimated to be $4,628,129.00, which shall be distributed equally among all net new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 29,625,173 SF during the time that the Increment III development order is in effect. 
6  Administration. The administrative cost to the city for enforcing the requirements of the Downtown Development Order is estimated to be $2,228,100.00 over nine years. These administrative costs shall be distributed equally among all net new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 29,625,173 SF during the time that the Increment III development order is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-56.1. - Consumer price index adjustment. 
Fees shall be adjusted every 12 months beginning March 1, 2018 based upon the change in the Consumer Price Index ("CPI") - All Urban Consumers Not Seasonally Adjusted, U.S. city average for all items (1982-84=100) which for purposes of the formula below shall be referred to as "Annual CPI". 
The change shall be calculated as follows: 
(Annual CPI for Prior Calendar Year minus Annual CPI for Calendar Year Two Years Prior)/(Annual CPI for the Calendar Year Two Years Prior) = Change in CPI 
then 
(Change in CPI + 1) * (Fee Currently in Force) = (New Fee for Next 12 months). 
Notwithstanding the calculation above, if the "Change of CPI" for any 12-month period is greater than 0.10, then 0.10 shall replace the actual "Change in CPI" in the calculation for that 12-month period. Additionally, if the "Change in CPI" is less than 0.0, then 0.0 shall replace the actual "Change in CPI" in the calculation for that 12-month period. 
As an example, and for illustrative purposes only, to calculate the change on March 1, 2019 where the fee currently in force was $1.64 per square foot, 2018 Annual CPI was 251 and 2017 Annual CPI was 245; the calculation would be as follows: 
251-245= 6/245 = 0.0245 
then 
0.0245 + 1 = 1.245 * $1.64 = $2.04 per square foot fee between March 1, 2019 and February 29, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-57. - Procedure for calculation of downtown development supplemental fee. 
The DRI supplemental fee calculated by the processes as outlined above is collected prior to the issuance of a building permit. The sequencing for the collection of DRI fees depends on whether a project is built "by-right" under the Miami 21 Code or if the project requires a zoning permit, as defined herein. 
(a)  DRI Fees for projects that are approved with a zoning permit. For projects receiving zoning permits as defined herein, the payment of the DRI administration fee and the DRI master plan recovery fee is due at the time the zoning permit is granted. At the time these projects are presented for building permits, DRI fees for transportation mitigation shall be paid. 
(b)  DRI fees for projects that are approved "by-right." Projects that are built in the Downtown DRI "by-right" which do not require a zoning permits shall pay all DRI fees for at the time of building permit. Projects which are referred to the department of planning during a building permitting review may request a DRI review and may reserve DRI development credits by paying the DRI administration fee and DRI master plan recovery fee prior to obtaining for a building permit, when all DRI fees are due in full. 
Application for reservation of development credits for net new development within the Downtown DRI area is completed by submitting project plans to the director of planning or his/her designee for a DRI review. This submission will generate a fee schedule for the assessment of the associated DRI fees based on the project. Project modifications require new DRI review. Each review will generate a fee schedule assessing fees for net new development and credit for demolition, if applicable. 
(1)  Determine the applicable land use(s) based upon the applicant's intended use and the design and configuration of the space and, in the event that a proposed use is not included in one of the land use categories defined in section 13-53, apply the defined land use category most similar to the proposed use in terms of the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips, in consultation with the city's office of transportation. 
(2)  Calculate the gross square footage, number of dwelling units, number of hotel rooms, and number of seats in attractions/recreation facilities as appropriate for each land use. 
(3)  Multiply the appropriate units of each land use in the development by the appropriate downtown development supplemental fee coefficients. 
(4)  Upon written request of the applicant, review and adjust the amount of downtown development supplemental fee calculated, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-58. - Administration of downtown development supplemental fee. 
(a)  Collection of downtown development supplemental fee. Downtown development supplemental fees due pursuant to this article for administration fees and DRI/master plan recovery fees shall be collected by the planning and zoning department at the time of zoning permit or at any time prior to issuance of a building permit. Downtown development supplemental fees due pursuant to this article for transportation impacts shall be collected by the planning and zoning department at any time prior to issuance of a building permit (except as specified in section 13-55). 
(b)  Transfer of funds to finance department. Upon receipt of downtown development supplemental fees, the department of planning shall transfer such funds to the city finance department which shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate accounts. All such funds resulting from the collection of the supplemental fees shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account. 
(c)  Establishment of and maintenance of accounts. The city finance department shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each account into which the downtown development supplemental fees that are collected can be segregated by each of the three fee components. 
(d)  Maintenance of records. The city finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each account which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the downtown development orders, the administration fee and the DRI/master plan recovery fee. In connection with capital improvement projects, funds may be used for planning, design, construction, land acquisition, financing, financial and legal services, and administrative costs. 
(e)  Refund of downtown development supplemental fee. 
(1)  The current owner of property on which a downtown development supplemental fee for transportation mitigation and air quality has been paid may apply for a refund of such fee if: the city has failed to encumber or spend the collected fees by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years of the date of payment of the fee, or the building permit for which the transportation mitigation or air quality fee has been paid has been terminated or expired for non-commencement of construction; or the project for which a building permit has been issued has been altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the transportation mitigation or air quality fee due. Downtown development supplemental fees paid for administration and DRI/master plan recovery are not refundable. 
(2)  Only the current owner of property may petition for a refund. A petition for refund shall be filed within one year of any of the above-specified events giving rise to the right to claim a refund. 
(3)  The petition for refund shall be submitted to the city manager or his or her duly designated agent on a form provided by the city for such purpose. The petition shall contain a notarized affidavit that petitioner is the current owner of the property; a certified copy of latest tax records of Metropolitan Dade County showing the owner of the subject property; a copy of the dated receipt for payment of the fee issued by the city's planning, building and zoning department, and a statement of the basis upon which the refund is sought. 
(4)  Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the city manager or his or her duly designated agent must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request. The decision must include the reasons for the decision including, as may be appropriate, a determination of whether the collected fees have been encumbered or spent in accordance with the requirements of this article. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the city manager or his or her duly designated agent shall notify the city's finance director and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. 
(5)  Any money returned pursuant to this subsection shall be returned with interest at the rate of three percent per annum. 
(6)  Petitioner may appeal the determination of the city manager to the impact fee board of review subject to the time limitations and procedures for appeals to that board set forth in section 13-16 of the City Code. 
(f)  Annual review and modification. The city shall annually review downtown development supplemental fee ordinance procedures, assumptions, formulas, and fee assessments and make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result of: 
(1)  Development occurring in the prior year. 
(2)  Amendments to the development order. 
(3)  Changing needs for facilities and/or services. 
(4)  Inflation and other economic factors. 
(5)  Revised cost estimates for public improvements and/or services. 
(6)  Changes in the availability of other funding sources. 
(7)  Such other factors as may be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Sec. 13-59. - Bonding of capital improvement projects. 
The city may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in furtherance of the provision of downtown development supplemental fee-related projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other city revenues as may be allocated by the city commission. Fees paid pursuant to this article, however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for the purposes of the article and for financing, directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-60. - Appeal procedures; impact fee board of review. 
The downtown development supplemental fee ordinance hereby incorporates by reference the appeals board and procedure as set forth in sections 13-16, 13-17, 13-18, 13-19 and 13-20 of the City Code and hereby establishes their applicability for any appeals undertaken pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-61. - Effect of downtown development supplemental fee on planning, zoning, subdivision, and other regulations. 
This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, or other regulations of the city, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-62. - Downtown development supplemental fee as additional and supplemental requirement. 
The city downtown development supplemental fee is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution or duplication of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of the downtown development order, the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, and to be coordinated with the city's capital improvement program and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of public facility improvements and services in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for the same improvement(s) in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this article, provided, however, that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to Miami Dade County, state, and/or city regulations, for other public facilities in addition to the supplemental fee related improvements as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-63. - Conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances, Code sections, or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-64. - Severability. 
In the event that any portion or section of this article or the development orders for downtown Miami are determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this article or the development orders for downtown Miami, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05)  
Sec. 13-65. - Findings. 
The city commission (hereinafter "commission") hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  The real property which is the subject of this article, the project area, is legally described in as set forth in Exhibit E of Ordinance No. 13704. 
(2)  The DDA has filed a CADA with the city, the South Florida Regional Planning Council, and the state department of community affairs. 
(3)  The purpose of the CADA is to identify and assess regional impacts and to obtain approval for total allowable development in accordance with the general guidelines set forth in the development orders and the CADA. The city has recognized the project area as a single area of high intensity development and focused on the impacts that the total allowable development within the project area will have on land, water, transportation, environmental, community services, energy and other resources and systems of regional significance. The CADA seeks a single state DRI review process for overall phased development of the downtown area rather than requiring each individual DRI scale development within the downtown area to be reviewed separately other than for a major use special permit and as a means of accommodating the impacts of the non-DRI scale cumulative growth on the downtown area. 
(4)  Development within the project area is expected to continue to be accomplished over an extended period of time by a variety of developers, which may include the city. These developers may respond to market demand and technologies that can only be estimated in the CADA. The CADA and the DO are intended to serve as flexible guides for planned development of the project area rather than a precise blueprint for its development. Therefore, pursuant to F.S. § 380.06(22) (2017), the CADA seeks master development approval for three increments of development over a period of approximately 38 years and specific development approval for Increment I, II, and III. Subsequent incremental applications may need to be adjusted to more nearly serve the evolution of market demand and technologies. 
(5)  The project area contains a total of approximately 927 acres, including approximately 78 acres presently zoned and developed as city parks. The CADA has proposed a quantity of net new development within the project area for the land uses and phases defined herein as total allowable development. 
(6)  A comprehensive assessment of the probable impacts that will be generated by the total allowable development has been conducted by various city departments, as reflected in the CADA, and as reviewed by the South Florida Regional Planning Council staff. 
(7)  The impacts found in the development order are consistent with the report and recommendations of the South Florida Regional Planning Council, entitled "Development of Regional Impact Assessment for Downtown Miami," dated October 5, 1987, "Development of Regional Impact Assessment for Downtown Miami" dated July 1, 2002 and "Development of Regional Impact Report Downtown Miami Increment III" dated June 2016. 
(8)  Net new development imposes demands upon public facilities and services benefiting the region and requires additional regional infrastructure. 
(9)  To the extent that net new development places demands upon regional public facilities and services, those demands should be satisfied by developments actually creating the demands. 
(10)  The limiting factors determining the amount of potential development in the project area are the effects of net new development on transportation facilities. 
(11)  The downtown DRI and the downtown master plan are of benefit to all net new development in the project area and expenses incurred by the city and/or DDA in connection with the preparation and adoption of the downtown DRI/master plan, and future related studies, and for the enforcement of the development orders should be reimbursed to the city by the net new development benefiting therefrom. 
(12)  The total amount of the downtown development supplemental fee is determined by the cost of the three components of the fee: 
a.  Transportation mitigation fee; 
b.  Downtown DRI/master plan recovery fee; and 
c.  Administration fee. 
The most appropriate measure to distribute the proportionate share of the cost of the transportation mitigation fee shall be the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips for net new development in each land use category, as utilized in the CADA DRI/master plan recovery fees and administration fees are most appropriately allocated to all net new development at an equal rate for all land use categories. 
(13)  The downtown development supplemental fee is being imposed on all net new development in order to pay the costs of certain development order related requirements, as described above. Since the demand for such development order related requirements are uniquely created by the new development, the downtown development supplementary fee is equitable and does not impose an unfair burden on such development is in the best interest of the city and its residents. 
(Ord. No. 12678, § 2, 4-28-05; Ord. No. 13703, § 2, 10-26-17)  
Secs. 13-66—13-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOUTHEAST OVERTOWN/PARK WEST DEVELOPMENT SUPPLEMENTAL FEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13406, § 2, adopted September 26, 2013, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 13-61—13-73; Ord. No. 10465, § 1, adopted July 21, 1988, and Ord. No. 12745, § 2, adopted December 1, 2005.  The exhibits referred to in this article are not set out at length herein, but may be found in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Sec. 13-96. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Miami Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-97. - Intent. 
(a)  This article is intended to impose the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee as a supplemental fee on a new development within the Southeast Overtown/Park West project area, utilizing the defined terms in section 13-101 below. The Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee comprises four components including a transportation mitigation fee, an air quality fee, a DRI/master plan recovery fee and an administration fee. The Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee is payable prior to the time of building permit issuance or upon approval of certain permits, as provided for herein, in an amount based upon the appropriate units of land use, in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development in the project area as described in Exhibit 1, since the demand for the mitigation is uniquely attributable to such new development and net new development on an area-wide basis. 
(b)  This article shall be uniformly applicable to all new development and net new development within the project area. However, certain fees applicable to affordable housing, as defined herein, shall be borne by the city through the Southeast Overtown/Park West community redevelopment project, as provided in section 13-101 below. This fee shall not be uniformly applicable to any activity which is not classified as new development or net new development as defined herein or which has, on the effective date of the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI development orders, a valid building permit or currently effective DRI development order. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-98. - Findings. 
The city commission of Miami, Florida (hereinafter "commission") hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  The real property which is the subject of this article, the project area, is legally described in Exhibit 1. 
(2)  The city has filed a CADA with the city, the South Florida Regional Planning Council, and the state land planning agency. 
(3)  The purpose of the CADA is to identify and assess regional impacts and to obtain approval for total allowable development in accordance with the general guidelines set forth in the development orders and the CADA. The city has recognized the project area as a single area of high intensity development and focused on the impacts that the total allowable development within the project area will have on land, water, transportation, environmental, community services, energy and other resources and systems of regional significance. The CADA seeks a single state DRI review process for overall phased development of the project area rather than requiring each individual DRI scale development within the project area to be reviewed separately other than for a major use special permit or its functional equivalent, and as a means of accommodating the impacts of the non-DRI scale cumulative growth on the project area. 
(4)  Development within the project area is expected to continue to be accomplished over an extended period of time by a variety of developers, which may include the city. These developers may respond to market demand and technologies that can only be estimated in the CADA. The CADA and the DO are intended to serve as flexible guides for planned development of the project area rather than a precise blueprint for its development. Therefore, pursuant to F.S. § 380.06(b) (2011), the CADA seeks master development approval for three increments of development over a period of approximately 40 years and specific development approval for increment I, increment II, and increment III. Subsequent incremental applications may need to be adjusted to more nearly serve the evolution of market demand and technologies. 
(5)  The project area contains a total of approximately 209 acres. The CADA has proposed a quantity of net new development within the project area for the land uses and phases defined herein as total allowable development. 
(6)  A comprehensive assessment of the probable impacts that will be generated by the total allowable development has been conducted by various city departments, as reflected in the CADA, and as reviewed by the South Florida Regional Planning Council staff. 
(7)  The impacts found in the development order are consistent with the reports and recommendations of the South Florida Regional Planning Council, entitled "Development of Regional Impact Assessment for Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Area," dated January 4, 1988 for increment I of the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI; August 3, 1992 for increment II; and February 6, 2012 for increment III. 
(8)  Net new development imposes demands upon public facilities and services benefiting the region and requires additional regional infrastructure. 
(9)  To the extent that net new development places demands upon regional public facilities and services, those demands should be satisfied by developments actually creating the demands. 
(10)  The limiting factors determining the amount of potential development in the project area are the effects of net new development on transportation facilities and air quality. 
(11)  The Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI and the Southeast Overtown/Park West master plan are of benefit to all net new development in the project area, and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the preparation and adoption of the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI/master plan and for the enforcement of the development orders should be reimbursed to the city by the net new development benefiting therefrom. 
(12)  The total amount of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee is determined by the cost of the four components of the fee: 1) transportation mitigation fee; 2) air quality fee; 3) Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI/master plan recovery fee; and 4) administrative fee. The most appropriate measure to distribute the proportionate share of the cost of the transportation mitigation fee and the air quality fee shall be the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips for net new development in each land use category, as utilized in the CADA. DRI/master plan recovery fees and administration fees are not appropriately allocated to all net new development at an equal rate for all land use categories. 
(13)  The Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee is being imposed on all net new development in order to pay the costs of certain development order related requirements, as described above. Since the demand for such development order related requirements are uniquely created by the new development, the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplementary fee is equitable and does not impose an unfair burden on such development and is in the best interest of the city and its residents. 
(14)  The primary objectives of the Southeast Overtown/Park West community development plan are the removal of slum and blight and encouragement of affordable housing development. 
(15)  The city commission, via Resolution No. 87-619, has found that a housing emergency exists within the city. This condition continues to exist. Thus, the findings and conclusions of Resolution No. 87-619 are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-99. - Authority. 
The city commission is authorized to establish and adopt a Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee pursuant to the authority granted by the Florida Constitution, Article VII, Sections 1(f), 1(g) and 2(b), the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. Ch. 166 (2004); the City Charter, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (F.S. § 163.3161, amended by F.S. § 163.3177 in 1986), the Florida Impact Fee Act (F.S. § 163.31801), and the Southeast Overtown/Park West development of regional impact development order issued by Resolution Numbers 88-110, 88-111, 92-609, and 13- , as amended. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt such article pursuant to any other source of authority nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-100. - Imposition of fee. 
(a)  Except as may be provided in section 13-104, no building permits, major use special permits, or its functional equivalent, or other permit approving development, shall be issued for any new development as herein defined unless the applicant therefor has paid the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee imposed by and calculated pursuant to this article or payment of such fee as been borne by the city. 
(b)  Payment of required Southeast Overtown/Park West supplemental fees from governmental agencies or authorities, that do not have to obtain building permits from the city, shall be due prior to commencement of construction, including demolition. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended: 
ADA or application for development approval shall mean the original application for development approval for the Southeast Overtown/Park West community redevelopment project area filed by the city on February 6, 1987, pursuant to F.S. § 380.06 (200411), as amended by the increment II ADA filed in 1992 and the increment III ADA filed in 2011. 
Administrative fees shall mean a fee charged to all new development to pay for the city's administrative costs for enforcing the terms and conditions of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development orders, including but not limited to preparation of ordinances and procedures, review of permit applications, monitoring compliance with requirements, and enforcing violations; and which shall be a component of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Affordable housing shall mean housing for families and individuals with incomes under 120 percent of the median income in Miami-Dade County. 
Air quality fees shall mean a fee charged to all net new development to pay for the city's costs for air quality monitoring, modeling and mitigation measures as required in the increment I, increment II, and increment III development orders for Southeast Overtown/Park West, and which shall be a component of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Applicant shall mean individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons acting as coapplicants, any county or state agency, any other legal entity, or the authorized representative of any of the aforementioned, signing on application for a building permit. 
Building permit shall mean any permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to section 105 of the Florida Building Code. 
CADA or consolidated application for development approval shall mean the revised ADA prepared pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 380.06 (2011). 
Certificate of occupancy shall mean a permanent or temporary or partial certificate of occupancy issued, pursuant to the Florida Building Code. 
City shall mean the City of Miami, Florida. 
Class II special permit shall have the meaning given within city Ordinance Number 11000, as amended, the zoning ordinance for the city. 
Commission shall mean the city commission of Miami, Florida. 
Comprehensive plan shall mean the city's plan for future development adopted by city Ordinance Number 10544, and as may be amended and updated from time to time. 
Convention use shall mean meeting rooms, banquet halls, exhibition halls, auditoriums, and their auxiliary spaces intended for use by conventions, seminars, exhibitions, and the like; which shall exceed the minimum standard for ancillary facilities within the definition of hotel use. 
CRA shall mean the city Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Agency. 
DO or Southeast Overtown/Park West development order shall mean the master or increment I, increment II, or increment III development orders for the Southeast Overtown/Park West community redevelopment area as a development of regional impact, issued by the city by Resolution Numbers 88-110, 88-111, Resolution Number 92-609, and Resolution 13- , as amended. 
DRI shall mean development of regional impact. DRI/master plan recovery fee shall mean a fee charged to all new development to reimburse the city and the CRA for costs incurred in the DRI/master plan study and future related studies in accordance with the CADA and the Southeast Overtown/Park West development orders, and which shall be a component of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
DU or dwelling unit shall have the meaning given to "dwelling unit" in the zoning ordinance. 
Hotel use shall mean lodging or hotel uses as any as defined in the zoning ordinance; and may include meeting and banquet facilities and convenience goods and services for hotel guests, provided that the total of such ancillary facilities shall not exceed 15 percent of proposed hotel. 
MUSP or major use special permit shall mean a special permit issued by the city commission pursuant to Ordinance Number 11000, the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended. 
Net new development shall mean any construction or reconstruction which will result in a net increase, within any parcel of land, of residential dwelling units, hotel rooms, seats in attractions/recreation facilities or gross square footage for office, retail/service, convention, wholesale/industrial or institutional uses. Land uses to be removed by demolition of a building or structure may be credited against the proposed new land uses for purposes of calculating the net increase, if the planning director determines that there was a valid certificate of occupancy existing on the effective date of this development order for the land uses to be demolished. If a change of land use is proposed, the planning director may credit the prior land use against the proposed land use based upon equivalent impacts as measured by peak hour vehicle trip generation. Any activity which has, on the effective date of this development order a valid building permit or any currently effective development order shall not be included as net new development. The planning director may exclude from net new development any small development under 10,000 square feet in floor area, if he or she finds that such development would have no regional impact as measured by peak hour vehicle trips. 
Office use shall mean space for the conduct of the administrative functions of government or business and professional activities not including sales of merchandise of the premises, and not including personal services as defined herein under "retail/service use." 
Parcel of land shall mean, pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, and which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips means the average number of trips per hour during the afternoon peak period from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. generated by motor vehicles, excluding public transit vehicles, that have either an origin or a destination within the project area. 
Project area shall mean the area included within the legal description in Exhibit 1, including all property within the boundaries of the Southeast Overtown/Park West community redevelopment area, as designated in 1982 by city commission Resolution No. 82-755. 
Residential use shall mean any "dwelling units" as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Retail/service use shall mean space for the sale of merchandise, eating and drinking establishments, and personal services such as but not limited to hair salons, travel agencies, laundries, dry cleaners, bank tellers, photographers, shoe repair, tailoring, etc. 
Room shall have the meaning given to "lodging unit" in the zoning ordinance. 
SF, gross square feet, or gross square footage shall have the meaning given to "floor area" in the zoning ordinance. 
Site shall mean a legally described parcel of property capable of development pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee shall mean a fee charged to new development in the project area comprising components including a transportation mitigation fee, an air quality fee, an administration fee, and a DRI/master plan recovery fee which are assessable to new development according to the provisions of this article. 
Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee coefficient shall mean the charge per unit of land use as calculated for each component of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Total allowable development shall mean the quantity of net new development for which certificates of occupancy may be issued under the terms and conditions of the development order, as may be modified pursuant to F.S. § 380.06(19) (2011). 
Transportation mitigation fee shall mean a fee charged to all net new development to pay for improvements to mitigate for impacts on the regional transportation system in accordance with requirements of the CADA and the increment I, increment II, and increment III development orders for Southeast Overtown/Park West Miami; and which shall be a component of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Zoning ordinance shall mean Ordinance 13114 known as the Miami 21 Zoning Code, or a successor ordinance, the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-102. - Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee coefficients. 
(a)  The following shall be the coefficients, by land use, for each of the four components of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Table 1. Fee Coefficients—Increment II 
(per gross square footage of floor area) 
Land Use 	Transportation Mitigation 	Air Quality 	DRI/Master Plan Recovery 	DRI 
Administration 	Total Fee 
Coefficient 
Office 	$0.39 	$0.03 	$0.40 	$0.18 	$1.01 
Retail/service 	$1.78 	$0.14 	$0.40 	$0.18 	$2.51 
Residential 1 	$0.10 	$0.01 	$0.40 	$0.18 	$0.70 
Hotel 2 	$0.26 	$0.02 	$0.40 	$0.18 	$0.86 
Recreation 3 	$0.25 	$0.00 	$0.40 	$0.18 	$0.83 
 
Notes: 
1 These fee coefficients for residential use are based upon an assumed average of 1,000 square feet ("SF") per dwelling unit ("DU"), and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $102.00 per DU and an air quality fee of $11.00 per DU. 
2 These fee coefficients for hotel use are based upon an assumed average of 700 SF per hotel room, and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $182.70 per room and an air quality fee of $14.70 per room. 
3 These fee coefficients for attractions/recreation use are based upon an assumed average of 20 SF per seat and shall be adjusted for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $4.90 per seat and an air quality fee of $0.02 per seat. 
Table 2. Fee Coefficients—Increment III 
(per gross square footage of floor area) 
Land Use 	Transportation Mitigation 	Air Quality 	DRI/Master Plan Recovery 	DRI 
Administration 	Total Fee 
Coefficient 
Office 	$0.213 	$0.006 	$0.298 	$0.148 	$0.664 
Retail/service 	$0.510 	$0.014 	$0.298 	$0.148 	$0.969 
Residential 1 	$0.074 	$0.003 	$0.298 	$0.148 	$0.523 
Hotel 2 	$0.184 	$0.005 	$0.298 	$0.148 	$0.635 
Recreation 3 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 	$0.000 
Convention 	$0.886 	$0.024 	$0.298 	$0.148 	$1.355 
 
Notes: 
1 These fee coefficients for residential use are based upon an assumed average of 1,000 square feet ("SF") per dwelling unit ("DU"), and shall be calculated for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $74.00 per DU and an air quality fee of $3.00 per DU. 
2 These fee coefficients for hotel use are based upon an assumed average of 700 SF per hotel room, and shall be calculated for each development based upon a transportation mitigation fee of $128.80 per room and an air quality fee of $3.50 per room. 
3 Not applicable for Increment III. 
_____
(b)  The proportionate share for each unit of land use is calculated as follows: 
(1)  a.  Transportation mitigation. The increment II development order requires the city to widen Northwest First Avenue from Northwest Tenth Street to Northwest Fourteenth Street at an estimated proportionate share cost of $636,648.00 (in 2004 dollars), in order to mitigate the regional transportation impacts of total allowable development. The regional transportation mitigation estimated proportionate share cost of $636,648.00 (in 2004 dollars) is distributed among units of land use in total allowable development based upon the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips, as utilized in the CADA (see Exhibit 2 of Resolution 92-609). All development subject to increment II shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
b.  The increment III development order requires a transportation mitigation fee of $1,871,626.00 (in 2011 dollars) to mitigate the regional transportation impacts of total allowable development. This fee was derived from estimated improvements necessary to maintain the minimum level of service standard on regional roadways impacted by total allowable development (see Exhibit X). The regional transportation mitigation fee of $1,871,626.00 is distributed among units of land use categories for the total allowable development based upon the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips, as utilized in the CADA (see Exhibit X of Resolution 13- ). 
(2)  a.  Air quality. The increment II development order requires the city to perform monitoring and modeling for future carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations, and to take appropriate actions to prevent violations of the minimum standard for CO concentrations. The city estimates its total cost for compliance with the air quality requirements of the increment II development order to be $50,000.00 which is distributed among units of land use in total allowable development based upon the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips, as utilized in the CADA (see Exhibit 2 of Resolution 92-609). This cost shall be borne by the city, through the Southeast Overtown/Park West project, for fees attributable to applicants if such fee is generated by affordable housing development. All other applicants shall be subject to payment of said fee. All development subject to increment II shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
b.  The increment III development order requires the city to take appropriate actions to prevent violations of the minimum standard for CO concentrations. The city estimates its total cost for compliance with the air quality requirements of the increment III development order to be $50,000.00 which is distributed among units of land use in total allowable development based upon the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips, as utilized in the CADA (see Exhibit X of Resolution 13- ). The air quality fee may be used by the city for CO monitoring and other measures that improve air quality such as landscaping, open space, streetscape, transit, and pedestrian-oriented improvements. This cost shall be waived, for fees attributable to applicants if such fee is generated by affordable housing development certified by the city department of community development. All other applicants shall be subject to payment of said fee. All development subject to increment III shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
(3)  a.  DRI/master plan recovery. The total costs to the city for preparing the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI for increment II, increment III, the NOPC Applications, the SEOPW CRA master plans and related studies is estimated to be $1,187,300.00, which shall be distributed equally among all new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 2,941,828 SF during the time that the increment II development order is in effect. All development subject to increment II shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
b.  The updated total costs to the city for preparing the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI for increment III and the SEOPW CRA master plans and related studies is estimated to be $2,744,000.00, which shall be distributed equally among all new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 9,220,000 SF during the time that the increment III development order is in effect. All development subject to increment III shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
(4)  a.  Administration. The administrative cost to the city for enforcing the requirements of the development order is estimated to be $105,000.00 per year or a total of $525,000.00 during the five years that the increment II development order is projected to be in effect. These administrative costs shall be distributed equally among all new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 2,941,828 SF during the time that the increment II development order is in effect. This cost shall be, waived for fees attributable to applicants if such fee is generated by affordable housing development. All other applicants shall be subject to payment of said fee. All development subject to increment II shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
b.  The administrative cost to the city for enforcing the requirements of the development order is estimated to be $105,000.00 per year or a total of $1,365,000.00 during the 13 years that the increment III development order is projected to be in effect. These administrative costs shall be distributed equally among all new development on the basis of gross square footage of floor area. The total amount of new development is estimated to be 9,220,000 SF during the time that the increment III development order is in effect. This cost shall be borne by the city, through the Southeast Overtown/Park West project, for fees attributable to applicants if such fee is generated by affordable housing development. All other applicants shall be subject to payment of said fee. All development subject to increment III shall be subject to payment of said fee by applicants. 
(5)  Cost of living adjustments. 
a.  The coefficients in Table 1 above shall be adjusted annually on November 1st of each year with the first adjustment occurring on April 1st, 2006, by multiplying each coefficient in the table by the formula set forth in this paragraph (the "adjustment factor"). The adjustment factor shall be the lesser of: 
1.  The percentage increase in the annual Consumer Price Index of the prior calendar year as compared to the annual Consumer Price Index for 2004 (188.9); or 
2.  Seven percent per year compounded for each year after 2005, whichever is greater. The formula for the adjustment factor is as follows: 
Prior year's Consumer Price Index = adjustment factor 
Divided by 188.9 
b.  The coefficients in the Table 2 above shall be adjusted annually on November 1st of each year with the first adjustment occurring on May 1st, 2013, by multiplying each coefficient in the table by the formula set forth in this paragraph (the "adjustment factor"). The adjustment factor shall be the lesser of: 
1.  The percentage increase in the annual Consumer Price Index of the prior calendar year as compared to the annual Consumer Price Index for 2011 (170.0); or 
2.  Seven percent per year compounded for each year after 2011, whichever is greater. The formula for the adjustment factor is as follows: 
Prior year's Consumer Price Index = adjustment factor 
Divided by 170.0 
For these purposes, the consumer price index to be utilized shall be that published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, using the U.S. city average, all Urban Consumers (1982 - 1984 = 100) Not Seasonally Adjusted. In no event shall the adjustment factor for any year be less than one. In the event that the consumer price index referred to above is no longer published, then a comparable index which measures inflationary factors, and the corresponding decrease in the purchasing power of the U.S. Dollar, shall be selected by the city, and the adjustment factor shall be based upon such index. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-103. - Procedure for calculation of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
Upon receipt of approval of a building permit or MUSP for any net new development, the planning director shall determine the amount of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee due pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Determine whether the development is exempt by virtue of the conditions specified herein. 
(2)  Determine the applicable land use(s) based upon the applicant's intended use and the design and configuration of the space, and in the event that a proposed use is not included in one of the land use categories defined herein, apply the defined land use category most similar to the proposed use in terms of the average rate of generation of p.m. peak hour external motor vehicle trips. 
(3)  Calculate the gross square footage, number of dwelling units, and/or number of hotel rooms as appropriate for each land use. 
(4)  Multiply the appropriate units of each land use in the development by the appropriate Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee coefficients. 
(5)  Upon written request of the applicant, review and adjust the amount of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee calculated, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-104. - Administration of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
(a)  Collection of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fees due pursuant to this article for administration fees and DRI/master plan recovery fees shall be collected by the planning director after zoning approval and prior to the issuance of a building permit. Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fees due pursuant to this article for transportation impacts and air quality impacts shall be collected by the planning director at any time prior to issuance of a building permit (except as specified in section 13-100). Fees shall be paid in accordance with the applicable rate at the time of payment. 
(b)  Transfer of funds to finance department. Upon receipt of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fees, the planning director shall transfer such funds to the city finance department which shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate accounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account. 
(c)  Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The city finance department shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each such account, whereby Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fees collected can be segregated by each of the four fee components: transportation mitigation fees, air quality fees, DRI/master plan recovery fees, and administration fees. 
(d)  Maintenance of records. The city finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received; and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the Southeast Overtown/Park West development orders, administration fee and the DRI/master plan recovery fee. In connection with capital improvement projects, funds may be used for planning, design, construction, land acquisition, financing, financial and legal services, and administrative costs. 
(e)  Refund of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee. 
(1)  The current owner of a property on which a Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee for transportation mitigation and air quality has been paid may apply for a refund of such fee if: The city has failed to encumber or spend the collected fees by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years of the date of payment of the fee; or the building permit for which the transportation mitigation or air quality fee has been paid, has been terminated or expired for noncommencement of construction; or the project for which a building permit has been issued has been altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the transportation mitigation or air quality fee due. Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fees paid for administration and DRI/master plan recovery are not refundable. 
(2)  Only a current owner of property may petition for a refund. A petition for refund shall be filed within one year of any of the above-specified events giving rise to the right to claim a refund. 
(3)  The petition for refund shall be submitted to the city manager or his duly designated agent on a form provided by the city for such purpose. The petition shall contain: a notarized affidavit that petitioner is the current owner the property; a certified copy of latest tax records of Miami-Dade County showing the owner of the subject property; a copy of the dated receipt for payment of the fee issued by the city's planning director, and a statement of the basis upon which the refund is sought. 
(4)  Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the city manager or his duly designated agent must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request. The decision must include the reasons for the decision including, as may be appropriate, a determination of whether the collected fees have been encumbered or spent in accordance with the requirements of this article. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the city manager or his duly designated agent shall notify the city's finance director and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. 
(5)  Any money returned pursuant to this subsection shall be returned with interest at the rate of three percent per annum. 
(6)  Petitioner may appeal the determination of the city manager to the impact fee board of review subject to the time limitations and procedures for appeals to that board set forth in section 13-16 of the City Code. 
(f)  Annual review and modification. The city shall, through the SEOPW CRA at the CRA's expense, annually review Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee ordinance procedures, assumptions, formulas, and fee assessments and make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result of: 
(1)  Development occurring in the prior year. 
(2)  Amendments to the development order. 
(3)  Changing needs for facilities and/or services. 
(4)  Inflation and other economic factors. 
(5)  Revised cost estimates for public improvements and/or services. 
(6)  Changes in the availability of other funding sources. 
(7)  Such other factors as may be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-105. - Bonding of capital improvement projects. 
The city may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in furtherance of the provision of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee-related projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other city revenues as may be allocated by the city commission. Fees paid pursuant to this article, however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for the purposes of the article and for financing, directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of indebtedness to undertake projects to mitigate for transportation and air quality impacts of the DRI. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-106. - Appeal procedures; impact fee board of review. 
The Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee ordinance hereby incorporates by reference the appeals board and procedure as set forth in sections 13-16, 13-17, 13-18, 13-19 and 13-20 of the City Code and hereby establishes their applicability for any appeals undertaken pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-107. - Effect of Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee on planning, zoning, subdivision, and other regulations. 
This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, or other regulations of the city, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 13-108. - Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee as additional and supplemental requirement. 
The City of Miami Southeast Overtown/Park West development supplemental fee is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution or duplication of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of the Southeast Overtown/Park West development order, the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, and to be coordinated with the city's capital improvement program and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of public facility improvements and services in conjunction with the development of land, while also encouraging the development of affordable housing. In no event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for the same improvement(s) in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this article; provided, however, that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to Miami-Dade County, state, and/or city regulations, for other public facilities in addition to the supplemental fee related improvements as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 2, 9-26-13)  
Secs. 13-109—13-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INTERIM PROPRIETARY AND GENERAL SERVICES FEE 
 
Sec. 13-136. - Fee established. 
A fee to be known as the "interim proprietary and general services fee" is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-101)  
Sec. 13-137. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is recognized that the costs of providing certain city services exceed the fees charged for said services and that those costs are borne in large part through ad valorem taxation. Those services which the city provides include, but are not limited to police protection, fire protection, parks and recreational facilities and administrative services. 
(b)  It is further recognized that, from the time that a new building or structure is completed and occupied until the improvements are reflected on the tax roll as of the ensuing January 1, services are provided for which no part of the cost of said services is compensated. The purpose of the interim proprietary and general services fees, therefore, is to defray the cost to the city in providing city services to newly improved property prior to the imposition of ad valorem taxes on such improved property. The fee is not in any manner, directly or indirectly, intended as an ad valorem tax, nor is the amount of the fee established herein related in any way to the valuation of the property receiving said services. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-102)  
Sec. 13-138. - Fee levied for services to certain properties. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an interim proprietary and general services fee which shall apply to those properties for which a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion is issued, either permanent or temporary, for full or partial use of the premises, and which shall be payable on the date upon which such certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion is issued until the ensuing January 1. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an interim proprietary and general services fee which shall apply to those properties for which a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion is issued, either permanent or temporary, for full or partial use of the premises, and which shall be payable on the date upon which such certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion is issued until the ensuing January 1, or until such time as the improvement necessitating said certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion is assessed by the Miami-Dade County property appraiser and extended on the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 10705, § 1, 2-7-90; Code 1980, § 13-103; Ord. No. 11754, § 1, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 13-139. - When fee paid. 
The interim proprietary and general services fee shall be paid upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, either permanent or temporary, or a certificate of completion. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued until such time as the interim proprietary and general services fee has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-104; Ord. No. 11754, § 1, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 13-140. - Charges. 
For the purpose of this section, a "unit" shall be defined as a single-family residence; each dwelling unit of a townhouse, duplex or multifamily dwelling; a single-tenant industrial space; a retail store or a single-tenant space in an office or commercial building; or a warehouse bay, except those warehouse facilities subdivided and used primarily as leased storage units, which shall be considered one unit per structure. The term shall include additions to units, such as additional rooms, but not maintenance, pools, fences, or remodeling which does not result in a net increase in square footage, for which no fee shall be required. The fee shall be $0.03 per square foot per month. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 10705, § 1, 2-7-90; Code 1980, § 13-105)  
Sec. 13-141. - Lien provisions. 
All such fees becoming due and payable after October 1, 1989, shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as, special assessment liens against real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of city and county ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, and claims in, to or against the real property containing the building, structure or dwelling. Such fees shall become delinquent if not paid within 60 days after the due date. All delinquent fees shall bear an interest charge of one percent per month, on any or all of the outstanding balance of such fees due, and if not fully paid with all accrued interest by the due date of the next interim proprietary and general service fee payment, will continue to accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month. Unpaid and delinquent fees, together with accrued interest, shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved. Such special assessment liens for interim proprietary and general service fees may be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85 or, in alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions of F.S. ch. 173 or the collections and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by other methods authorized by law. The owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and abstracting and related lien expenses imposed by the virtue of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-106)  
Sec. 13-142. - Exemptions. 
The interim proprietary and general service fee shall not be levied upon: 
(1)  Properties requiring a certificate of occupancy solely for change of use of said property. 
(2)  Any property which is used solely for tax exempt purposes. 
(3)  Any property owned by governmental units and used for governmental purpose, or governmentally owned property which is leased to an organization which uses the property solely for tax exempt purposes. 
(4)  Any housing development which is certified by the city's department of development and housing conservation as low- and/or moderate-income housing development, or affordable housing (low and/or moderate income) which is publicly sponsored. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 10705, § 1, 2-7-90; Code 1980, § 13-107)  
Sec. 13-143. - Revisions. 
The budget department with the approval of the city manager shall revise said charges for services to reasonably cover the cost of providing such services. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-108)  
Sec. 13-144. - Collection and deposit. 
All money paid for such services shall be collected by the director of planning, building and zoning department as a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion and shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 10601, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 13-109; Ord. No. 11754, § 1, 2-9-99)  
Chapter 14 - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Development impact fees, ch. 13; Overtown redevelopment trust fund, § 18-261 et seq. 
Law review reference— Note on constitutional urban redevelopment, 13 Fla. L. Rev. 344. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DISTRICT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Authority: The downtown development authority, the body corporate hereby created by this article, known as the downtown development authority board of the city. 
Board: The governing body of the authority selected as herein provided. 
Central business district: The area in the city to which this article primarily relates, zoned and used principally for business. 
Director: The chief executive officer of the authority selected by the board as herein provided. 
Downtown: A specifically defined area or zone of the city in the central business district, established by the city. 
Governing body: The commission of the city. 
Planning board: The department or agency of the city, by whatever name such department or agency may be known, which is chiefly responsible for community planning. 
Public facility: Any street, park, parking lot, playground, right-of-way, structure, waterway, bridge, lake, pond, canal, utility line or pipe, building, including access routes to any of the foregoing designed and dedicated to use by the public generally, or used by any public agency with or without charge, whether or not the same is revenue producing. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1; Code 1980, § 14-16)  
Sec. 14-27. - Boundaries designated. 
The downtown district described as follows shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the downtown development authority: 
Begin at the intersection of the centerline of N.W. Fifth Street and N.W. Third Avenue (east side of N-S Expressway (I-95), thence run southerly along the centerline of N.W. Third Avenue and the easterly side of N-S Expressway to the centerline of West Flagler Street; thence westerly along the centerline of said West Flagler Street to the centerline of the Miami River; thence meandering southeasterly along the centerline of said Miami River to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Metro Rapid Transit right-of-way (formerly Florida East Coast (FEC) Railroad right-of-way) said right-of-way line being 50 feet easterly of and parallel with the centerline of said Metro Rapid Transit right-of-way; thence run southerly and southwesterly along said easterly right-of-way line of Metro Rapid Transit to the intersection with the centerline of S.W. 15th Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of 15th Road to a point of intersection with the southerly prolongation of the westerly line of Costa Bella Development Subdivision (107-14); thence northeasterly, northwesterly and northeasterly along said westerly line of Costa Bella to the intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of S.E. 14th Lane; thence southeasterly, northeasterly, northerly, and northwesterly along said southerly and easterly right-of-way line of S.E. 14th Lane and S.E. 14th Terrace to the intersection with the northwesterly property line of lot 31, block 2 of amended plat of Point View as recorded in plat book 2 at page 93 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly line of said lot 31, to the northeasterly side of the existing ten-foot alley in block 2 of said Point View; thence southeasterly along the northeasterly side of said ten-foot alley to the intersection with the property line between lots 4 and 5 of said block 2 of Point View; thence northeasterly along said line of lots 4 and 5 and its prolongation thereof to the centerline of S.E. 14th Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline of S.E. 14th Street to a point of intersection with the existing bulkhead and shoreline of Biscayne Bay; thence meandering northerly along the existing bulkhead and shoreline of Biscayne Bay to a point of intersection with the southerly boundary of Claughton Island Bridge; thence easterly along the said southerly right-of-way line of Claughton Island Bridge to the intersection with the westerly bulkhead line of Claughton Island, said bulkhead line being part of the Metropolitan Dade County bulkhead line as recorded in plat book 73 at page 18 of the public records; thence southerly, easterly, northerly and westerly, following said existing bulkhead and its westerly prolongation thereof around the island to the intersection with the mainland on the easterly shoreline of Biscayne Bay; thence meandering in a northwesterly and westerly direction along the shoreline of Biscayne Bay and the Miami River to the intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Brickell Avenue Bridge (S.E. Second Avenue); thence north along said bridge to the existing bulkhead on the northerly shoreline of the Miami River; said bulkhead line also being the southerly boundary of the Dupont Plaza Center and Miami Center Joint Venture property; thence northeasterly along the southerly boundary of Dupont Plaza Center and Miami Center Joint Venture property to a point of intersection with the easterly property line of Chopin Associates and Miami Center Limited Partnership; said property line being along the shoreline of Biscayne Bay; thence northerly along said easterly property line of Chopin Associates and Miami Center Limited Partnership property along Biscayne Bay to the southerly property line of Bayfront Park; thence continuing northerly, northeasterly and northwesterly along the bulkhead line of Bayfront Park and the Bayfront Park Miamarina to a point of intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of State Road A-1-A (Douglas Macarthur Causeway); thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way of said Douglas Macarthur Causeway to its intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of the Intercoastal Waterway, said point also being the westerly line of the submerged parcel of land of the NW quadrant of Watson Island as shown on the boundary survey of NW quadrant upland and submerged parcel (City of Miami miscellaneous file 61-398); thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of said Intercoastal Waterway to a point of intersection of the turning basin limit with the northerly line of the Miami main ship channel, said point also being approximately 500 feet west of the westerly bulkhead line of Watson Island and 1200 feet southerly of the south right-of-way line of Douglas Macarthur Causeway, as per O.R.B. 2454, pages 77-79; thence northeasterly, southeasterly and northeasterly along the southeasterly line of said NW quadrant of Watson Island to the most easterly corner of said NW quadrant of Watson Island, said corner being on the southwesterly right-of-way line of Douglas Macarthur Causeway; thence northwesterly and westerly along the said right-of-way line to the northwest corner of said NW quadrant of Watson Island; thence westerly along the southerly right-of-way line of the state road A-1-A (Douglas Macarthur Causeway) to the bulkhead line of Biscayne Bay; thence northerly along the bulkhead line of Biscayne Bay to a point of intersection with the centerline of N.E. 17th Street extended easterly; thence westerly along the centerline of N.E. 17th Street and its extension thereof to a point of intersection with the centerline of North Bayshore Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of North Bayshore Drive to its intersection with the centerline of N.E. 17th Terrace; thence northwesterly along the centerline of N.E. 17 th Terrace to its intersection with the southwesterly extension of the northwesterly line of lot 2 of block 1 of Seaport as recorded in plat book 149 at 79 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly line of said lot 2, and its said southwesterly extension thereof, to the southwesterly corner of lot 1 of block 1 of said Seaport (149-79); thence southeasterly and easterly along the southerly line of said lot 1 and its easterly extension to its intersection with the centerline of North Bayshore Drive; thence northeasterly along the centerline of North Bayshore Drive to its intersection with the southeasterly extension of the northerly line of said lot 1 of block 1 of said Seaport (149-79); thence northwesterly along the northerly line of said lot 1, and its said southeasterly extension thereof, to the northwesterly corner of said lot 1; thence northwesterly across a 10-foot-wide alley to the northeasterly corner of lot 6 of block 8 of Miramar amended as recorded in plat book 5 at page 4 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence northwesterly along the northerly line of said lot 6 and its northwesterly extension to its intersection with the centerline of Sevilla Street (N.E. 4 th Avenue) of said Miramar amended (5-4); thence southwesterly along the centerline of said Sevilla Street (N.E. 4 th Avenue) to its intersection with the centerline of Vedado Street (N.E. 4 th Avenue) of said Miramar amended (5-4); thence northerly along the centerline of N.E. 4 th Avenue (Vedado Street); thence northerly along the centerline of N.E. Fourth Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of N.E. 19th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of N.E. 19th Street to a point of intersection with southerly extension of the easterly lot line of lot 4 of block 1 of Miramar amended as recorded in plat book 5 at page 4 of the public records of Dade County, Florida, thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 4 and its extension thereof to the southerly lot line of lot 8 of Coral Park as recorded in plat book 2 at page 66 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence easterly along the southerly lot line of lot 8 to the southeast corner of said lot 8; thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 8 to the southerly right-of-way line of N.E. 20th Street; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of N.E. 20th Street to the southerly extension of the easterly lot line of lot 7 of said Coral Park (2-66); thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 7 and its extension thereof to the northeast corner of lot 7; thence westerly along the northerly lot line of lot 7 to a point of intersection with the southerly extension of the easterly lot line of lot 7 of block 4 of Bayside Park amended as recorded in plat book 2 at page 40 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 7 and its extension thereof across a 15-foot-wide alley to the northeast corner of lot 7; thence continuing northerly across the right-of-way of N.E. 20th Terrace to the southeast corner of lot 7 of block 1 of Bayside Park amended (2-40); thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 7 to the northeast corner of said lot 7; thence across a 15-foot-wide alley to the southeast corner of lot 5 block 3 of Bayonne Subdivision as recorded in plat book 2 at page 35 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence northerly along the easterly lot line of lot 5, and the northerly extension of its easterly lot line thereof, to the centerline of N.E. 21st Street; thence easterly along the centerline of N.E. 21st Street to a point of intersection with the southerly extension of the easterly lot line of lot 3 of block 1 of Bayonne Subdivision (2-35); thence northerly along the easterly lot line and its extension thereof, to the southerly lot line of tract A of Caruso Subdivision as recorded in plat book 79 at page 23 of the public records of Dade County, Florida; thence easterly along the southerly tract line of tract A to the southerly extension of the easterly right-of-way line of N.E. Fourth Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly right-of-way line of N.E. Fourth Avenue and its extension thereof to the centerline of N.E. 24th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of N.E. 24th Street to the centerline of N.E. Second Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of N.E. Second Avenue to the centerline of N.E. 17th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of N.E. 17th Street and N.W. 17th Street to the easterly right-of-way line of the FEC Railroad; thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of the FEC Railroad to the centerline of N.W. Fifth Street thence westerly along the centerline of N.W. Fifth Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 12307, §§ 2, 3, 12-12-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12307, §§ 2, 3, adopted December 12, 2002, repealed and reenacted § 14-27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 14-27 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, § 13-2; Ord. No. 9650, § 1, adopted July 8, 1983; Ord. No. 9835, § 1, adopted May 24, 1984; Ord. No. 10575, § 1, adopted April 27, 1989, and the Code of 1980, § 14-17.  
Sec. 14-28. - Property subject to ad valorem taxes for payment of city's general obligation debts, etc. 
All real property located within the central business district shall be subject to ad valorem taxes to pay the principal and interest on all existing general obligation debts of the city and any future debts which may be authorized by law. 
(Code 1967, § 13-3; Code 1980, § 14-18)  
Sec. 14-29. - Powers of city cumulative. 
All powers conferred upon the city by this article are and shall be supplemental and in addition to those conferred by any other general or special law and shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes hereof. 
(Code 1967, § 13-4; Code 1980, § 14-19)  
Secs. 14-30—14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Downtown development authority created. 
Pursuant to Laws of Fla., ch. 65-1090, there is hereby created the downtown development authority of the city, which authority shall be a body corporate with the power to sue and be sued in all the courts of the state and shall have its own corporate seal. 
(Code 1967, § 13-5; Code 1980, § 14-25) 
State Law reference— Act authorizing creation of downtown development authorities in certain cities, Laws of Fla., ch. 65-1090, set forth in pt. I, subpt. C, art. I of this volume.  
Sec. 14-52. - Downtown development authority board—Composition; appointment and terms of office of members and executive board; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The affairs of the authority shall be under the direct supervision and control of a board consisting of 15 members, appointed, and confirmed, by the city commission in the manner indicated in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The board shall be constituted by 15 members as follows: 
(1)  The city commission, at large, shall appoint one of its members to be the chairperson of the board and the 15th member thereof. The chairperson of the authority shall have the power to appoint the chairperson(s) to the various committees which the authority shall have the power to establish from time to time. 
(2)  One member may be appointed by the board of county commissioners of Dade County and submitted to the city commission for confirmation. 
(3)  One member may be appointed by the cabinet of the state and submitted to the city commission [for] confirmation. 
(4)  The remaining 12 members shall be appointed by the then current board of directors of the authority and submitted to the city commission for confirmation. At least eight of the 12 appointees must be property owners, as provided in section 14-53. The board shall include at least one member from each sub-district created by the authority from time to time. A proposed member shall not be a member of the board of directors of the authority until confirmed by the city commission. In the event that an appointee is rejected by the city commission, then the board shall appoint a successor(s) until all 12 seats are filled by appointees who are confirmed by the city commission. 
(5)  In the event the city commission does not reject a proposed member appointed by the board of county commissioners or by the cabinet of the state within the next two meetings of the city commission taking place after the date the city commission is notified of such appointment, then said appointee shall be deemed confirmed by the city commission. If, however, any such appointee is rejected by the city commission within the aforementioned period, then the board of county commissioners and/or the cabinet of the state shall have a period of ten days, after being notified of the rejection, in which to appoint a replacement, who shall be again subject to confirmation by the city commission. In the event that the appointee is, again, rejected by the city commission, then the board of directors of the authority shall have the right to fill the vacant position(s) in the manner provided in subsection (6). 
(6)  In the event that the board of county commissioners or the cabinet of the state fails to appoint a member within 30 days from the date that the nomination is requested by the board of the authority, or within ten days after being notified of the rejection of a nominee, then the board may appoint proposed members(s) for said positions. The proposed members for the county and state seats shall be individuals who, in the opinion of the board, have the necessary qualifications and credentials to represent the board of county commissioners and/or the cabinet of the state. The appointee(s) shall be submitted to the city commission for confirmation, and shall be deemed confirmed unless the appointment is rejected by the city commission within the next two meetings of the city commission taking place after the date the city commission is notified of said appointment. In the event of a rejection, the board shall have the right to continue to submit the name of appointee(s) until confirmation by the city commission. 
(c)  Members shall serve terms of four years expiring on August 31 of the fourth year of their term. Members shall serve a maximum of eight consecutive years, provided that upon the unanimous vote of the board, the city commission may, by unanimous vote, extend the term of a member for one additional period of four years. Notwithstanding the foregoing, members who, as of the effective date of this section, have served on the board for a period in excess of eight years shall be permitted to finish their term and may serve for one additional period of four years upon the unanimous vote of the board and the city commission. Members shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and confirmed. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term only. 
(d)  Quorum shall consist of five members. Rules of procedure of the board may require up to nine members to be present in person or by telephone to take board action. 
(Code 1967, § 13-6; Ord. No. 9067, § 1, 2-12-80; Ord. No. 9071, § 1, 2-28-80; Ord. No. 9705, § 1, 10-25-83; Ord. No. 9869, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 10424, § 1, 4-14-88; Ord. No. 10534, § 1, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 10985, § 1, 5-14-92; Ord. No. 11043, § 1, 3-11-93; Ord. No. 11064, § 1, 5-27-93; Ord. No. 11130, § 10, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11151, § 1, 5-23-94; Code 1980, § 14-26; Ord. No. 11373, § 6, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 11538, § 3, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 11564, § 7, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 11692, § 2, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 11734, § 2, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 12519, § 3, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07)  
Sec. 14-53. - Same—Qualifications of members. 
(a)  Except for the seats to be filled by the city commission, the board of county commissioners, or the cabinet of the state, all members of the board shall (1) reside; or (2) work; or (3) own (or be the designated representative of the owner of) a business; or (4) own (or be the designated representative of the owner of) real property in the downtown district, as described in section 14-27 of this article II. For purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to "own real property" where the person is the owner of the fee simple title, or owns the leasehold interest on the property under a lease having an original term of at least 30 years. All members of the board shall be individuals of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability and acumen. No officer or employee of the city, other than one member of the city commission, shall be eligible for appointment to the board. 
(b)  Before assuming the duties of the office, each appointed member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the oath of office required of officials of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 13-7; Ord. No. 10714, § 1, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 10985, § 1, 5-14-92; Ord. No. 11189, § 2, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 14-27; Ord. No. 11373, § 6, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 11538, § 3, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 11692, § 2, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 14-54. - Same—Meetings; rules and regulations; compensation of members. 
The board shall adopt and promulgate rules governing its procedures subject to approval by the city commission and shall hold regular meetings no less often than once each month, except for any month in which the city commission is not in session. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules of the board. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. Each member of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1967, § 13-8; Code 1980, § 14-28; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07)  
Sec. 14-55. - Same—Removal of members. 
Notwithstanding anything in the Code to the contrary, by resolution specifying facts sufficient to advise a board member as to the basis for his or her removal and after reasonable notice to the board member and an opportunity for the member to be heard, the city commission or the board of directors, may remove a board member: 
(1)  For cause; 
(2)  Upon the occurrence of an event hat causes the member to cease to meet their qualification criteria set forth in section 14-53; or 
(3)  As otherwise provided by law. 
For purposes of this section, being absent from three consecutive regular board meetings or from four regular board meetings during a calendar year shall constitute good cause for removal. 
(Code 1967, § 13-9; Ord. No. 9363, § 1, 1-14-82; Ord. No. 11130, § 10, 3-24-94; Code 1980, § 14-29; Ord. No. 11538, § 3, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07)  
Sec. 14-56. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board, subject to the provisions of this article, and subject to other applicable provisions of law, shall have all powers customarily vested in the board of directors of a corporation for profit. It shall exercise supervisory control over the activities of the executive director and the staff of the downtown development authority in carrying out the functions authorized by this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the board, and it shall have the power, to do the following: 
(1)  Appoint an executive director; prescribe his/her duties; and fix his/her compensation, which shall be paid from funds available to the authority. The staff members shall be employed by the executive director, and shall have no civil service rights or privileges. 
(2)  Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the central business district of the city. 
(3)  Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the central business district. 
(4)  Plan and propose, within the downtown area, public improvements of all kinds, including renovation, repair, remodeling, reconstruction or other changes in existing buildings which may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of any such plan which in the opinion of the board will aid in the economic growth of the downtown area. 
(5)  To implement as provided in this article any plan of development in the downtown area as shall be necessary to carry out its functions, except that when funds are required the approval of the city commission is required. 
(6)  In cooperation with the planning advisory board and zoning board of the city and the planning department of the city, develop long range plans designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the central business district, and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to implement such plans to the fullest extent possible. 
(7)  Retain and fix the compensation of legal counsel to advise the board in the proper performance of its duties. The general counsel of the downtown development authority as authorized in this article shall be a practicing attorney at law admitted to the practice of law in the state. He/she shall represent the authority in all suits or actions brought by or against the authority involving the jurisdiction, power, duties, functions or activities of the authority, or of the city, under the terms of this article. 
(8)  To make and enter into all contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties. 
(9)  Borrow money on a short-term basis to pay expenses of operation following the assessment and levy and prior to collection of the tax herein authorized, and to issue evidences of indebtedness, such loans to be signed by the chairperson and the secretary of the authority. Prior to the issuance of evidence of indebtedness for such loans, the board shall first present the plan and need therefor and the commission of the city must approve such evidence of indebtedness by an appropriate resolution. The rate of interest to be paid by the authority on any such debt shall be the lowest rate of interest available not to exceed six percent per annum. The authority shall hold the city harmless with respect to any debt created hereunder. 
(Code 1967, § 13-10; Ord. No. 8665, § 1, 6-21-77; Code 1980, § 14-30; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 14-57. - Same—Additional powers and duties. 
In addition and supplemental to the powers provided in section 14-56, the authority acting through its board, subject to the approval of the commission of the city as hereinafter set forth, shall have the right, power and authority to: 
(1)  Acquire by the exercise of the power of eminent domain any real property which it may deem necessary for its purposes under this article after the adoption by it of a resolution declaring that the acquisition of the real property described therein is necessary for such purposes, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. The authority may exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in F.S. chs. 73 and 74. Property already devoted to a public use may be acquired in like manner, provided that no real property belonging to the city, the county, the state or any political subdivision thereof may be acquired without its consent. 
(2)  Acquire by purchase or otherwise on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution, own, convey or otherwise dispose of, lease as lessor or lessee any land and any other property, real or personal, or any rights or interests therein, which it may determine is reasonably necessary for any project (hereafter defined) or purpose of this article; and to grant or acquire licenses, easements and options with respect thereto. 
(3)  Improve land, construct, reconstruct, equip, improve, maintain, repair and operate office buildings and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto, within the boundaries of the authority for the housing in whole or in part of federal, state, county or municipal governmental entities or any agencies thereof or any other person or corporation or any combination of the foregoing (each such office building being herein called a "project"), subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the mayor and commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. 
(4)  Fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any project or any part thereof or any facilities furnished thereby, or property under its control and to pledge such revenue to the payment of revenue bonds issued by it, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the mayor and commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. 
(5)  Lease as lessor any project, projects or property under its control or any part thereof and charge rentals for the use thereof sufficient with any other available revenues to pay the principal of and the interest on the revenue bonds issued to pay the cost of any such project or projects, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the mayor and commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. 
(6)  Accept grants and donations of any type of property, labor, or other thing of value from any public or private source. 
(7)  Receive the proceeds of the tax referred to in this article, subject to the commission of the city approving the millage assessment as provided therein. 
(8)  Receive the revenues from any property, project or facility owned, leased, licensed, or operated by it or under its control, subject to the limitations imposed upon it by trusts or other agreements validly entered into by it. 
(9)  Cooperate and enter into agreements with any governmental agency or other public body, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. 
(10)  Make or receive from the municipality or the county in which the authority is located conveyances, leasehold interests, grants, contributions, loans and other rights and privileges, subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. 
(11)  Subject to the need and plan therefor being first presented to the commission of the city and its approval evidenced by the adoption of an appropriate resolution approving such plan, issue, negotiate and sell, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the laws of the state, except as otherwise herein provided, revenue bonds of the authority, payable solely from revenues, to pay all or any part of the cost of any project, projects or purpose of this article upon such terms and conditions, manner and form, and having such details, conditions and provisions as shall be determined by resolution of the authority not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, and to secure such revenue bonds by a trust agreement by and between the authority and a bank or trust company having trust company powers within or without the state, provided that any such revenue bonds shall mature at such time or times not later than 40 years from their date and shall bear interest at a rate or rates not exceeding six percent per annum; to take all steps deemed by it necessary or expedient for efficient preparation and marketing of the revenue bonds at public sale upon ten days' published notice in the municipality where the authority is located or with the approval of the commission of the city at private sale, at the best price obtainable, including the entry into binding agreements with corporate trustees, underwriters, and the holders of the revenue bonds, and the employment and payment, as a necessary expense of issuance, for the services of consultants on valuations, costs and feasibility of undertaking, revenues to be anticipated and other financial matters, architecture, engineering, legal matters, accounting matters, and any other fields in which expert advice may be needed to effectuate advantageous issuance and marketing; and such bonds shall be governed by the following conditions: 
a.  Any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be a debt of the city, the county in which it is located, or the state, or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city, county or state; but such bonds shall be payable solely from the revenues pledged for their payment as authorized herein. The city establishing such authority, the county in which it is located, and the state are not directly or indirectly obligated to pay the principal of or the interest on the bonds, and the faith and credit of the city is not pledged to the payment of such principal or interest; and all such bonds shall contain this statement on their face. The issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this section shall not, directly or indirectly or contingently, obligate the city, county or state to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor, or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
b.  All revenue bonds issued pursuant hereto shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes. 
(12)  Exercise all powers incidental to the effective and expedient exercise of the foregoing powers to the extent not in conflict herewith or inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1967, § 13-10.1; Code 1980, § 14-31; Ord. No. 11564, § 7, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 14-58. - Employees generally. 
(a)  The board shall employ and fix the compensation, subject to the approval of the city commission, of the executive director of the board, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The executive director shall be a person of good moral character and possessed of a reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability. No member of the board shall be eligible to hold the position of executive director. Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, the executive director shall take and subscribe to the oath and furnish bond as required of members of the board. He/she shall be the chief executive officer of the downtown development authority and shall devote his/her entire time and attention to the duties of his/her office. He/she shall not, while serving as executive director, engage in any other business or profession. Subject to the approval of the board, and direction by it when necessary, he/she shall have general supervision over and be responsible for the preparation of plans and the performance of the functions of the authority in the manner authorized in this article. He/she shall attend all meetings of the board and shall render to the board, the mayor and to the city commission, a monthly report covering the activities and financial condition of the authority. In the absence or disability of the executive director, the board may designate a qualified person to perform the duties of the office as acting executive director. The executive director shall furnish the board with such information or reports governing the operation of the authority as the board may from time to time require. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the board, the executive director shall employ and fix the compensation of: 
(1)  A treasurer, who shall keep the financial records of the authority and who, together with the executive director, shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to him/her by the board. At the discretion of the board, the functions of the treasurer may be performed by an outside professional retained and approved by the board for these purposes. 
(2)  A secretary, who shall maintain custody of the official seal and of all records, books, documents or other papers not required to be maintained by the treasurer. The secretary shall attend all meetings of the board and keep a record of all its proceedings. The secretary shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the board. 
(3)  Such clerical, technical and professional assistance, including, but not limited to, engineering, planning, economic research and other fields, as shall in the opinion of the board be necessary to provide for the efficient performance of the functions of the board. 
(Code 1967, § 13-11; Code 1980, § 14-32; Ord. No. 11564, § 7, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07)  
Sec. 14-59. - Annual budget; source of funds. 
(a)  No later than 30 days prior to the date the city commission establishes the millage rate for the city, the executive director shall prepare for the approval of the board a budget for the operation of the downtown development authority for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be prepared in the same manner as required of all departments of the city. When approved by the board it shall not require approval of any officer or body of the city other than the city commission. No funds of the city may be included in the budget of the authority except those funds authorized in this article. 
(b)  The operations of the downtown development authority shall be principally financed from the following sources and such other sources as may be approved by the city commission: 
(1)  Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions. 
(2)  Proceeds of an ad valorem tax, not exceeding 0.4750 mills per dollar valuation of property in the downtown area designated by the city commission. 
(3)  Money borrowed and to be repaid from other funds received under the authority of this article which shall include federal funds, contributions and funds derived from the millage authorized to be levied under this article. 
(Code 1967, § 13-12; Code 1980, § 14-33; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 13573, § 2, 11-19-15)  
Sec. 14-60. - Annual ad valorem tax levy in downtown district; disposition of funds. 
The city commission is authorized to levy an additional ad valorem tax on all real and personal property in the downtown district as described in this article, not exceeding 0.4750 mills on the dollar valuation of such property, for the purpose of financing the operation of the downtown development authority. This levy of 0.4750 mills per dollar ad valorem tax shall be in addition to the regular ad valorem taxes and special assessments for improvements imposed by the city commission. The tax collector shall transmit funds so collected to the appropriate officer of the city responsible for the handling of the public money who shall deposit the same in the city treasury to the credit of the authority. Such money shall be used for no purpose other than those purposes authorized in this article and, upon approval of the board, pursuant to vouchers signed by a minimum of two authorized signatories of the authority, who shall be the executive director and one member of the board of directors, or two members of the board of directors. The funds of the authority shall be secured as other public funds are secured. Other money received by the authority shall forthwith be deposited in the city treasury to the credit of the authority, subject to disbursement as authorized in this article. The city shall not obligate itself nor shall it ever be obligated to pay any sums from general public funds, or from any public funds other than money received pursuant to section 14-59 for or on account of any of the activities of the authority. 
(Code 1967, § 13-13; Code 1980, § 14-34; Ord. No. 12905, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 13573, § 2, 11-19-15)  
Sec. 14-61. - Assessment of funds for handling and auditing by city. 
The city commission shall have the power to assess against the funds of the downtown development authority, for the use and benefit of the general fund of the city, a reasonable pro rata share of such funds for the cost of handling and auditing, which assessment when made shall be paid annually by the board pursuant to an appropriate item in its budget. 
(Code 1967, § 13-14; Code 1980, § 14-35)  
Sec. 14-62. - Conflicts of interest of board members, employees, etc. 
No board member nor any employee of the board shall vote or otherwise participate in any matter in which he/she has a financial interest, either direct or indirect. When such interest shall appear, it shall be the duty of the board member, or employee, to make such interest known and he/she shall thenceforth refrain from voting on or otherwise participating in the particular transaction involving such interest. Wilful violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute malfeasance on the part of a member of the board, and shall be grounds for instant dismissal of any employee. Any transaction involving a conflict of interest, wherein a violation of this section is involved, may be rendered void at the option of the board. 
(Code 1967, § 13-15; Code 1980, § 14-36; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
City Code cross reference— Conflicts of interest, § 2-611 et seq.  
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN PEDESTRIAN PRIORITY ZONE 
 
Sec. 14-63. - Established; boundaries. 
There is hereby created a Downtown Pedestrian Priority Zone (DPPZ), the boundaries of which shall be concurrent with the boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority as described in section 14-27 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13426, § 2, 1-9-14)  
Sec. 14-64. - Standards. 
DPPZ standards for pedestrian comfort and safety are hereby established to account for the exceptional urban context of downtown Miami, to safeguard its unique relationship between land use and multi-modal transportation infrastructure, and to promote safety, health, amenity, economic vitality and general welfare within the DPPZ. All public rights-of-way within the DPPZ shall: 
(1)  Provide a minimum six-foot unobstructed pedestrian path at all sidewalks; 
(2)  Provide perpendicular curb ramps at all intersections; 
(3)  Provide marked crosswalks at all intersections at all four corners and mid-block crosswalks at blocks greater than 400 feet; 
(4)  Provide pre-timed fixed signals at all traffic controlled intersections with a minimum of one second of crossing time for every two and eight-tenths feet of street width. 
(5)  Provide driving lane widths of no more than ten feet, turning lanes of no more than 12 feet, and sharrow lanes of no more than 12 feet; 
(6)  Provide sidewalk bulb-outs extending at least 20 feet from crosswalks in either direction at all street intersections and curb radii not exceeding 15 feet; 
(7)  Provide broad spectrum (white) mid-block street lighting that ensures a consistent and uniform distribution of illumination on all sidewalks; 
(8)  Provide continuous shade tree canopy on all sidewalks with widths ten feet or greater; where sidewalks are less than ten feet wide, require adjacent buildings to have canopies, overhangs and/or other architectural devices that provide shade onto the sidewalk area; 
(9)  Be designed to and posted at a maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour; and 
(10)  Prohibit "right turn on red" at all intersections. 
(Ord. No. 13426, § 2, 1-9-14)  
Sec. 14-65. - Conflicts with other chapters and regulations. 
Within the DPPZ, this division shall govern in the event of conflicts with: 
(1)  Other provisions of this Code; 
(2)  The city's engineering standards as defined in section 54-1 of this Code; 
(3)  To the extent allowed by law, the minimum standards for public works construction as promulgated in the Miami-Dade County Public Works Manual pursuant to Section 2-100 of the Miami-Dade County Code of Ordinances. Variances may be requested from the Miami-Dade County Public Works Director; 
(4)  The Florida Greenbook; and 
(5)  To the extent allowed by law, any other guidelines or standards of any other entity having jurisdiction over public rights-of-way within the DPPZ. 
(Ord. No. 13426, § 2, 1-9-14)  
Secs. 14-66—14-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GUSMAN CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 
 
Sec. 14-91. - Administration. 
(a)  The members of the off-street parking board of the city, or their successors, are hereby authorized to administer the facility known as Gusman Center for the Performing Arts and located at 174 East Flagler Street, Miami, Florida, on the property legally described as follows: 
Lot 1, lot 2 (less the west two inches of the north 65 feet), the south 55 feet of lot 3, and the north 45 feet of lots 18, 19 and 20, block 121 north, City of Miami, according to the plat thereof, as recorded in plat book B, at page 41, of the public records of Dade County, Florida. 
(b)  Administration of said facility shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Provide for the general management, maintenance and upkeep of the building, including the engagement of such personnel or independent contractors as are necessary for such. 
(2)  Negotiate and enter into agreements or leases for the use of the auditorium and other available space in the building on the property. 
(3)  Provide for appropriate means of accounting and bookkeeping so that the financial affairs of the facility are adequately administered and accounted for. 
(4)  Provide leadership and guidance so that the facility may be financially sound in its operation as well as being a cultural and artistic success, and a noteworthy monument reflecting credit upon the city, and an outstanding attraction in the downtown area. 
(5)  Establish a maintenance fund for the upkeep of the building and establish such reserve funds from the income of the facility as are deemed by the members of the off-street parking board to be necessary for the successful operation of the facility. 
(6)  Make periodic reports to the mayor and city commission which shall reflect the financial condition of the operation of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 8435, § 1, 7-31-75; Code 1980, § 14-51; Ord. No. 11564, § 7, 10-28-97)  
Secs. 14-92—14-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN AND SOUTHEAST OVERTOWN/PARK WEST DEVELOPMENTS OF REGIONAL IMPACT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13406, § 3, adopted September 26, 2013, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 14-58—14-65, 14-70—14-72; Ord. No. 10543, § 1, adopted January 26, 1989; Ord. No. 10675, § 1, adopted November 30, 1989, and Ord. No. 11032, § 2, adopted December 10, 1992. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-121. - Intent. 
This article is intended to assist in the implementation of the downtown development of regional impact (Resolutions 87-1148, 87-1149, 91-968, 94-849, 94-850, 98-219, 98-787, 98-1153, 99-159, 99-973, 02-1307, 04-0425) and the Southeast Overtown/Park West development of regional impact (Resolutions 88-110, 88-111, 92-609 and 13- ) development orders. Its purpose is to assure the orderly use and flow of development credits by preventing the retention of such credits by developments unable to complete construction within a reasonable period of time and to initiate implementation of traffic control and environmental protection measures of said resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-122. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as presented below: 
Building permit: Any permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to Section 105 of the Florida Building Code. 
Certificate of occupancy: A permanent or temporary or partial certificate of occupancy issued, pursuant to the Florida Building Code, for any "net new development" as defined herein. 
City: The City of Miami, Florida. 
Credit holder: Entity to which a reservation of development credits has been issued in conjunction with receipt of a building permit or major use special permit. 
DDA or downtown development authority: The downtown development authority of the city. 
DRER: Department of Regulatory and Economic Resources of Miami-Dade County. 
Development: As defined in F.S. § 380.04 (2011) and any amendments thereto. 
Development credits: The individual units of land uses included within total allowable development, as measured by square footage or number of dwelling units, hotel rooms, or seats. 
Development orders: City of Miami Resolutions 87-1148, 87-1149, 91-968, 94-849, 94-850, 98-219, 98-787, 98-1153, 99-159, 99-973, 02-1307 and 04-0425 as amended (downtown development of regional impact), and Resolutions 88-110, 88-111, 92-607, 92-608, 92-609, 93-217, 99-973, 00-289, 01-1159, 05-0480 and 13- (Southeast Overtown/Park West development of regional impact), as amended, as applicable. 
DRI: Development of regional impact. 
Major use special permit or MUSP: A special permit issued by the city commission for large developments pursuant to former Zoning Ordinance Number 11000, or its functional equivalent. 
Net new development: Any construction or reconstruction which will result in a net increase, within any "parcel of land," of residential dwelling units, hotel rooms, seats in attractions/recreation facilities or gross square footage or office, government office, retail/service, convention, wholesale/industrial or institutional uses. Land uses to be removed by demolition of a building or structure may be credited against the proposed new land uses for purposes of calculating the net increase, if the planning, building and zoning director determines that there was a valid certificate of occupancy existing on the effective date of the master increment I, increment II, or increment III development orders rendered for the downtown DRI and the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI for the land uses to be demolished. If a change of land use is proposed, the planning, building and zoning director may credit the prior land use against the proposed land use based upon equivalent impacts as measured by peak hour vehicle trip generations. 
Parcel of land: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, and which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
Reservation of development credits: A written certificate, signed by the planning, building and zoning director, allocating an amount of development credits equal to the amount of net new development in a zoning approval or building permit to a specified parcel of land, subject to the terms and conditions of this article. Reservations of development credits shall run with the land and shall not be transferable to any other parcel of land or building permit. 
SF, gross square feet, or gross square footage shall mean the floor area as defined within the zoning ordinance. 
Site shall mean a legally described parcel of property capable of development pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Total allowable development: The quantity of net new development for which certificates of occupancy may be issued under the terms and conditions of the increment I, increment II and increment III development orders as amended, together with the applicable master development order, as may be modified pursuant to F.S. § 380.06(19) (2011), and which shall be measured by the following land uses: 
DOWNTOWN 
Land Uses 	Increment I 
(1988-1997) 	Increment II 
(1992-1999) 	Increment III 
(1999-2007) 	Totals 
Office (gross square feet) 	6,919,550 	3,600,000 	3,700,000 	14,219,550 
Government office (gross square feet) 	300,000 	250,000 	200,000 	750,000 
Retail/service (gross square feet) 	1,050,000 	400,000 	500,000 	1,950,000 
Hotel (rooms) 	1,500 	500 	1,100 	3,100 
Residential (dwelling units) 	3,550 	2,550 	2,920 	9,020 
Convention (gross square feet) 	500,000 	0 	0 	500,000 
Wholesale/industrial (gross square feet) 	1,050,000 		1,050,000 	2,100,000 
Institutional (gross square feet) 	300,000 	0 	300,000 	600,000 
Attractions/recreation (seats) 	6,500 	1,600 	5,000 	13,100 
 
SOUTHEAST OVERTOWN/PARK WEST 
Land Uses 	Increment I 
(1988-2005) 	Increment II 
(1992-2019) 	Increment III 
(2012-2025) 	Totals 
Office (gross square feet) 	166,000 	337,000 	2,300,000 	2,803,000 
Retail/service general commercial (gross square feet) 	72,272 	94,828 	1,250,000 	1,417,100 
Hotel (rooms) 	0 	500 	2,100 	2,600 
Residential (dwelling units) 	2,000 	2,000 	4,000 	8,000 
Attractions (seats) 	8,000 	8,000 	0 	16,000 
Conference (gross square feet) 	0 	0 	200,000 	200,000 
 
Work: Work shall be considered to have commenced and be in active progress when the planning director determines, after consultation with the city's building official, that a full complement of workers and equipment is present at the site to diligently, in accordance with normal and customary construction scheduling, incorporate materials and equipment into the structure throughout the day on each full working day, weather permitting. 
Zoning ordinance shall mean city Ordinance Number 13114, known as Miami 21 Zoning Code, or a successor ordinance, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Secs. 14-123—14-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVATION OF DEVELOPMENT CREDITS 
 
Sec. 14-151. - Downtown: With building permit. 
Application for reservation of development credits for net new development within the downtown DRI areas that is not required to undergo major use special permit (MUSP) review pursuant to Ordinance Number 11000, the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, shall be made concurrent with applications for a building permit. Reservations for development credits will be issued simultaneously with an approved building permit subject to the payment of all applicable fees at the time when due pursuant to ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-152. - Downtown: With major use special permit. 
(a)  Application for reservation of development credits for net new development within the downtown DRI areas that because of its size and nature must undergo major use special permit (MUSP) review pursuant to Ordinance Number 11000, the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, shall be made concurrent with the application for a MUSP. Applicants shall only apply for reservation of development credits for those portions or phases of their net new development anticipated to be under construction within 24 months from the date of the issuance of the MUSP. Subsequent phases may receive a reservation only after the building permit has been issued for the prior phase. Reservation of development credits shall be issued simultaneous with the MUSP, subject to the payment of all applicable fees at the time when due pursuant to ordinance, and further subject to adherence to the following time limitations: 
(1)  Within six months from the effective date of the MUSP, the applicant must demonstrate to the planning, building and zoning director that design development plans and drawings for those portions of net new development for which a reservation of development credits has been issued are in progress and are likely to be completed within the succeeding six months. 
(2)  Within 12 months from the effective date of the MUSP, the applicant must submit a letter of intent to provide construction financing from a lending institution or other qualified source and demonstrate to the planning, building and zoning director that working drawings/construction documents for those portions of net new development for which a reservation of development credits has been issued are in progress and likely to be completed within the succeeding six months. 
(3)  Within 18 months from the effective date of the MUSP, the applicant must submit a binding letter of commitment for construction financing from a lending institution or other qualified source and demonstrate to the planning, building and zoning director that a complete application for a building permit has been submitted to the planning, building and zoning department for those portions of net new development for which a reservation of development credits has been issued. 
(4)  Within 24 months from the effective date of the MUSP, the applicant must demonstrate to the planning, building and zoning director that the building permit has been obtained and that work has commenced on the net new development for which a reservation of development credits has been issued. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the MUSP to submit the required information, in writing, to the planning, building and zoning director on or before the expiration date of each of the above-described six-month intervals. At any of the above-described intervals the planning, building and zoning director may rescind the reservation of development credits for failure to comply with the time limitations. Notice of intent to rescind a reservation for development credits shall be made, in writing, by the planning, building and zoning director, stating reasons therefor, within 15 days from the expiration date of the current six-month interval of the time limitations. The credit holder may present additional facts, information or data in support of his/her position prior to the rendering of a final decision by the planning, building and zoning director which shall be made in writing within 30 days from the expiration date of the current six-month interval of the time limitations. Development credits rescinded pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in reserve by the planning, building and zoning department pending the outcome of an appeal pursuant to section 14-156. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 14-153. - Downtown: Time limits on development credit reservation after building permit issued. 
Reservations of development credits will remain in effect for so long as the building permit remains in effect in accord with the South Florida Building Code, except as provided herein. 
(1)  After 20 percent or more of the construction is complete, as measured by construction loan disbursements, on the full amount of net new development for which a reservation of development credits is applicable, the reservation shall not expire or be rescinded except by termination of the building permit. It shall be the responsibility of the credit holder to submit bank drafts or other relevant documentation to the planning, building and zoning director to verify required pro rata completion of said construction. 
(2)  Prior to completion of 20 percent of construction, as provided above, if "work" appears not to be actively underway for at least 50 percent of the working days (Monday through Friday, national holidays excluded) within any given six-month period, the planning, building and zoning director may, by certified mail, request a review of the reasons for the work stoppage. If the credit holder fails to respond in writing with supporting documentation, within 15 days, or if the planning, building and zoning director finds that work has been abandoned or is likely to be stopped for longer than a six-month period of time due to financial failure, legal action, or any other reason, he/she may rescind the reservation of development credits. Notice of intent to rescind a reservation for development credits shall be made in writing by the planning, building and zoning director, stating reasons therefor, within 30 days from the date that the planning, building and zoning director transmits, by certified mail, the written request for review of the work stoppage. The credit holder may present additional facts, information, or data in support of his/her position prior to the rendering of a final decision by the planning, building and zoning director which shall be made in writing within 45 days from the date that the credit holder received the written request for review of the work stoppage. If the planning, building and zoning director, after consulting with the city's building official, finds sufficient evidence that work will be resumed within the succeeding six-month period and will continue on a reasonable timetable for the size and nature of the construction project, according to local construction industry standards, he/she shall not rescind the reservation of development credits, but he/she may establish a reasonable timetable for completion of at least 20 percent of the net new development, and conditions upon which the reservation of development credits may be rescinded upon failure to meet the timetable. Work stoppages caused by civil unrest, labor disputes on the site, or fire, shall be counted as "nonworking" days. Development credits rescinded pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in reserve by the planning, building and zoning department pending the outcome of an appeal pursuant to section 14-156. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 14-154. - Downtown: Reallocation of development credits subsequent to expiration or rescission of reservation. 
(a)  If a reservation for development credits expires or is rescinded by the planning, building and zoning director, pursuant to this article, those development credits shall be reserved on a first come, first served basis for other net new development, subject to the following order of priority: 
(1)  Net new development with building permits approved subject to availability of development credits. 
(2)  Net new development with pending building permit applications, based upon the date of acceptance by the planning, building and zoning department of the complete building permit applications. 
(3)  Net new development with a letter of commitment for construction financing and, if applicable, an approved MUSP. 
(4)  Net new development with approved MUSPs, based upon the approval date of the MUSP. If more than one MUSP was approved on the same date, priority will be based upon the date of acceptance by the planning, building and zoning director of a complete MUSP application. 
(b)  No sooner than six months after a reservation for development credits has expired or been rescinded pursuant to this article, a new reservation for development credits may be given to the same parcel of land, following submission of a new application and payment of all applicable fees by the owner, subject to availability of development credits based upon the order of priority listed above. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-155. - Downtown: Changes in plans subsequent to reservation of development credits. 
Any proposed change in plans affecting the use or gross square footage of any net new development shall be approved by the planning, building and zoning director. The reservation of development credits and applicable fees shall be adjusted accordingly; provided, however, that additional development credits shall be reserved only when available according to the order of priority listed in section 14-154 above. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-156. - Downtown: Appeals. 
(a)  If a reservation of development credits is rescinded by the planning, building and zoning director pursuant to this article, the credit holder may appeal said action to the city commission by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk, within 15 days from the date of transmission to the planning, building and zoning director's written notification of reservation of development credit rescission, and paying a filing fee of $500.00. The notice of appeal shall contain sufficient documentation for the city commission to make a determination as to whether the credit holder has complied with the relevant portion of the time limitations set forth in sections 14-152 and 14-153 herein. A public hearing shall be scheduled for the next available city commission meeting, not to exceed 45 days from the date of appeal, whereupon the city commission shall, by resolution, ratify the action of the planning, building and zoning director or shall reinstate all or part of the reservation of development credits for a time certain not to exceed six months, except as provided below, subject to appropriate terms and conditions, and subject to compliance with subsequent intervals of the time limitations set forth in sections 14-152 and 14-153. 
(b)  If work has been halted by court injunction or governmental action, the city commission may reinstate all or part of the credits for a time certain not to exceed one year upon a strong evidentiary showing by the appellant that matters giving rise to the injunction or governmental action have a very high probability of being resolved within six months of the date of the appellant's city commission public hearing. 
(c)  Review of actions of the city commission in reinstating a reservation of development credits, reinstating a reservation of development credits subject to terms and conditions, reinstating a portion of a reservation of development credits whether or not subject to terms and conditions, or denying reinstatement of a reservation of development credits shall be by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court in accordance with the procedure and within the time provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for the review of rulings of any commission or board. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-157. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Reservation of development credit. 
(a)  Application for reservation of development credits for net new development within the Southeast Overtown/Park West DRI area may be made after zoning approval of a project and the furnishing of a notice of intent to apply for development credit to the executive director of the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Agency, with the payment of Administration and Master Plan Recovery fees. Applicants shall only apply for reservation of development credits for those portions or phases of their net new development anticipated to be under construction within 24 months from the date of zoning approval. Subsequent phases may receive a reservation only after the building permit has been issued for the prior phase. All applicable fees, including administration, master plan recover, air quality, and transportation, shall be paid prior to obtaining a building permit. Development credits shall be issued upon payment of all applicable fees. Reservation and issuance of development credits are further subject to adherence to the following time limitations: 
(1)  Within 12 months from the reservation of development credits, the applicant must demonstrate to the planning director that construction drawings for those portions of net new development for which a reservation of development credits has been issued are in progress and are likely to be completed within the succeeding six months. 
(2)  Within 24 months of a reservation of development credits the applicant must pay all applicable fees, obtaining development credits, and obtain a building permit for the development for which the credit was issued. 
(3)  Within 24 months of the issuance of a building permit, the applicant must demonstrate to the planning director that the building permit has been obtained and that work has commenced on the net new development for which development credits have been issued. 
(4)  Application for modifications to approved plans within the aforementioned timeframes shall toll required timeframes. The date of zoning approval of a modification shall then be considered as the new date of reservation of development credits or issuance of development credits as the case may be. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the holder of a reservation of development credits or development credits to submit the required information in writing to the planning director and obtain the necessary permits on or before the expiration date of each of the above-described intervals. At or after any of the above-described intervals the planning director may rescind the reservation of development credits or obtained development credits for failure to comply with the time limitations. Notice of intent to rescind a reservation for development credits shall be made, in writing, by the planning director, stating reasons for the rescission. The credit holder may present additional facts, information or data in support of his/her position prior to the rendering of a final decision by the planning director, which shall be made in writing within 30 days of the date of transmission of the planning zoning director's written notification of reservation of development credit or development credit rescission. Development credits rescinded pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in reserve by the planning and zoning department pending the outcome of an appeal pursuant to section 14-162. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 14-158. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-159. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Time limits on development credit reservation after building permit issued. 
Development credits will remain in effect as long as the building permit remains in effect in accord with the Florida Building Code. If construction has commenced, development credits will remain in effect in perpetuity unless the construction site is abandoned and any constructed improvements are condemned or demolished; in which case the planning director may rescind the development credits. Notice of intent to rescind development credits shall be made, in writing, by the planning director, stating reasons for the rescission. The credit holder may present additional facts, information or data in support of his/her position prior to the rendering of a final decision by the planning director, which shall be made in writing within 30 days of the date of transmission of the planning zoning director's written notification of reservation of development credit or development credit rescission. Development credits rescinded pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in reserve by the planning and zoning department pending the outcome of an appeal pursuant to section 14-162. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 14-160. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Reallocation of development credits subsequent to expiration or rescission of reservation. 
(a)  If a reservation for development credits expires or is rescinded by the planning director, pursuant to this article, those development credits shall be reserved on a first come, first served basis for other new development. 
(b)  No sooner than six months after a reservation for development credits has expired or been rescinded pursuant to this article, a new reservation for development credits may be given to the same parcel of land, following submission of a new application and payment of all applicable fees by the owner, subject to availability of development credits. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-161. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Changes in plans subsequent to reservation of development credits. 
Any proposed change in plans affecting the use or square footage of any net new development shall be approved by the planning director. The reservation of development credits and applicable fees shall be adjusted accordingly; provided, however, that additional development credits shall be reserved only when available according to the order of priority listed in section 14-160 above. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-162. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Appeals. 
(a)  If a reservation of development credits is rescinded by the planning director pursuant to this article, the credit holder may appeal said action to the city commission by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk, within 30 days from the date of transmission of the planning director's written notification of reservation of development credit or development credit rescission, and paying a filing fee of $500.00. The notice of appeal shall contain sufficient documentation for the city commission to make a determination as to whether the credit holder has complied with the relevant portion of the time limitations set forth in sections 14-152 and 14-153 herein. A public hearing shall be scheduled for the next available city commission meeting, not to exceed 60 days from the date of appeal, whereupon the city commission shall, by resolution, ratify the action of the planning director or shall reinstate all or part of the reservation of development credits for a time certain not to exceed six months, except as provided below, subject to appropriate terms and conditions, and subject to compliance with subsequent intervals of the time limitations set forth in sections 14-157 and 14-159. 
(b)  If work has been halted by court injunction or governmental action, the city commission may reinstate all or part of the credits for a time certain not to exceed one year upon a strong evidentiary showing by the appellant that matters giving rise to the injunction or governmental action have a very high probability of being resolved within six months of the date of the appellant's city commission public hearing. 
(c)  Review of actions of the city commission in reinstating a reservation of development credits, reinstating a reservation of development credits subject to terms and conditions, reinstating a portion of a reservation of development credits whether or not subject to terms and conditions, or denying reinstatement of a reservation of development credits shall be by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court in accordance with the procedure and within the time provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for the review of rulings of any commission or board. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-163. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Notice to Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Agency. 
A courtesy copy of all notices required under sections 14-159 through 14-162 shall be transmitted to the executive director of the Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Agency. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Secs. 14-164—14-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-181. - Downtown: Environmental regulations. 
All development shall adhere to all terms and conditions in the development orders and in addition: 
(1)  During construction, all downtown development with areas of exposed soil over 5,000 square feet shall have said exposed areas sprayed with water as frequently as necessary to prevent airborne dust. Other methods of controlling airborne dust may be substituted if approved by DRER. If any area of exposed soil over 5,000 square feet is intended to be undisturbed by construction for more than 90 days, such area shall be sodded or seeded and mulched to provide grass cover. 
(2)  During construction, Section 4611.1 of the South Florida Building Code shall be enforced by requiring all stormwater runoff to be retained on site, or by placing temporary screens, berms, and/or riprap around the perimeter of the construction site to filter all stormwater runoff until the permanent stormwater retention system is operative. Such retention or filtration systems shall be approved by DRER and the city department of resilience and public works. 
(3)  All stormwater drainage systems shall be approved by DRER pursuant to the South Florida Water Management District rules; and shall be designed to retain on site at least the first one inch of runoff from a five-year storm event. 
(4)  All drainage structures, including wells, shall include pollutant-retardant devices approved by DRER pursuant to the South Florida Water Management District rules. Such pollutant-retardant devices shall be maintained in efficient operating condition, including periodic removal of accumulated contents. 
(5)  Net new development shall reduce pollutants entering groundwater and/or surface waters by limiting application of pesticides and fertilizers in vegetated stormwater retention areas to once per year for preventive maintenance and to emergencies, such as uncontrolled insect infestation. 
(6)  Net new development shall reduce pollutants entering groundwater and/or surface waters by vacuum sweeping all parking lots of 11 or more vehicle spaces and private roadways serving the parking lots at least once per week. 
(7)  All development is subject to Section 24-35.1 of the Dade County Code. 
(8)  Prior to construction on any site, all invasive exotic plants shall be removed, specifically melaleuca, casuarina, and Brazilian pepper. Net new development shall use only those species included in the official list of recommended plant species prepared by the South Florida Regional Planning Council, as may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that additional species may be used if written approval is supplied by the executive director of the South Florida Regional Planning Council. Said official list is on file with the planning, building and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 14-182. - Downtown: Transportation control measures. 
(a)  General requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all downtown development except renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change of use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement; when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall: 
(1)  Actively encourage all employees within the development to participate in carpools or vanpools by establishing or participating in an information and referral program, and shall maintain a current list (updated annually) of all employees interested in participating in a carpool or vanpool. At least once each calendar year, carpool, vanpool, and ridesharing information packages and questionnaires shall be obtained from the Florida department of transportation through its regional commuter assistance program for the South Florida region and distributed to all tenants and employees. 
(2)  Establish and maintain current local and regional mass transit route and schedule information in locations throughout the development that are visible and accessible to existing and potential transit users. Mass transit route and schedule information shall be displayed in a prominent public area of the building such as the lobby or near pedestrian access points to parking garages or lots. At no less than six-month intervals, route and schedule information maintained on the premises shall be verified as to current status and replaced if obsolete. 
(3)  Encourage mass transit use by the provision of bus shelters, bus turnout lanes, or other physical improvements intended to improve the safety, comfort, or convenience of transit ridership, where such transit amenities are needed as determined by the planning, building and zoning director. 
(4)  Encourage mass transit use through the purchase of transit passes from Miami-Dade County, and making them available to building tenants and/or employees at a discounted price or at no charge, or in lieu of employer-subsidized employee parking. 
(5)  Reduce peak-hour trip generation through scheduling, where practical, staggered work hours for employees. 
(b)  Parking requirements. The following parking requirements shall apply to all downtown development except: renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change in use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement; when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Parking shall be provided by the development in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city's zoning regulations, but in no case shall parking be provided in excess of the following amounts: 
MAXIMUM PARKING SPACES PERMITTED BY TYPE OF USE 
Use 	Maximum Parking 
Residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Retail 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
Hotel/motel 	1.5 spaces per room 
Restaurant 	1 space per 100 sq. ft. GFA 
Office/other 	1 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA in the CBD-1 zoning district and 1 space per 400 sq. ft. GFA elsewhere 
 
(2)  Of the total parking provided, the number of spaces that can be placed on-site may be constrained by the city due to street capacity and/or air quality requirements. 
(3)  The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city's zoning regulations. For office uses only, there shall be no minimum number of spaces required to be on site; all parking may be located off site in a location approved by the city. If less than the minimum number of required spaces is permitted to be located on site, then: 
a.  The developer shall execute a permanent agreement to purchase transit passes in lieu of providing parking spaces, in an amount equal to two transit passes per each required parking space that is not provided; 
b.  The developer shall make a one-time payment equal to the current "gap-financing" cost for each space as established by the city's department of off-street parking and enter into an agreement with the department of off-street parking to lease the spaces once built; or 
c.  The developer shall own or lease the off-site spaces elsewhere in a location approved by the city. "Elsewhere" is defined as being one or a combination of the following locations: 
1.  A peripheral downtown location near expressway and/or arterial street entrance to downtown and within a maximum of 600 feet walking distance to a Metrorail or Metromover station or, if more than 600 feet walking distance from a Metrorail or Metromover station, connected by a parking shuttle system approved by the city. 
2.  Any outlying location within a maximum of 1,200 feet walking distance to a Metrorail station or a designated Metrobus park/ride facility approved by the city. 
(c)  Air quality requirements. The following air quality requirements shall apply to all downtown development except: renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change in use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall comply as follows: 
Air quality modeling for carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations may be required by the city at any intersection projected to operate at level of service (LOS) E or F. If required, the CO modeling shall be conducted according to DRER standards and submitted in a report that includes an assessment of transportation control measures required to maintain CO concentrations below 80 percent of the State of Florida's eight-hour standard of ten micrograms per cubic meter, during the year following occupancy of the development. The development shall be responsible for its fair share of any transportation improvement deemed by the city to be necessary to protect against future violations of the CO standard. 
(d)  Large scale development requirements. In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (c) above, any downtown development that requires a major use special permit pursuant to the provisions of the city's zoning regulations shall comply with these additional requirements: 
(1)  Submit a transportation control measures (TCM) plan as a part of the application for a major use special permit. Such TCM plan shall outline and describe the transportation control measures proposed to be undertaken by the development in order to achieve a reduction of at least ten percent in peak hour vehicle trips. The plan shall describe a reporting procedure that will measure actual performance against the TCM plan's objectives. 
(2)  Each year following issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the development shall submit an annual report describing actual performance against the TCM plan objectives, an evaluation of such performance, and recommendations for modification to the TCM plan, if any. 
(e)  Special provisions. 
(1)  For special uses possessing unique characteristics that affect parking requirements, such as convention center, sports arena, stadium, auditorium, museum, theater, major league ballpark, and the like, parking requirements shall be calculated for each such use based on its special characteristics, hours and days of peak operation, location with respect to Metrorail, Metromover, and Metrobus services, peripheral and other existing parking, and similar unique characteristics that affect the quantity and location of necessary parking. 
(2)  Parking as a principal permitted use may be permitted in such quantities and locations as determined by the city to be necessary to satisfy a measurable deficiency between the need for, and supply of, parking spaces that cannot be reduced through rigorous application and enforcement of the transportation control measures contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Sec. 14-183. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Environmental regulations. 
All development shall adhere to all terms and conditions in the development orders and in addition: 
(1)  During construction, all Southeast Overtown/Park West development with areas of exposed soil over 5,000 square feet shall have said exposed areas sprayed with water as frequently as necessary to prevent airborne dust. Other methods of controlling airborne dust may be substituted if approved by DRER. If any area of exposed soil over 5,000 square feet is intended to be undisturbed by construction for more than 90 days, such area shall be sodded or seeded and mulched to provide grass cover. 
(2)  During construction, Section 3307.1 of the Florida Building Code shall be enforced by requiring all stormwater runoff to be retained on site, or by placing temporary screens, berms, or riprap around the perimeter of the construction site to filter all stormwater runoff until the permanent stormwater retention system is operative. Such retention or filtration systems shall be approved by DERM and the city department of resilience and public works. 
(3)  All stormwater drainage systems shall be approved by DRER pursuant to Miami-Dade County and the South Florida Water Management District rules; and shall be designed to retain on site at least the first one inch of runoff from a five-year storm event. 
(4)  All drainage structures, including wells, shall include pollutant-retardant devices approved by DRER pursuant to Chapter 24, Miami-Dade County and the applicable South Florida Water Management District rules. Such pollutant-retardant devices shall be maintained in efficient operating condition, including periodic removal of accumulated contents. 
(5)  Net new development shall reduce pollutants entering groundwater or surface waters by limiting application of pesticides and fertilizers in vegetated stormwater retention areas to once per year for preventive maintenance and to emergencies, such as uncontrolled insect infestation. 
(6)  Net new development shall reduce pollutants entering groundwater or surface waters by vacuum sweeping all parking lots of 11 or more vehicle spaces and private roadways serving the parking lots at least once per week. 
(7)  All development is subject to Section 24-18 of the Miami-Dade County Code. 
(8)  Prior to construction on any site, all invasive exotic plants shall be removed, specifically melaleuca, casuarina, and Brazilian pepper. Net new development shall use only those species included in the official list of recommended plant species prepared by DRER, as may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that additional species may be used if written approval is supplied by DRER. Said official list is on file with the planning, building and zoning departments. 
(9)  All fill material utilized for excavation activities or from offsite sources shall meet the clean soils criteria of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), and DRER, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 14-184. - Southeast Overtown/Park West: Transportation control measures. 
(a)  General requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all Southeast Overtown/Park West development except renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change of use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement; when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall: 
(1)  Actively encourage all employees within the development to participate in carpools, vanpools, bicycle sharing, car sharing and the use of hybrid vehicles by establishing or participating in an information and referral program, installing electric vehicle charging stations within the development's parking facilities, and maintain a current list (updated annually) of all employees interested in participating in such programs. At least once each calendar year, ridesharing information packages and questionnaires shall be obtained from the Florida department of transportation through its regional commuter assistance program for the South Florida region and distributed to all tenants and employees. 
(2)  Establish and maintain current local and regional mass transit route and schedule information as well wayfinding signage for access to bicycle lanes and greenways in locations throughout the development that are visible and accessible to existing and potential transit users. Mass transit route and schedule information shall be displayed in a prominent public area of the building such as the lobby or near pedestrian access points to parking garages or lots. At no less than six-month intervals, route and schedule information maintained on the premises shall be verified as to current status and replaced if obsolete. 
(3)  Provide site plan amenities such as improved pedestrian access to transit stops, and short term bicycle parking near building entrance and long term bicycle storage facilities. Encourage mass transit use by the provision of bus shelters, bus turnout lanes, or other physical improvements intended to improve the safety, comfort, or convenience of transit ridership, where such transit amenities are needed as determined by the planning, building and zoning director. 
(4)  Encourage mass transit use through the purchase of transit passes from Miami-Dade County, and making them available to building tenants or employees at a discounted price or at no charge, or in lieu of employer-subsidized employee parking. 
(5)  Reduce peak-hour trip generation through scheduling, where practical, staggered work hours for employees, flexible work hours, and telecommuting programs. 
(6)  Provide public access to planned and existing greenways adjacent to property, and provide wayfinding to reach the greenway from the street. 
(b)  Parking requirements. The following parking requirements shall apply to all Southeast Overtown/Park West development except: renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change in use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement; when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Parking shall be provided by the development in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city's zoning regulations, but in no case shall parking be provided in excess of the following amounts: 
MAXIMUM PARKING SPACES PERMITTED BY TYPE OF USE 
Use 	Maximum Parking 
Residential 	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit 
Retail 	1 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA 
Hotel/motel 	1.5 spaces per room 
Restaurant 	1 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA 
Office/other 	1 space per 900 sq. ft. GFA east of the FEC 
	1 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA west of the FEC 
 
(2)  Of the total parking provided, the number of spaces that can be placed on-site may be constrained by the city due to street capacity or air quality requirements. 
(3)  The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city's zoning regulations. For office uses only, there shall be no minimum number of spaces required to be on site; all parking may be located off site in a location approved by the city. If less than the minimum number of required spaces is permitted to be located on site, then: 
a.  The developer shall execute a permanent agreement to purchase transit passes in lieu of providing parking spaces, in an amount equal to two transit passes per each required parking space that is not provided; 
b.  The developer shall make a one-time payment equal to the current "gap-financing" cost for each space as established by the city's department of off-street parking and enter into an agreement with the department of off-street parking to lease the spaces once built; or 
c.  The developer shall own or lease the off-site spaces elsewhere in a location approved by the city. "Elsewhere" is defined as being one or a combination of the following locations: 
1.  A peripheral downtown location near expressway or arterial street entrance to downtown and within a maximum of 600 feet walking distance to a Metrorail or Metromover station or, if more than 600 feet walking distance from a Metrorail or Metromover station, connected by a parking shuttle system approved by the city. 
2.  Any outlying location within a maximum of 1,200 feet walking distance to a Metrorail station or a designated Metrobus park/ride facility approved by the city. 
(c)  Air quality requirements. The following air quality requirements shall apply to all Southeast Overtown/Park West development except: renovation of existing structures or land improvements; change in use or intensity of use of an existing structure or land improvement when such change generates a net increase of less than 50 peak-hour vehicle trips over the vehicle trip generation of the previous use or intensity; new structures or additions to existing structures of less than 10,000 square feet; excavation; demolition; or deposit of fill. Development not excluded above shall comply as follows: 
Air quality modeling for carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations may be required by the city at any intersection projected to operate at level of service (LOS) E or F. If required, the CO modeling shall be conducted according to DRER standards and submitted in a report that includes an assessment of transportation control measures required to maintain CO concentrations below 80 percent of the State of Florida's eight-hour standard of ten micrograms per cubic meter, during the year following occupancy of the development. The development shall be responsible for its fair share of any transportation improvement deemed by the city to be necessary to protect against future violations of the CO standard. 
(d)  Large scale development requirements. In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (c) above, any development that requires a major use special permit pursuant to the provisions of the city's zoning regulations shall comply with these additional requirements: 
(1)  Submit a transportation control measures (TCM) plan as a part of the application for a major use special permit. Such TCM plan shall outline and describe the transportation control measures proposed to be undertaken by the development in order to achieve a reduction of at least ten percent in peak hour vehicle trips. The plan shall describe a reporting procedure that will measure actual performance against the TCM plan's objectives. 
(2)  Each year following issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the development shall submit an annual report describing actual performance against the TCM plan objectives, an evaluation of such performance, and recommendations for modification to the TCM plan, if any. 
(e)  Special provisions. 
(1)  For special uses possessing unique characteristics that affect parking requirements, such as convention center, sports arena, stadium, auditorium, museum, theater, major league ballpark, and the like, parking requirements shall be calculated for each such use based on its special characteristics, hours and days of peak operation, location with respect to Metrorail, Metromover, and Metrobus services, peripheral and other existing parking, and similar unique characteristics that affect the quantity and location of necessary parking. 
(2)  Parking as a principal permitted use may be permitted in such quantities and locations as determined by the city to be necessary to satisfy a measurable deficiency between the need for, and supply of, parking spaces that cannot be reduced through rigorous application and enforcement of the transportation control measures contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Secs. 14-185—14-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 14-211. - Penalty; procedures. 
A violation of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted and upon conviction the violator shall be punishable according to law; however, in addition to, or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue in civil court and to enforce the provisions of this article before its code enforcement board. Further, the planning, building and zoning director, zoning administrator or building official are hereby empowered to temporarily revoke any building permit or certificate of occupancy for development evidencing violation of this article pending a rescission determination by the planning, building and zoning director. 
(Ord. No. 13406, § 3, 9-26-13)  
Secs. 14-212—14-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13252, § 1, adopted February 10, 2011, repealed the former article V, divisions 1—4 in its entirety, which pertained to the Southeast Overtown/Park West Redevelopment District and Community Redevelopment Agency and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 52.5-1—52.5-4, 52.5-21—52.5-28; Ord. No. 11248, §§ 1—12, adopted April 27, 1995; Ord. No. 11561, § 2, adopted October 28, 1997; Ord. No. 11736, § 2, adopted December 8, 1998; Ord. No. 12247, § 3, adopted June 27, 2002, and Ord. No. 12623, § 8, adopted December 9, 2004. 
 
Secs. 14-251—14-311. - Reserved. 

Chapter 16 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority with respect to registration and voting, § 3(qq); initiative, § 5; referendum, § 6; conduct of elections, § 7 et seq.; recall, § 11; election when terms of four or more commissioners expire simultaneously, § 13; voting precincts, § 106. 
City Code cross references— Election and general powers of city commission, § 2-31; placing political or other advertisements on city property or trash receptacles, § 54-7. 
County Code cross reference— Elections, ch. 12. 
Law review references— Note on nonresident voters, 4 Fla. L. Rev. 252; article as to validity of municipal elections in Florida, 8 Miami L.Q. 268. 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13687, § 2, adopted June 8, 2017, designated the provisions of sections 16-1—16-8 as article I. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Proceedings of city commission—Use of registration records in city elections. 
(a)  In providing for the use in any municipal election of the registration records, the city commission shall adopt a resolution which shall set forth, in addition to such other matters as the city commission may desire to have included therein, the following: 
(1)  The date upon which such municipal election is to be held. 
(2)  The purpose of such municipal election. 
(3)  A description of the registration books and records which pertain to election precincts wholly or partly within the city and which the city is adopting and desires to use for holding such municipal election. 
(4)  The days and hours thereof during which persons qualified to vote in such municipal elections, but who have not registered under the provisions of state law may register at the office of the supervisor and all permanent branch offices, as designated by the board of county commissioners of the county, which lie wholly or partly within the city. 
(5)  That the city clerk shall be the official representative of the city commission in all transactions with the supervisor of registration in relation to matters pertaining to the use of such registration books and records for holding such municipal election. 
(b)  The city commission shall cause a certified copy of such resolution to be delivered to the supervisor of registration not less than 45 days prior to the date of such municipal election. 
(Code 1967, § 15-9; Code 1980, § 16-8)  
Sec. 16-2. - Same—Holding of city elections; straw ballot. 
(a)  The city commission shall, not less than 45 days prior to the proposed date of any municipal election, adopt a resolution setting forth the following: 
(1)  The date upon which such election is to be held. 
(2)  The purpose of such election. 
(3)  The list of polling places in the several precincts. 
(4)  The names of those persons designated and assigned to serve as clerks of election and as inspectors of election; provided that the city commission may omit such names from such resolution and include them in a resolution to be adopted later in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
(5)  The form of ballot to be used in such election (except absentee ballots), prepared in compliance with all statutory requirements relating to the use of mechanical voting machines. 
The city commission shall further authorize and direct the city clerk to give notice of the adoption of such resolution and of the provisions thereof, by and through the publication of an appropriate advertisement in two daily newspapers of general circulation in the city at least 15 days before the day upon which such municipal election is to be held. In the event that any polling place designated in the resolution shall become unavailable for use as such, the city clerk shall designate another polling place within the same precinct for holding the election and shall thereafter report his/her action at the next regular city commission meeting by filing a certificate with the mayor and city commission setting forth the details of the change and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision in the city Code to the contrary, a resolution calling for a municipal election where the ballot question at such proposed election is a "straw ballot question," namely, a question which has no binding or obligatory effect regardless of the voters' approval or disapproval of such question, shall be adopted not less than 30 days prior to the date of such proposed election. 
(Code 1967, § 15-10; Ord. No. 10148, § 1, 9-25-86; Code 1980, § 16-9; Ord. No. 11564, § 8, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 16-3. - City clerk to conduct all municipal elections. 
Every municipal election shall be conducted by and be under the personal supervision of the city clerk, who is hereby empowered and directed to exercise all of the powers and to perform all of the duties and functions appropriate to the conduct of such election, including the establishment, promulgation and enforcement of such rules and regulations relating to such election and the establishment, maintenance, filing and preservation of such election records as the city clerk may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 15-11; Code 1980, § 16-10)  
Sec. 16-4. - Applicability of state law. 
All general laws of the state relating to elections and to the registration of persons qualified to vote therein, which are not inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, are hereby adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 15-15; Code 1980, § 16-14) 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97—106.  
Sec. 16-5. - Absentee voting. 
The general laws of the state are hereby adopted as a means of providing for absentee voting in any authorized election in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 15-16; Code 1980, § 16-15)  
Sec. 16-6. - Candidate qualifications; affidavit, and form thereof, required of candidates for office of commissioner or mayor; finding candidate unqualified; failure to submit affidavit; authorization for city clerk to pursue judicial declaration. 
(a)  A candidate for the office of mayor shall: 
(1)  Possess the qualifications requisite to an elector at a general state election; 
(2)  Have resided within the city at least one year prior to qualifying for the office; 
(3)  Be required to maintain an actual and real residence for the duration of his/her term of office in the city; 
(4)  Have been registered by the city registration books that have been prescribed by ordinance; 
(5)  Be a qualified elector of the city as set forth in section 4 of the Charter of the city; and 
(6)  Shall: 
a.  Pay a qualification fee in the amount of $100.00; 
b.  Follow the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee provided below; or 
c.  Pay a qualification fee in the amount of $100.00 and follow the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee provided below. 
(b)  A candidate for the office of commissioner shall: 
(1)  Possess the qualifications requisite to an elector at a general state election; 
(2)  Have resided, within the city for at least one year prior to qualifying; 
(3)  Have resided within the district they wish to represent for at least one year prior to qualifying; 
(4)  Be required to maintain an actual and real residence for the duration of their term in the city and in their district; 
(5)  Have been registered by the city registration books that have been prescribed by ordinance; 
(6)  Be a qualified elector of the city as set forth in section 4 of the Charter of the city; and 
(7)  Shall: 
a.  Pay a qualification fee in the amount of $100.00; 
b.  Follow the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee provided below; or 
c.  Pay a qualification fee in the amount of $100.00 and follow the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee provided below. 
(c)  Candidates for nomination and election to the office of commissioner or mayor shall pay the required qualification fee, or follow the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee as provided for below, and file with the city clerk, on a form submitted by the clerk, a sworn statement in the following form containing the following information: 
AFFIDAVIT OF CANDIDATE 
CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA 
STATE OF FLORIDA ) 
COUNTY OF MIAMI-DADE  ) 
CITY OF MIAMI   ) 
___________ (hereinafter "affiant"), being first duly sworn, deposes and says: 
1.  My name is ___________. 
2.  I am offering myself as a candidate for the office of _______ of the City of Miami, Florida, in group _____. 
3.  I have resided in the City of Miami for a minimum of one year before qualifying if applying for mayor and one year in the district if applying for commission and I am a registered voter and a duly qualified elector of the City of Miami, Florida, presently registered to vote in precinct no. _____. 
I presently reside at the following address ( must include zip code ): _____
_____ , 
which is my legal address, and I have resided continually at said address from the _____ day of _______ to the _____ day of _______. 
4.  Immediately prior to residing at the above-stated address, I have resided at the hereinbelow listed addresses for the cited periods of time: 
(List hereinbelow all addresses at which you have resided for the past five years, as well as the length of time at each address.) 
Prior Addresses 	For the Period 
_______ 	_______ 
_______ 	_______ 
_______ 	_______ 
 
5.  In addition to the residence I have listed as my present address I also reside at the following listed addresses on a temporary basis as a secondary domicile or domiciles. 
_____
_____
6.  Affiant's spouse resides at the following address: 
(Must include city, state and zip code.) 
_____
7.  Affiant's minor children reside at the following address: 
(Must include city, state and zip code.) 
_____
8.  At the present time, affiant (is) (is not) registered to vote in any city, county or state other than as stipulated in subparagraph 3, above. 
9.  Name and business address of affiant's employer: 
_____
_____
_____
10.  Affiant's occupation: 
_____
Affiant's business telephone number(s): 
_____
11.  Affiant has been employed in the above-cited capacity for the following period of time: _____ . 
(Note: In the event the occupation of affiant has been for a period of less than one year, or the employment period with the same employer has been for a period of less than one year, affiant shall give the name(s) and address(es) of his/her employer(s) and occupation(s) for the period of one year prior to the date of this affidavit.) 
_____
_____
_____
_____
12.  Affiant represents that he/she (is) (is not) currently holding another elective or appointive office—whether city, county or municipal—the term of which or any part thereof runs concurrently with that of the office he/she seeks, and that he/she has resigned from any office from which he/she is required to resign pursuant to F.S. § 99.012 and/or the City of Miami Charter. 
13.  Affiant represents that, as of this date, he/she (is) (is not) seeking to qualify for a public office which is currently held by an officer who has authority to appoint, employ, promote, or otherwise supervise him/her and who has qualified as a candidate for reelection to that office. 
Note: If affiant is an employee of the City of Miami, affiant shall take a leave of absence, without pay from his/her employment during the period in which affiant has become a candidate for elective public office. This Subsection does not apply to the Commissioners and Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk, and Independent Auditor General. Such leave of absence shall be effective upon whichever occurs first: 
(a)  Such employee receives contributions or makes expenditures, or gives her or his consent for any other person to receive contributions or make expenditures, with a view to bringing about his or her nomination or election to public office; or 
(b)  At the time such employee appoints a campaign treasurer and designates a primary depository; or 
(c)  At the time such employee files qualification papers and subscribes to a candidate's oath as required by law. 
14.  Affiant's campaign headquarters address and telephone number: 
_____
_____
Affiant's campaign treasurer's name: 
_____
Affiant's campaign treasurer's address: 
_____
_____
Telephone nos.: (work) _____ (home) _____ 
15.  Affiant represents that, if elected, he/she shall serve in the elective office to which he/she seeks election. 
16.  Following is the exact way in which affiant would like to have his/her name printed on the official ballot: 
_____
SIGNED THIS _____ day of _______, 20___, in Miami, Florida. 
_____
Affiant 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, personally appeared ___________, who, after first being duly sworn, deposes and states that ___________ executed the foregoing to the best of _______ knowledge and belief. 
_____
CITY CLERK, 
CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA 
(SEAL) 
_______ Did take an oath 
_______ Produced identification 
Type of identification produced: _______ 
(d)  In the event the commission finds that any candidate for the office of mayor or commissioner does not meet the qualifications of an elector as required under the Charter of the city or of this section, the commission may adopt a resolution so finding and directing the city clerk to refrain from placing the name of the candidate for mayor or commissioner, as the case may be, on the ensuing ballot for such office. In the event the name of the candidate has already been placed on the ballot, then the clerk shall be instructed to take the necessary action to either remove the name from the ballot or lock the key for that particular candidate in order that the electorate shall not be permitted to vote on an unqualified candidate for the office of mayor or commissioner. 
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the candidate who is found to be unqualified for the office of mayor or commissioner from appealing the decision of the commission to a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(e)  The city clerk shall not accept a qualification fee from any candidate who fails to submit to the clerk, either prior to or simultaneously with the submission of the qualification fee, the affidavit fully completed as required by subsection (b) hereof. 
(f)  If the city clerk finds: 
(1)  That the qualification papers of a candidate, on their face, are not in compliance with the applicable elections laws of the State of Florida and in compliance with the applicable municipal charter or laws or ordinances; 
(2)  That the qualification papers of any candidate, on their face, are incomplete or defective, and are incomplete or defective at the end of the qualifying period; 
(3)  That the qualification fee has not been paid in accordance with law or the candidate has not followed the petition process in lieu of a qualification fee as provided for below; 
(4)  That a sworn written statement is or has been filed by a qualified elector residing within the municipality challenging the qualifications of a candidate for municipal office; or 
(5)  That the city clerk has received written notification from the Miami-Dade County Supervisor of Elections that a candidate is not an elector of the City of Miami; 
the city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file and prosecute an appropriate action in the circuit court for Miami-Dade County, in the name of the city clerk, solely for the purpose of receiving a judicial determination with regard to the qualifications of the candidate. In the event the circuit court rules for the city clerk, the city clerk is directed to take the necessary action to remove the name from the ballot or notify the voting public of the candidate's invalidity if such removal is impracticable. 
(g)  Petition process in lieu of a qualification fee. 
(1)  A person who seeks to qualify as a candidate for mayor or commissioner and who meets the petition requirements of this section is not required to pay the city qualification fee required by this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above, a candidate is required to pay the state election assessment as described in F.S. § 99.093, as amended. 
(3)  A candidate must obtain the number of signatures of voters in the geographical area represented by the office sought equal to at least one percent of the total number of registered voters of that geographical area, as shown by the compilation by the Miami-Dade County Elections Department for the immediately preceding general election. Signatures may not be obtained until the candidate has filed the appointment of campaign treasurer and designation of campaign depository and are valid only for the qualifying period immediately following such filings. 
(4)  The format of the petition shall be prescribed by the city clerk and shall be used by candidates to reproduce petitions for circulation. If the candidate is running for an office that requires a district designation, the petition must indicate that designation and, if it does not, the signatures are not valid. A separate petition is required for each candidate. 
(5)  Each petition must be submitted to the city clerk before noon of the 28th day preceding the first day of the qualifying period for the office sought. The city clerk shall submit the petition to the Miami-Dade County Elections Department in order to verify the status of the voters in the city or district of the office sought. No later than the seventh day before the first day of the qualifying period, the city clerk shall determine whether the required number of signatures has been obtained and shall notify the candidate. 
(Code 1967, § 15-18; Code 1980, § 16-17; Ord. No. 11381, § 1, 7-19-96; Ord. No. 11564, § 8, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 12363, § 2, 5-8-03; Ord. No. 12939, § 1, 8-1-07; Ord. No. 13618, § 2, 7-14-16; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13678, § 2, 5-11-17) 
State Law reference— Candidates, campaign expenses and contesting elections, F.S. ch. 99; campaign financing, F.S. ch. 106.  
Sec. 16-7. - Exemption from payment of the qualifying fee. 
Any person seeking to run for the office of mayor or as a city commissioner who is unable to pay the qualification fee without imposing an undue burden on personal resources or on resources otherwise available to him or her shall, upon written certification of such inability given under oath to the city clerk, be exempt from paying the qualification fee. 
(Ord. No. 12363, § 2, 5-8-03)  
Sec. 16-8. - Election not required for mayor or for a city commissioner for a specific district seat if only one qualifying candidate is listed on a general municipal ballot at close of qualifying period. 
If, at the close of the qualifying period there is only one candidate's name listed on the general municipal election ballot for mayor or for a city commissioner for a specific district seat(s), no election for mayor or for a city commissioner for a specific district seat(s) shall be required, and said candidate or candidates shall be declared elected for that particular term(s) of office as of five days after the date of the scheduled general municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 12423, § 2, 9-25-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12423, § 2, adopted September 25, 2003, enacted provisions intended for use as § 16-7. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as § 16-8.  
Secs. 16-9—16-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRONIC REPORTING 
 
Sec. 16-20. - Electronic reporting/penalties. 
(a)  Each person, candidate, political committee, electioneering communications organization, or other individual or organization required to file campaign treasurer's reports with the city clerk in their official capacity as filing officer for the City of Miami ("city") pursuant to F.S. ch. 106, shall file such reports by means of the city's electronic filing system beginning with the campaign treasurer's report due on August 10, 2017. 
(1)  Any failure to file reports on the designated due date shall subject the violator to those penalties provided in F.S. ch. 106. 
(2)  The city clerk shall determine the required format and related process for the campaign treasurer's reports and shall provide copies of information upon request. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Campaign treasurer's reports shall mean the campaign finance reports required to be filed by each person, candidate, political committee, electioneering communications organization, or other individual or organization, pursuant to F.S. ch. 106. 
Person , candidate , political committee , and electioneering communications organization shall have the meanings ascribed to such terms in F.S. ch. 106. 
(Ord. No. 13687, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 16-21. - Electronic posting. 
Campaign treasurer reports electronically filed pursuant to this article shall be posted on the city's website by the city clerk within three business days of any such report's electronic filing date. 
(Ord. No. 13687, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Sec. 16-22. - Technical assistance. 
The city clerk shall provide technical assistance to those subject to the electronic filing requirements set forth above. The city commission may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for such technical assistance. 
(Ord. No. 13687, § 2, 6-8-17)  
Chapter 17 - ENVIRONMENTAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Buildings, ch. 10; landfills and waterfront improvements, ch. 29; noise regulation, ch. 36; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 49; control of marine pollution, § 50-96 et seq.; planning and zoning, ch. 62; historic and environmental preservation board, § 62-26 et seq. 
County Code cross references— Diseased palm trees, ch. 11D; environmental protection, ch. 24; developments in incorporated areas creating county impact, ch. 33A; authority of board of county commissioners to designate areas of critical environmental concern within the unincorporated areas of Dade County, § 33B-2. 
State Law reference— Water resources, F.S. ch. 373; pollutant discharge prevention and control, F.S. ch. 376; environmental land and water management, F.S. ch. 380; pollution of waters, F.S. ch. 387; environmental control, F.S. ch. 403. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TREE PROTECTION IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13670, § 2, adopted March 23, 2017, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article I pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 13174, § 2, adopted May 13, 2010, and Ord. No. 13274, § 2, adopted June 23, 2011. 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this article is to protect, preserve and restore the tree canopy within the City of Miami ("city") by regulating the removal, relocation, pruning, planting and trimming of trees. 
The purpose of this article is to assure that the design and construction of all development activity is executed in a manner consistent with the preservation of existing trees to the greatest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Sec. 17-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. Definitions for industry terms are based on the American National Standards Institute A-300 Standards for Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub, and other Woody Plant Management - Standard Practices (most recent edition; containing all Parts); International Society of Arboriculture Glossary of Arboricultural Terms (most recent edition); and University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Science Bulletin SS-FOR-11 Forest Terminology for Multiple-Use Management. 
American National Standards Institute A-300 Tree Care Standards Manual ("ANSI A-300 Standards"): A tree manual which establishes performance standards for the care and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and other woody plants. These are the industry standards for Arboriculture or Urban Forestry used by the industry and many governing agencies as the minimum standards of practice for care and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and other woody plants. These are the generally accepted industry standards for tree care practices written by the Tree Care Industry Association (TCIA) to develop consensus performance standards for trees, shrubs, and other woody plants. 
Applicant: A person who is the owner, authorized agent of the owner, or lessee of a property under a written lease authorized to apply for a tree permit. 
Arboriculture: The cultivation, management, and study of woody plants, especially trees. 
Bark: Protective outer covering of branches and stems outside of the cambium. 
Buildable area: The portion of the site exclusive of the required yard areas as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city and its successors. 
Cambium: A thin layer of cells under the bark of trees that produces growth of new tissue. 
Canopy: The collective branches and foliage of a crown of a tree or group of tree crowns, usually represented as canopy diameter measured across the canopy from drip line to drip line at an average canopy width. 
Canopy coverage: The aerial extent of ground within the drip line of the tree, usually represented as square feet of canopy area. 
Certificate of approval: A written document permitting tree removal or development activity within those areas identified and established as environmental preservation districts or scenic transportation corridors. 
(1)  Standard certificate of approval. A written document issued by the preservation officer for tree permits located within an environmental preservation district. 
(2)  Special certificate of approval. A written document issued by the historic and environmental preservation board ("HEPB") where the board must decide if a major addition, removal or alteration of trees meets the requirements of this article. This certificate will be considered by HEPB in accordance with the procedures for a special certificate of appropriateness in section 23-6.2 of this Code, as amended. 
Certified arborist: Also known as a "ISA Certified Arborist." A person who has successfully completed the testing program administered by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) to be an ISA Certified Arborist, with a current valid certification number. This person must be trained and knowledgeable in all aspects of arboriculture as relevant to the conditions of trees within the city. 
Certified arborist report: A report issued by a certified arborist that, at a minimum, shall contain data for each existing tree in the applicable tree boundary survey as follows: species; DBH as defined herein; height; canopy spread; health condition; opinions regarding current condition; recommended tree activity, if any; and color photographs of trees which shall depict sufficient detail to support the opinion of the certified arborist. 
Code compliance: The department responsible for the enforcement of the City Code, as further described in chapter 2, article X. 
Code enforcement board: The code enforcement board of the city as appointed pursuant to chapter 2, article X. For purposes of this article, "code enforcement board" shall be synonymous with and have all powers of the special master. The terms may be used interchangeably. 
Construction: See "Development activity." 
Controlled tree species: Tree species listed in the most recent edition of the Landscape Manual or in section 24-49.9 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida ("Miami-Dade County Code"), which can become invasive in native plant communities when not located in, and cultivated properly, as part of a managed landscape design. 
Critical root zone: Also known as a "CRZ." The CRZ is as large or larger than the minimum recommended root area for a tree as stated in the ANSI A-300 Standards for transplanting trees, usually measured and presented as root ball diameter. 
Crown: A portion of an individual tree above the main stem, consisting of live branches and foliage. 
Crown cover: The percentage of a given area that is covered by the vertical projection of the crowns of trees. 
Diameter at breast height ("DBH"): The diameter at breast height of a tree trunk, measured at four and one-half feet above ground level (surface grade or soil grade). In the case of multi-stemmed trees, the DBH is a calculation of the sum of the DBH of each trunk measured at four and one-half feet above ground level. 
Dead tree: A tree which is not actively transporting water and nutrients from roots to leaves, and is exhibiting symptoms such as decay, brittleness, rot, non-seasonal defoliation, substantial loss of its branches, or other signs of substantial deterioration. 
Department: The department of planning and zoning, which is responsible for review and issuance of tree permits. 
Development activity: The carrying out of any building construction that requires issuance of a permit by the city, including without limitation building construction, additions (including but not limited to additions of carports, pools, decks, fences, driveways, and parking lots), modifications, demolition, or making any material alteration to the use or exterior appearance of any structure. 
Drip line: The area defined by the outermost circumference of a tree's branches where water drips from and onto the ground. 
Environmental preservation districts: Geographical areas, parcels or corridors, which have been or may be identified, are established by the city commission as significant natural or manmade attributes in need of preservation and control because of their educational, economic, ecological and environmental importance to the welfare of the general public and the city as a whole. The city's environmental preservation districts are designated in an atlas kept on file with the department of planning. 
Environmentally significant feature: Natural or manmade artifacts, sites or features which possess attributes in need of preservation and control because of their economic, educational or environmental importance to the welfare of the general public and the city as a whole. Environmentally significant features include all trees within the city and specifically designated natural, topographical or geological formations, mangrove areas, natural hammocks, unique scenic vistas or transportation corridors and rare and valuable plant material. 
Exotic tree species: A plant species introduced from another country or geographic region outside its natural range, which may become naturalized or invasive, but is not native or indigenous to a region. 
Fatally diseased tree: A tree that has been identified with a disease that is not curable by known industry standard pest control treatments or has visible damage from a disease and may include secondary stresses related to a disease. A fatally diseased tree may be considered a high-risk tree. 
Florida grades and standards: The standards for determining the quality of nursery stock being grown, sold and/or used in landscape projects in Florida. These are based on the Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants as published by the most current edition of the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
Girdling: Tree abuse in the form of restriction or destruction of the vascular system within a root, stem, or branch of a tree that causes inhibition of the flow of water and nutrients, usually accomplished by removal of bark and cambium around all or most of the circumference of a tree branch or stem. 
Grade: The ground level of a subject property. 
Hatracking: Also known as "Topping." A form of tree abuse in the form of the reduction of tree size using heading cuts that shorten limbs or branches back to a predetermined crown limit. Hatracking involves indiscriminate cutting back of branches between nodes. 
High-risk trees: A tree that is in a location where risks to persons or property exist, including trees that have an identifiable part or parts with a high potential for failing and a high potential to strike a foreseeable target resulting in significant consequences within a short time-frame. The determination of whether a tree is a high-risk tree shall be made by the department upon assessing the supporting risks. 
Homestead property: A property that receives a homestead exemption as determined and listed by the Miami-Dade County Property Appraiser's Office. This exemption must be current to be applicable. 
Homestead resident: A person or persons living in a residence that receive a homestead exemption as determined and listed by the Miami-Dade County Property Appraiser's Office. This exemption must be current to be applicable. 
Internode/internodal: The region of a tree's stem between two successive nodes; length of a branch or stem growing between the nodes. 
Landscape manual: The Miami-Dade County Landscape Manual, latest edition, which is the official landscape manual issued by Miami-Dade County, Florida, and incorporated herein by reference. The landscape manual, as amended from time to time, is adopted by reference by the city and deemed incorporated by reference as if set forth herein. If a conflict arises between the landscape manual and this article, the latter shall prevail. The landscape manual shall be used in conjunction with section 24-49.9 of the Miami-Dade County Code and said section shall be relied on for any conflicts between the landscape manual and the Miami-Dade County Code for Prohibited Species. 
Lion's tailing: A form of tree abuse in which the removal of an excessive number of inner, lateral branches from parent branches results in a tree having the majority of foliage in the outer portions of the canopy. 
Main stem (or main trunk ): The portion of a tree between ground level and the point of division into major branches. 
Native tree species: An indigenous species that is normally found as part of an ecosystem. A species present in a defined area or region of the United States prior to European settlement. 
Node: Slightly enlarged portion of a stem where leaves and buds arise. 
Owner: Any person, entity, corporation, partnership, trust, holding company, limited liability company or any other legally recognized entity that is the legal, beneficial, or equitable owner of any interest whatsoever in the property. "Owner" shall include any purchaser, assignee, successor, or transferee of any interest whatsoever in the property regarding any provisions of this article. 
Palm (or palm tree ): Monocotyledonous plant of the Palmacea family. A type of tree that is an un-branched evergreen tree of tropical and warm regions, with a crown of very long feathered or fan-shaped leaves, and typically having old leaf scars forming a regular pattern on the trunk. 
Person: As per the definition set forth in section 1-2 of this Code. 
Prohibited tree species: A species of tree listed as a prohibited species in the current edition of the Landscape Manual, or in section 24-49.9 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as well as Weeping Fig Trees (Ficus benjamina). 
Public right-of-way: See "Right-of-way" as defined in section 55-1 of the City Code, as amended. 
Registered landscape architect: A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in Florida as authorized by F.S. ch. 481. 
Replacement trees: Also known as "mitigation tree." Trees that are proposed to be used as replacement for trees being removed from a property. 
Root: The part of a tree, usually underground, that anchors the tree to the ground and also absorbs and conducts water and nutrients to all parts of the tree. 
Root pruning: The cutting of roots to limit their vertical or lateral growth, the process of pre-cutting roots behind the line of a planned excavation to prevent tearing and splintering of remaining roots, any removal of roots one inch in diameter or greater, and/or the removal of more than ten percent of a tree's root system. Root pruning of more than ten percent of a tree's root system requires a tree permit. 
Scenic transportation corridor: Those roadways identified by the state or by the city commission resolution as having a unique landscape, an expansive tree canopy and/or unique landscape features that is of substantial environmental or scenic importance to residents and visitors. 
Shrub: A woody, perennial plant separated from a tree by its lower mature height (generally under 20 feet), and showing the lack of a well-defined main trunk, often multi-stemmed. 
Site plan: A comprehensive plan drawn to scale indicating site elevations, roadways and location of all relevant site improvements including structures, parking, other paved areas, ingress and egress drives, landscaped open space and signage. 
Sound nursery practices: The practices or procedures of landscape nurseries that meet or exceed the Florida Grades and Standards. 
Special master: The person(s) appointed pursuant to chapter 2, article X. For purposes of this article, the special master shall be synonymous with and have all powers of the code enforcement board. The terms may be used interchangeably. 
Specimen tree: A tree that is equal to or larger than 18 inches DBH. Trees that do not qualify as specimen trees are palms, non-native Ficus species, or any non-native fruit tree cultivated as a grove tree for commercial production of fruit. 
Spiking: A form of tree abuse in which there is the hammering or affixing of metal or other material into a tree to harm the tree or lower its commercial value, or any damage to the trunk of a tree caused by use of climbing spikes. 
Spread: The average diameter of the crown. The average diameter of the tree canopy or crown as measured across the canopy in at least two directions from drip line to drip line of farthest reaching branches. 
Stem(s): The principal axis or wood structure of a plant from which buds, shoots, foliage, and branches develop. 
Tree: A woody perennial plant, including palms, usually having only one dominant trunk and a well-defined stem or stems carrying a more or less definite crown, usually having a mature height greater than 16 feet. A tree regulated under this chapter must have a minimum size of 12 feet overall height with a DBH of two inches or larger. A palm regulated under this chapter must have a minimum height of 16 feet overall with a DBH of six inches or larger. 
Tree abuse: Action that damages a tree and/or parts of a tree. Generally, any tree activity beyond or against those described in the ANSI A-300 Standards. Examples of tree abuse include but are not limited to hatracking, spiking, lions tailing, tree removal (without a permit), pruning more than 25 percent of a tree canopy in one annual growing season, root pruning that destabilizes a tree, girdling, damaging and/or removing sections of bark, and damaging and/or removing sections of cambium. 
Tree activity: Work that will affect a tree on a property which includes tree removal, tree pruning more than 25 percent, and root pruning more than ten percent or trimming of a root more than one inch in diameter. 
Tree boundary survey: A survey such as a topographic survey that establishes property lines and corners of a parcel of land and also locates natural features such as trees and streams as well as man-made features such as buildings, fences, improvements, land contours, easements, and utilities. Tree boundary surveys shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor. 
Tree permit: A permit which is required for any tree activity. 
Tree protection barriers: Barriers, fences, or barricades that are placed around existing trees to provide protection during construction on a subject property. Examples are contained in the tree protection specifications and tree protection details as described in the Landscape Manual and ANSI A-300 Standards. 
Tree protection bond: A monetary bond that guarantees specific trees be protected and will not be harmed by the construction project and, if harmed, the party will reimburse for the loss. 
Tree protection zone ("TPZ"): An area defined by a certified arborist surrounding the trunk of a tree to protect roots and soil within at least the CRZ area. This area is necessary to protect tree health and stability. The TPZ is an area within which certain activities are prohibited or restricted, especially during construction or development activity. 
Tree pruning: Also known as "Tree trimming." The selective cutting of tree parts done to remove branches or parts of branches from a tree's crown. 
Tree removal: The act of cutting down, destroying, moving, relocating, or effectively destroying through damaging, any tree situated on any real property or public property within the city. 
Tree value: The appraised monetary value for a tree as calculated by an ISA certified arborist who is specially trained and experienced as a tree and landscape appraiser. Appraisals shall utilize the trunk formula method within the replacement cost approach of valuation as described in the most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal published by the International Society of Arboriculture. Tree value may be used to determine reasonable mitigation requirements for specimen trees removed without a permit and/or specimen trees effectively destroyed during construction, including trees permitted to be preserved or remain on site that are subsequently effectively destroyed, and may be used as an alternative to the replacement tree table for mitigation requirements for specimen trees being permitted for removal, as approved by the department. 
Trunk: The main or central stem of a tree. 
Vigor: The capacity of a tree to grow and resist stress; growing in a healthy condition. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17; Ord. No. 13697, § 2, 7-27-17)  
Sec. 17-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all public or private property within the city, unless expressly exempted by law. 
(b)  All tree activity as defined in this chapter require a tree permit as described herein. 
(c)  Any tree removal on a public right-of-way or on property owned by the city shall require a permit from the resilience and public works department, unless it is deemed in writing by the director of the department or his/her designee that such permit will be an undue burden for the city and is not in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(d)  All trees located within environmental preservation districts shall also be subject to the requirements of article 2 of this chapter. 
(e)  All trees located within natural forest communities shall also be subject to the requirements of article 3 of chapter 24 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended. 
(f)  All mangrove trees and any tree located upon land which is wetlands as defined in F.S. § 373.019, as amended from time to time, shall also be subject to the permitting requirements of article 2 of chapter 24 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 17-4. - Tree permit applications, requirements, review, and fees. 
(a)  Permit, when required. 
(1)  No person, agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, shall engage in tree activity on any property described in section 17-3 of this article without first obtaining a tree permit and unless exempted by section 17-11 of this article. 
(2)  A tree permit is required for tree pruning of more than 25 percent of the canopy, crown, or living foliage of a tree or other pruning not in accordance with the ANSI A-300 Standards shall be allowed upon presentation of a letter to the city, to be validated by a certified arborist, with justification as to why the ANSI A-300 Standards are not applicable. 
(3)  Pruning of the canopy, crown or living foliage of a tree, in strict accordance with ANSI A-300 Standards shall be allowed without a permit. A certified arborist letter or other documentation may be required. 
(4)  Any removal of roots one inch in diameter or greater and/or the removal of more than ten percent of a tree's root system shall require a tree pruning permit. No root pruning shall be allowed beyond the aforementioned limits anywhere in the city without a tree pruning permit except for the pruning of roots when essential for any repairs or improvements performed by or for the department of resilience and public works or capital improvements. 
(5)  No building permit for any work that has the potential to affect trees, including new construction, additions, carports, pools, decks, fences, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, demolition, or similar work, shall be issued by the building department unless the zoning department has determined that a tree permit or tree pruning permit is not required or that a valid tree permit or tree pruning permit has been issued in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Application requirements. The property owner or authorized agent shall submit a tree permit application to the department on the department's tree permit application form. A tree permit application shall include those supporting documents and plans as required by the department to provide adequate description and information to verify the intended tree activity, site conditions, proposed construction and work specifications in order to issue a tree permit. 
(c)  Plan requirements. Plans submitted with a tree permit application shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Commercial properties. Plans for a tree permit in conjunction with new construction, including but not limited to, demolition, additions, pools and decks shall include the following: 
a.  A tree boundary survey, drawn to scale, identifying the tree species, location, and listing the height, spread and diameter of all existing trees. The tree boundary survey shall illustrate the location of all existing structures, the location of any overhead and/or underground utilities and the right-of-way limits, edges of pavement, including all trees within the right-of-way. This survey shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor, licensed in the state. 
b.  A tree disposition plan drawn to scale identifying and listing all existing trees and specifying the condition of each tree, the TPZ radius and whether said trees are to remain, to be removed and/or to be relocated. The tree disposition plan shall also contain the value of specimen trees that are listed to remain and/or to be relocated. The valuation of trees shall be appraised using the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers Guide for Plant Appraisal, latest edition. The tree disposition plan shall superimpose all proposed new construction, the new locations of existing trees to be relocated on site over the tree survey plan information, and an accurate depiction of the CRZ and canopy of the trees to remain and/or be relocated. For applications involving the construction of a new building(s), the tree disposition plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a landscape architect currently licensed in the state, or by persons authorized by F.S. ch. 481, as amended, to prepare landscape plans or drawings. 
c.  A tree protection plan depicting all trees to remain and/or be relocated on site with a depiction of the tree's TPZ. 
d.  When applicable, an assessment on all existing trees with tree specifications. For trees and/or palms proposed for relocation, tree relocation specifications in accordance with ANSI A300 Standards shall be provided to the department. Additional information such as the TPZ, CRZ, tree protection and/or tree pruning recommendations may be required for trees to remain and/or be relocated. The assessment shall be prepared by an ISA Certified Arborist. 
(2)  Single-family or duplex properties. Plans for a tree permit in conjunction with new construction, including but not limited to demolition, additions, pools, and decks shall include the following: 
a.  A site plan drawn to scale, or existing property survey prepared by the owner or the owner's representative, identifying the location of the tree, the species and listing the height, spread and diameter of all existing trees. Said site plan may be limited to the immediate area of the proposed work. 
b.  A tree disposition plan drawn to scale, prepared by the owner or the owner's representative, or such plan incorporated onto an existing property survey, listing all existing trees and specifying the condition of each tree and whether said trees are to remain, to be removed and/or to be relocated. This plan shall also illustrate the location of all existing structures and/or all proposed new construction, the location of any overhead and/or underground utilities and the new locations of existing trees to be relocated on site. 
c.  When applicable, an assessment on all existing trees with tree specifications. For trees and/or palms proposed for relocation, tree relocation specifications in accordance with ANSI A300 Standards shall be provided to the department. Additional information such as the TPZ, CRZ, tree protection and/or tree pruning recommendations may be required for trees to remain and/or be relocated. The assessment shall be prepared by an ISA Certified Arborist. 
(3)  Plans for a tree permit unrelated to construction shall be drawn to scale using a site plan or existing property survey prepared by the owner or owner's authorized representative. 
(4)  All applications shall have a tree replacement plan/landscape plan drawn to scale that illustrates all proposed new construction, new locations of relocated trees, and new replacement tree locations that complies with the requirements of section 17-6 of this Code, entitled "Tree replacement." For applications involving the construction of a new building(s), the tree replacement plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a landscape architect currently licensed in the state, or by persons authorized by F.S. ch. 481, as amended, to prepare landscape plans or drawings. Tree replacement plan/landscape plan submitted for a one-family or two-family dwellings (homestead property) may be in the form of a site plan drawn to scale prepared by the owner or the owner's representative. 
(5)  Anytime construction or development is to be undertaken, a tree protection bond equal to the value of the specimen tree(s) to remain and/or to be relocated shall be posted, except for properties which have homestead exemption, pursuant to F.S. § 196.075, and show proof thereof. The bond shall remain in effect for one year after the final certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(d)  Review of application. Upon receipt of a completed tree permit application, the department shall review said application for compliance with the regulations as set forth in this article. Such review may include a field inspection of the site and referral of the application to other departments or agencies as necessary. The department shall take a reasonable amount of time to review and respond to applicants regarding tree permit applications, generally completing the initial review within 15 business days and thereafter providing the intended decision notice upon final approval the tree permit application. 
(e)  Notice. Within 48 hours of issuing the intended decision for a tree permit, the department shall notify the applicant and post a notice of the intended decision on or adjacent to the subject property in a location where it is visible to the general public. The posting shall provide a general description and location of the proposed tree activity contained in the tree permit. The intended decision shall also be sent to the homeowners' associations registered with the neighborhood enhancement team ("NET") in that area. 
(f)  Issuance of permit. If no appeal, in accordance with section 17-8 of this article, is received within ten calendar days of the issuance of the intended decision, the tree permit shall be issued. The property owner shall ensure that the tree permit is displayed until the authorized work is completed. 
(g)  Fees. Fees shall be as established pursuant to section 10-4 of this Code, as amended, "Building permit fee schedule." Applications from government agencies for tree removals in areas dedicated to public use may, at the discretion of the city commission, be exempted from application fees and permit fees by resolution. 
(h)  Final inspection. No later than six months following the completion of the authorized work, the applicant shall schedule a final inspection with the department for verification and acceptance of the final authorized work. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 17-5. - Criteria and conditions for tree permits. 
(a)  Criteria for tree permits. In determining whether a tree permit should be issued, the department will consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the tree is located in the buildable area or yard area where a structure or improvement may be placed and the tree unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property. Trees located in the property frontage (within the 15-foot setback), are not considered located within the buildable area or yard. Ingress and egress to garages are not considered buildable or yard areas. Trees on a public right-of-way shall not be considered for removal because they restrict ingress or egress to the garages or parking on the site, except if there is no other reasonable access to and from the structure or to the property from the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Whether the tree is in danger of falling; interferes with utility service determined by a trained and experienced vegetation management or line clearance employee and/or person; creates unsafe vision clearance within a sight triangle or other legal right-of way; or materially impairs the structural integrity of an existing structure. 
(3)  Whether the tree is deemed a high-risk tree, fatally diseased or dead. The department may require supporting documentation confirming that the tree is a high-risk tree, fatally diseased or dead and cannot be abated by other means (i.e. pruning, trimming, fruit removal, removal of hazardous limbs); photographs of the tree(s) showing the conditions, signs or symptoms of the tree; any laboratory analysis or relevant scientific literature; and any other potential supporting documentation. 
(4)  Whether the tree is a prohibited tree species. The department may require photographs of the tree(s) to support identification of the tree species. Prohibited tree species may be removed without the need for a replacement tree. 
(5)  Whether the tree creates a health hazard; interferes with native tree species; or creates a negative impact on natural land features such as rock outcroppings, sink holes or other geological, historical or archeological features. 
(6)  Any other relevant criteria the department deems appropriate to consider in order to make a determination. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of a tree permit. Any or all of the following conditions may be required by the department prior to issuance of a tree permit: 
(1)  The applicant may be required to redesign the project to preserve specimen tree(s) or any other tree determined by the department to be of substantial value because of its species, size, age, form and/or historical significance, and to provide an alternate plan that includes the adequate preservation of said tree(s) and design alterations within the scope and intent of the initially proposed plan. 
(2)  Where practical, specimen trees or any other tree determined by the department to be of substantial value because of its species, size, age, form and/or historical significance, proposed for removal, shall be relocated on or off-site within the commission district of the subject property. The applicant shall adhere to acceptable tree relocation standards and specifications. The department may require a certified arborist to monitor the root pruning and tree relocation preparation efforts on site and to provide documentation certifying that the work was accomplished according to acceptable standards and specifications. 
(3)  If it is impractical to relocate said tree(s) either on or off-site, because of age, type or size, the applicant shall be required to replace all trees permitted to be removed in accordance with the tree replacement requirements in section 17-6. 
(4)  The department may require that the applicant provide a written report from a certified arborist before making any determinations in conjunction with this article. The department may also require monitoring by a certified arborist during construction and/or tree activity requiring a tree permit to assure tree preservation. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Sec. 17-6. - Tree replacement. 
(a)  Tree replacement chart. The tree replacement chart 17.6.1.1 below, shall be used to determine the total number and size of trees that shall be planted as replacement trees for all trees permitted to be removed. The replacement trees are based on the diameter in inches (DBH) of the trees to be removed. To determine the required replacement trees, calculate the total sum in inches of the diameters of all trees to be removed. This sum will result in one single number in inches that represents the combined total of the diameters of all trees to be removed. Diameter measurement shall be rounded up to the nearest inch. 
CHART 17.6.1.1 TREE REPLACEMENT CHART 
Total diameter of tree(s) to be removed (sum of inches at DBH) 	Total number of replacement trees required (where each Replacement Tree is a minimum of 2" DBH x 6' spread in Canopy x 12' in height) 	OR 	Total number of replacement trees required (where each Replacement Tree is a minimum of 4" DBH x 8' spread in Canopy x 16' in height) 	Contribution to Tree Trust Fund 
2"—3" 	1 	or 	0 	$1,000.00 
4"—6" 	2 	or 	1 	$2,000.00 
7"—12" 	4 	or 	2 	$4,000.00 
13"—18" 	6 	or 	3 	$6,000.00 
19"—24" 	8 	or 	4 	$8,000.00 
25"—30" 	10 	or 	5 	$10,000.00 
31"—36" 	12 	or 	6 	$12,000.00 
37"—42" 	14 	or 	7 	$14,000.00 
43"—48" 	16 	or 	8 	$16,000.00 
49"—60" 	20 	or 	10 	$20,000.00 
 
(1)  If the sum of the diameter of trees to be removed exceeds a total of 60 inches, the additional inches shall be added cumulatively from the top of the chart, down to the bottom of the chart, to calculate the number of trees required as replacement trees. 
(2)  Up to 30 percent of the two-inch DBH replacement tree requirement may be met by native species with a minimum height of ten feet and a minimum DBH of one and one-half inches at time of planting. 
(3)  The removal of a palm shall be replaced with two palms at 16 feet overall height with a six-inch DBH or one tree at 12 feet overall height with a two-inch DBH. Native palms of a 14-foot minimum overall height and minimum DBH of three inches at time of planting shall count as a required two-inch DBH replacement tree on the basis of two palms per required tree. No more than 30 percent of the required replacement trees shall be palms. 
(b)  Tree species. Tree(s) installed as replacement trees shall be of a native or non-invasive species and shall be planted at grade or ground level according to ANSI A300 best management practices manual, incorporated herein by reference. When more than ten trees are installed as replacement trees, a diversity of species shall be required as per chart 17.6.2.1 tree species diversity chart, below. 
CHART 17.6.2.1 TREE SPECIES DIVERSITY 
Required Number of Trees 	Required Minimum Number of Species 
11—20 	2 
21—50 	4 
51 or greater 	6 
 
(c)  Tree replacement alternatives. 
(1)  Replacement trees for homestead properties may comply with the following alternatives: 
a.  The removal of a non-specimen/non-native tree, a controlled tree species or a palm species shall be replaced with a native species at a one-to-one ratio upon written confirmation from the department. Replacement shall be of minimum replacement size at two inches DBH and 12 feet overall height. 
b.  Trees authorized for removal from lots that meet the minimum lot tree requirements, as described in Article 9 of the Miami 21 Code, shall be replaced at a one-to-one ratio, excluding specimen trees and trees effectively destroyed as a result of tree abuse. 
c.  Homestead properties that remove trees without a proper tree permit must comply with the standard replacement tree quantities and requirements and may not avail themselves of these alternatives. 
d.  Hardship exemption. A person who meet either of the following criteria may be able to apply for a waiver, full or partial, of the requirements for tree replacement on homestead property as set forth in this section and subsection 17-10(a)(2) of the City Code: 
1.  Persons who qualify for the senior citizen exemption pursuant to F.S. § 196.075. 
2.  Persons whose total household income is below 80 percent of the area median income ("AMI") of Miami-Dade County as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") annually. 
e.  Tree gifting program. The gifting of trees by the city to property owners for the purpose of increasing the city's tree canopy, whenever possible, shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee in a manner that is in accordance with applicable laws. 
(2)  Prohibited tree species may be removed after obtaining a tree permit. Replacement trees are not required for the removal of any prohibited tree species as listed in current edition of the Miami-Dade County Prohibited Species List, except Lofty Fig (Ficus altissima) and Banyan Tree (Ficus benghalensis) which are subject to the provisions of this article. No fees will be assessed for tree removal of prohibited tree species. 
(3)  The city manager or designee, after a recommendation of the department, may adjust the requirement of replacement trees for affordable housing developments that are procured by the city and/or funded by the city, regardless of the source of funds. 
(d)  Tree quality. After issuance of a tree permit, replacement trees in accordance with this section shall conform to, or exceed, the minimum standards for Florida Number One as provided in the most current edition of "Florida Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part I and II," prepared by the state department of agriculture and consumer services, and incorporated herein by reference. Trees shall be planted according to sound nursery practices as illustrated in the landscape manual. 
(e)  Off-site replacement trees. If the total number of replacement trees cannot be reasonably planted on the subject property, the applicant may enter into a written agreement with the city, as approved by the department, to plant the excess replacement trees on public property within the city commission district of the subject property. If the department confirms and verifies that replacement trees cannot be planted within the city commission district of the subject property due to capacity issues, the department may approve the planting of the excess replacement trees in other parts of the city. An alternative to off-site replacement is provided in subsection (f), relating to the contribution to the tree trust fund. Applicants may do both to the extent that they should proffer to do so. 
(f)  Tree trust fund. If the department determines that an applicant is not able to comply with the planting of replacement trees either on-site or off-site as required by this section, then the applicant shall make a financial contribution into the city's tree trust fund prior to issuance of the tree permit as follows: 
(1)  Non-homestead properties. The contribution shall be equal to $1,000.00 for each two-inch DBH tree required in accordance with Chart 17.6.1.1. 
(2)  Homestead properties. The contribution shall be equal to $500.00 for each two-inch DBH tree required in accordance with Chart 17.6.1.1 per calendar year. If additional tree permits are issued in the same calendar year, the subsequent contribution shall be equal to $1,000.00 for each two-inch DBH tree required in accordance with Chart 17.6.1.1. 
(3)  Hardship exemption. A person who meets either of the following criteria may be able to apply for a waiver, full or partial, of the requirements for the tree trust fund on homestead property as set forth in this section and subsection 17-10(a)(2) of the City Code: 
a.  Persons who qualify for the senior citizen exemption pursuant to F.S. § 196.075. 
b.  Persons whose total household income is below 80 percent of the AMI of Miami-Dade County as determined by the HUD annually. 
(g)  Completion. The replacement tree process shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. Moreover, the approval of a tree permit is contingent on any requirements set forth in subsections (a) through (f) above. 
(h)  Maintenance of relocated and replacement trees. Trees that are relocated or replaced must be maintained in a healthy growing condition and guaranteed for a period of at least one year unless otherwise authorized by the department in writing. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17; Ord. No. 13697, § 2, 7-27-17)  
Sec. 17-7. - Tree protection. 
(a)  Tree protection during construction. Trees shall be protected during construction activity as determined by the department through the use of protective barriers in accordance with the landscape manual. Trees that are to remain shall be clearly identified with tags. Tree protection barriers shall be maintained around the trees in accordance with the tree protection plan approved by the department. 
Prior to and during demolition, development, or construction, including installation of irrigation systems or any other underground installations, protective barriers shall be placed around the perimeter of each tree's TPZ and shall remain in place in order to prevent the destruction or damaging of roots, stems or crowns of such trees. The barriers shall remain in place and intact until approved landscape operations begin; however, barriers may be removed temporarily to accommodate construction needs, provided that the manner and purpose for such temporary removal will not harm the trees. The trees shall be properly irrigated throughout the building process. Trees damaged during construction shall be subject to the provisions of section 17-9. 
(b)  Other tree requirements. Property owners shall protect the trees designated for preservation in the approved tree permit from chemical poisoning, excavation, grade changes, and any other potential tree abuse to at least the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Utility line trenches. Utility line trenches and/or directional borings shall be routed away from the trees to an area outside the TPZ to the maximum extent possible. 
(2)  Parking on site during construction or development activities. No parking, vehicle maintenance, storage of construction materials or debris, or cleaning of equipment shall take place within areas marked for preservation specifically including, but not limited to, within the TPZ of any individual trees or cluster of trees. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Sec. 17-8. - Appeals, appellate fees. 
(a)  Appeals to the historic and environmental preservation board ("HEPB"). The property owner, the applicant, or any aggrieved party having standing under state law, may appeal to the HEPB any decision of the department on matters relating to applications for tree permits, except for tree permits granted to the departments of public works or capital improvements program, by filing a written notice of appeal to the preservation officer, as established in chapter 23 of this Code, within ten calendar days after the date of the intended decision. The notice of appeal shall include the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. HEPB shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal. HEPB may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the department. 
All appeals to the HEPB in accordance with this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $315.00, except for appeals initiated by abutting property owners, as defined in the Miami 21 Code, for which a tree permit is sought. Appeals by a nonprofit corporation dedicated to conservation and protection of the natural and physical environment, or appeals by a homeowners association, as defined by F.S. ch. 720, as amended, which has one member who owns property within 500 feet of the subject property shall pay a reduced appeal fee of $157.50. 
(b)  Appeals to the city commission. The property owner, the applicant, the department, or any aggrieved party having standing under state law, may appeal to the city commission any decision of the HEPB on matters relating to applications for tree permits by filing a written notice of appeal with the department of hearing boards within 15 calendar days after the date of the decision. The property owner, the applicant, or any aggrieved party having standing under state law may appeal to the city commission any decision by the department on matters relating to tree permit applications for the departments of public works or capital improvements program or to their contractors, by filing a written notice of appeal with the department of hearing boards, within 15 calendar days after the date of the intended decision. The notice of appeal shall include the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall conduct a hearing de novo as a body of original jurisdiction, upon any appeal and/or review from an appealable decision under the terms of this article, as amended. New evidence or materials may be received by the city commission where such evidence or materials are pertinent to a determination of the appeal. The city commission may hear the testimony of witnesses and/or any other evidence offered by any person aggrieved or by any officer, board or agency of the city affected thereby or by any interested party having an interest in the appeal under state law and may, in conformity with this article and other applicable laws, rules and regulations, render its decision. The city commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and may affirm, modify or reverse, in whole or in part, with or without conditions, HEPB's decision, or may grant or deny the appeal of the tree permit issued to the departments of public works and capital improvements. 
All appeals to the city commission in accordance with this section shall be accompanied by a fee of $525.00, plus $4.50 per mailed notice to the adjacent owners within a 500-foot radius. A certified list of said adjacent owners shall be provided with all appeals. However, no fees shall be assessed for appeals initiated by abutting property owners, as defined by the Miami 21 Code, for which a tree permit is sought. Appeals by a nonprofit corporation dedicated to conservation and protection of the natural and physical environment, or appeals by a homeowners association, as that term is defined by F.S. ch. 720, as amended, which has one member who owns property within 500 feet of the subject property shall pay a reduced appeal fee of $262.50. 
The decision of the city commission shall constitute final administrative review, and no petition for rehearing or reconsideration, shall be considered by the city. Appeals from decisions of the city commission may be made to the courts as provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(c)  Notice. All public hearings on appeals shall be noticed as follows. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten calendar days in advance of the hearing to the owner of the subject property and the owners of the adjacent properties. At least ten calendar days in advance of the hearing, a sign, in compliance with the provisions of section 62-19 of this Code, shall be posted on the subject property. 
(d)  No tree removal permitted during an appeal. Upon timely submission of an appeal made pursuant to the requirements of this section, new construction and removal of any trees which could be affected by the subject appeal is prohibited, pending final disposition of the appeal. A violation of this subsection will automatically result in an additional $500.00 fine payable to the city's tree trust fund for each separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Sec. 17-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. Code Compliance shall have jurisdiction for the proper and effective enforcement of this article, under chapter 2, article X entitled code enforcement. Code compliance shall have the right to inspect subject properties in accordance with the approved tree permit and the provisions of this article. The department shall work with code compliance to ensure effective enforcement of this article. Upon notification by code compliance and/or the department, the building official may immediately issue a stop work order for any work that contributes to the violation of this article. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the violation has been corrected, including payment of all fines. 
(b)  Individual enforcement. Each tree removed, relocated or illegally pruned without a tree permit shall constitute a separate and distinct violation and shall be the subject of individual enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Sec. 17-10. - Penalties, remedies cumulative. 
(a)  Fine. Any property that violates this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Non-homestead properties. For every tree that has been the subject of tree activity without a tree permit or the subject of tree abuse, a fine of $1,000.00 per tree shall be imposed. 
(2)  Homestead properties. For every tree that has been the subject of tree activity without a tree permit or the subject of tree abuse, a fine of $500.00 per tree shall be imposed. 
(3)  Said fines are appealable to the code enforcement board pursuant to chapter 2, article X of this Code. 
(4)  Any property that has had a previous fine for a violation of this article within the past five years may receive a fine as stated in this section and shall also be automatically referred to the code enforcement board pursuant to chapter 2, article X of this Code and subject to enhanced penalties of $5,000.00 per day per violation pursuant to F.S. § 162.09. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing this article by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this article. 
(6)  Hardship exemption. A person who meets either of the following criteria may be able to apply for a waiver, full or partial, of the requirements of this section: 
a.  Persons who qualify for the senior citizen exemption pursuant to F.S. § 196.075. 
b.  Persons whose total household income is below 80 percent of the AMI of Miami-Dade County as determined by the HUD annually. 
(b)  Tree replacement required. The planting of replacement trees shall be required, in addition to the monetary fines assessed pursuant to this article. The number of trees required as replacement for each tree that was removed without a permit is provided in Chart 17.10.2.1, the tree replacement chart, for trees removed without a permit, below. If the total number of trees required as replacement trees cannot be reasonably planted on the subject property, the applicant may contribute to the city's tree trust fund in the amount provided in Chart 17.10.2.1. 
CHART 17.10.2.1. TREE REPLACEMENT CHART FOR TREES REMOVED WITHOUT A PERMIT 
Diameter (DBH of each tree removed without a permit 	Total number of Replacement Trees required (where each Replacement Tree is a minimum of 2" DBH x 6' spread in Canopy x 12' in height) 	OR 	Total number of Replacement Trees required (where each Replacement Tree is a minimum of 4" DBH x 8' spread in Canopy x 16' in height) 	OR 	Contribution into Tree Trust Fund 
2"—3" 	2 	or 	1 	or 	$2,000.00 
4"—6" 	4 	or 	2 	or 	$4,000.00 
7"—12" 	8 	or 	4 	or 	$8,000.00 
13"—18" 	12 	or 	6 	or 	$12,000.00 
19"—24" 	16 	or 	8 	or 	$16,000.00 
25"—30" 	20 	or 	10 	or 	$20,000.00 
31"—36" 	24 	or 	12 	or 	$24,000.00 
37"—42" 	28 	or 	14 	or 	$28,000.00 
43"—48" 	32 	or 	16 	or 	$32,000.00 
49"—60" 	40 	or 	20 	or 	$40,000.00 
 
_____
If the sum of the diameter of trees to be removed exceeds a total of 60 inches, the additional inches shall be added cumulatively from the top of the chart, down to the bottom of the chart, to calculate the number of trees required as replacement trees. If the exact DBH cannot be determined for trees removed without a permit, established industry practices shall be used to determine an estimated DBH, as approved by the department. 
(c)  High-risk trees. Trees that are high-risk trees, as a result of tree abuse, are subject to the replacement tree requirements of subsection (b). High-risk trees that result from any other reason are not subject to replacement trees. 
(d)  Tree viability after project completion. If the department determines that any tree is not viable, alive and growing one year after all associated tree activity on the property is completed, the department shall require that said tree be replaced with the same tree species and size which was originally planted or relocated, as per the approved tree permit. 
(e)  Withholding of a new building permit. Any tree activity in violation of this article shall constitute grounds for withholding new building permits directly related to said tree activity until the violation has been corrected, including payment of all fines and planting of all required replacement trees as pursuant to this section. 
Alternatively, in order to obtain the new building permit, the person in violation may post a payment and performance bond pursuant to F.S. § 255.05, as amended, naming the city as obligee. The bond shall be in the amount of ten percent of the construction cost or ten percent of the appraised value of the property, if no construction exists. The bond will remain in place until the violation has been corrected, pursuant to this section. In the event a bond is not feasible, the city may accept an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit, in the previously stated percentages, naming the city as payee. 
(f)  Withholding of a certificate of occupancy. The department shall not approve the zoning inspection required for a temporary or final certificate of occupancy until all tree permits have been finalized and violations of this article have been corrected, including the payment of all fines and the planting of all replacement trees required as mitigation, pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative to all remedies provided by law and/or equity, and the election of one shall not preclude the other. 
(h)  Costs and fees. In the event the city institutes any civil action to enforce the provisions of this article in a court of competent jurisdiction, if the city succeeds as prevailing party, it shall be entitled to recover the fines assessed pursuant to the violation(s), the cost of replacement trees required as mitigation, the costs associated with the investigation and prosecution including reasonable attorney fees, and any equitable and/or legal remedies assigned by the court. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17; Ord. No. 13697, § 2, 7-27-17)  
Sec. 17-11. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any tree growing in a botanical garden, or a licensed plant or tree nursery business. 
(2)  When the city manager or designee determines, in writing, that tree permitting requirements will impede private or public work to restore city order after a declared state of emergency by the city commission. 
(3)  The immediate removal of any tree that presents a life safety issue, by demonstrating to the city, following the review and recommendation of the department, which may require photographic proof revised and/or other supporting documentation, to help determine the condition of the tree prior to its removal. 
(4)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the pruning or trimming of trees where necessary for proper landscape maintenance and safety, provided that the pruning or trimming of trees is done in accordance with ANSI A-300 Tree Care Standards and the guidelines illustrated in the landscape manual. 
(Ord. No. 13670, § 2, 3-23-17)  
Secs. 17-12—17-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL PRESERVATION DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13174, § 2, adopted May 13, 2010, changed the title of article II from "Districts" to "Environmental preservation districts." 
 
Sec. 17-26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, definitions are found in section 17-1. 
(Code 1967, § 64-1; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-1; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-27. - Intent of article. 
The intent of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  To preserve and protect trees and other significant environmental features within the city. 
(2)  To require that the design and construction of all development activity be executed in a manner consistent with the preservation of trees and other significant environmental features to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  To provide guidelines and review procedures for controlling development activity which may alter, destroy or be detrimental to existing trees, significant environmental features and scenic areas. 
(4)  To provide the framework and legal mechanism for publicly identifying and preserving environmentally significant areas or sites. 
(Code 1967, § 64-2; Code 1980, § 17-2; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-28. - Applicability of article. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to real property as follows: 
All property located within a designated environmental preservation district, including scenic transportation corridors. 
(Code 1967, § 64-3; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-3; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-29. - Historic and environmental preservation board. 
The historic and environmental preservation board (hereinafter referred to as HEPB or the board) as established under section 62-186 shall be responsible for maintaining a record of unique environmentally significant lands or sites within the city. The board shall serve as the quasi-judicial instrument for granting or denying certificates of approval for tree removal and development activity within those areas identified and established as environmental preservation districts under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9427, § 1(A), 5-27-82; Code 1980, § 17-4; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-30. - Preservation officer. 
The preservation officer, as provided in section 62-191 shall be responsible to assist HEPB and to carry out the following duties: 
(1)  Serve as secretary to the board. The appointee shall attend all meetings of the board and maintain a record of the proceedings of the board, showing its action on each application. The appointee shall schedule and provide notification of board meetings to applicants and other department and agency representatives. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a proper application for tree removal or development activity within the designated environmental preservation districts, review such application, shall include a field check of the site and referral to other departments or agencies as necessary to determine any adverse effect upon the general public welfare and determine whether a standard or special certificate of approval is required. 
(3)  Maintain and update an official map delineating environmental preservation districts and a photographic documentation of all official designated sites. 
(4)  Work with other city departments and community environmental groups as required to protect and reserve the natural environment through public education and encouraging sound environmental policies. 
(5)  Evaluate applications for standard certificates of approval and render a decision based upon the standards and conditions for tree removal and the review standards for tree removal and development activity within environmental preservation districts. 
(6)  Ensure that notice of the application for a special certificate of approval is given as required in section 17-39. 
(7)  Prepare summary reports of all decisions on certificate of approval applications. The report shall briefly summarize the conditions and criteria for tree removal and the decision of the board or preservation officer. 
(Ord. No. 9427, § 1(B), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-5; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-31. - Environmental preservation districts. 
(a)  Designation generally; intent. Certain geographical areas or sites may be designated as environmental preservation districts by action of the city commission, recognizing the need for preservation and protection of such areas because of their educational, economic, environmental or ecological importance to the welfare of the general public and the city. Environmental preservation districts are intended to provide for preservation and protection of trees and other significant environmental and landscape features and to encourage design and development activity which is sensitive to the natural landscape character of the site. Sites with significant trees and landscape materials may be selected as environmental preservation districts because they provide important environmental functions for the welfare of the community, which include the following: stabilizing the soil, preventing erosion and excessive runoff; giving shade and cooling the land; providing protection from forceful winds; using their leaf surfaces to dilute gaseous pollutants and trap and filter out ash, dust and pollen in the air; absorbing a high percentage of carbon dioxide and returning oxygen to the air; alleviating noise pollution; increasing the value of the property; and adding to the natural scenic beauty of the city. All regulations and review procedures provided for environmental preservation districts are intended to protect the significant environmental features against needless destruction and to present guidelines which will lead to the continuance and enhancement of those features, while at the same time recognizing individual rights to develop property which are not prejudicial to the public interest. 
(b)  Natural or manmade environmental features. The following natural or manmade environmental features may be designated as environmental preservation districts, when one or more such features are located in a geographical area or lot: 
(1)  Clusters of trees with extensive tree canopy, natural hammock areas and mangrove areas. Land areas which include significant environmental features, outstanding characteristics or meet other professional criteria may be designated as environmental preservation districts by the historic and environmental preservation board. 
(2)  Exposed geological formations, such as natural rock outcroppings, caves, sinkholes and significant natural topography of the Coastal Atlantic Ridge. 
(3)  Scenic transportation corridors—those roadway areas which have a unique landscape character and an extensive tree canopy and are of substantial environmental importance to the residents of the city as well as to visitors. Dimensions and extent of scenic transportation corridors shall be determined for each specific area so designated, based upon an analysis of the corridor by qualified professional staff of the appropriate city departments. The boundaries of the scenic transportation corridors may be determined by the following: 
a.  The extent of roadway right-of-way area. 
b.  All established yard areas fronting on the transportation corridor. 
c.  Significant natural features, such as trees, or geological features which are not within the right-of-way or street yard area but are of value as a part of the scene. 
d.  Principal natural landscape or manmade elements which form the visual boundary or enclosing space of the corridor. 
e.  Unique botanical features, such as rare, exotic and valuable trees or plant life or examples of excellent landscape design. 
(c)  Procedure for designation. 
(1)  Areas or sites to be considered as environmental preservation districts may be recommended to HEPB by private individuals and organizations (after providing sufficient evidence that the resource qualifies under the provisions of this Code), all city departments, HEPB and the city commission. 
(2)  All areas to be considered must be evaluated by the HEPB with the appropriate recommendations conveyed to the city commission. 
(3)  A letter or invitation shall be delivered to the owners of all property within the boundaries of the proposed environmental preservation district, with a full explanation of the reasons for the environmental significance of the property, the effect of the proposed classification and the process by which environmental preservation districts are officially designated. The owners will be invited to appear at a public hearing before HEPB to discuss the matter. Should there be more than 50 property owners within the proposed scenic transportation corridor, a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the hearing, stating the aforementioned information and including the date, time, place and reason for the HEPB hearing shall be considered sufficient notice. Following the decision of HEPB, the property may then be recommended by the board to the city commission for designation as an environmental preservation district. 
(4)  The areas recommended by the HEPB and approved by the city commission are established as environmental preservation districts. These sites or areas are then added to the official map delineating environmental preservation districts on file with the department. 
(d)  Effects of designation. 
(1)  Once an area or site is officially designated as an environmental preservation district, all development activity or removal of trees within that area must be reviewed by the preservation officer, and a certificate of approval, standard or special, must be granted under the provisions of section 17-32 before a tree removal permit or a building permit will be issued by the department. 
(2)  When the city commission approves the designation of an area or site as an environmental preservation district, the regulations and review requirements for both the existing transect and the preservation district shall apply. 
(Code 1967, § 64-6; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9427, § 1(C), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-6; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-32. - Removal of trees not located in environmental preservation districts. 
The removal of trees not located in environmental preservation districts shall follow the procedures set forth in article I entitled "Tree protection in general." 
(Code 1967, § 64-7; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9427, § 1(C), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-7; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-33. - Removal of trees and development activity within environmental preservation districts. 
(a)  Certificate of approval required. No person, agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, move or effectively destroy through damaging any tree or other environmentally significant feature within an environmental preservation district without first obtaining a certificate of approval and must abide by tree removal as set for in article I. No person, agent or representative thereof shall commence any development activity within an area visible from a public way within an environmental preservation district without first obtaining a certificate of approval, standard and special, as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Standard certificates of approval may be issued by the preservation officer, without review and approval by the historic and environmental preservation board, for the following classifications of applications: 
a.  Applications for development activity where all existing trees are to be preserved or relocated on site. 
b.  Applications for removal of trees which are diseased, injured, in danger of falling, or interfere with utility service, create unsafe vision clearance, or conflict with other ordinances or regulations. 
c.  Application for removal of trees which are listed in section 17-37. 
d.  Applications involving tree removal and additions or modifications to existing building, except where such addition exceeds 50 percent of the existing lot coverage. 
e.  Applications involving tree removal and site improvements for existing buildings such as but not limited to fences, walls, patios, driveways, pools, etc. 
(2)  Special certificates of approval require the approval of the historic and environmental preservation board, and include the following classifications of applications: 
a.  Applications for new development involving removal of existing trees from the site or alteration of other environmentally significant features. 
b.  Applications for development activity or tree removal not listed in subsection (a)(1) as eligible for a standard certificate of approval. 
c.  Applications referred to the historic and environmental preservation board on appeal from decisions of the preservation officer, or from the general public as described in section 17-8. 
(b)  Applications. All applications for a certificate of approval within environmental preservation districts shall be initially made to the preservation officer. Applications shall include the following and shall remain on file with the city: 
(1)  An official application form, including all requested information, signed by the property owner. 
(2)  Refer to subsection 17-4(b), application requirements, subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) for the required documentation that shall accompany applications. 
(3)  Signature of a planning, building and zoning official indicating compliance with applicable zoning regulations or specifying variances necessary for permitting. 
(c)  Application review. The preservation officer shall review the application, which shall include a site inspection or referral to other departments, and determine whether the type and extent of the proposed work falls within the jurisdiction of a standard certificate of approval or a special certificate of approval. 
(1)  Where an application is eligible for a standard certificate of approval, the preservation officer shall, within 15 days of receipt of a completed application, issue such standard certificate of approval, with or without conditions, or deny such standard certificate of approval with specified reasons therefore. 
(2)  Where the nature and extent of proposed work requires a special certificate of approval, the historic and environmental preservation board shall hold a public hearing and take action within 45 days of receipt of a completed application. The board shall either authorize a special certificate of approval, with or without conditions, or deny such special certificate of approval with specified reasons therefore. 
(d)  Permits. No permit for development activity or tree removal within an environmental preservation district shall be issued by the building department until a certificate of approval has been issued pursuant to this article. Such permit applications shall be approved by the preservation officer to verify conformance with the certificate of approval. Tree removal permits authorized by a standard certificate of approval shall be subject to the ten-day delayed effective date and posting requirements of subsection 17-4(d). 
(e)  Changes in approved work. Any change in work proposed subsequent to issuance of a certificate of approval shall be reviewed by the preservation officer to determine whether such change would materially affect the certificate of approval. If so, such change shall require a new certificate of approval pursuant to all standards and procedures in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 64-8; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9427, § 1(C), (D), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-8; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-34. - Criteria and conditions for tree removal. 
(a)  Criteria for removal. No permit shall be issued for tree removal from the site, unless one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The tree is located in the buildable area or yard area where a structure or improvement may be placed and unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property. Trees located in the property frontage (within the setback) shall not be considered to be located within the building area or yard. Ingress and egress to garages are not considered the buildable area or yard. 
(2)  Trees on the public right-of-way shall not be considered for removal as a result of restriction to or from ingress or egress to the garages or parking on the site provided however, that if there is no other reasonable access to and from the structure or to the property from the public right-of-way, this requirement shall be waived by the director of code enforcement when it relates to private property and/or by the director of public works when it relates to the public right-of-way. 
(3)  The tree is diseased, injured or in danger of falling, interferes with utility service, creates unsafe vision clearance or conflicts with other provisions of this Code or other ordinances or regulations. 
(4)  The tree is an exotic tree species and will be replaced with a native tree species to promote good forestry practices; creates a health hazard; interferes with native tree species or creates a negative impact on natural land features such as rock outcroppings, sink holes or other geological, historical or archaeological features. 
(5)  It is in the general welfare of the public that the tree be removed for a reason other than set forth above. 
(b)  Conditions for relocation and replacement. As a condition to the granting of a tree removal permit, any or all of the following may be required: 
(1)  The applicant may be required to redesign the project to preserve specimen tree(s) or any other tree determined by the historic and environmental preservation board to be of substantial value due to its species, size, age, form and/or historical significance, provide an alternative plan, when feasible, which shall include the preservation of such tree(s) and design alterations within the scope and intent of the initially proposed plan. The applicant shall provide sufficient information, to include a tree survey drawn to scale that illustrates all existing site conditions and a tree disposition plan drawn to scale that superimposes all proposed new construction including all overhead and underground utilities and the new locations of trees over the tree survey plan information. The historic and environmental preservation board will review and analyze the aforementioned information, in order to determine the appropriate course of action. 
(2)  Where practical, specimen trees, or any other trees determined by the department to be of substantial value due to its species, size, age, form and/or historical significance, that is proposed for removal shall be relocated on or off-site. The applicant shall adhere to acceptable tree relocation specifications. 
(3)  If it is impractical to relocate and replant such trees of substantial value, either on the site or off the site, the tree may either be removed, or the applicant may be required to demonstrate a "good faith" effort to redesign the project to protect and preserve the trees. The applicant shall be required to replace all trees permitted to be removed in accordance with the tree replacement requirements contained in section 17-1. 
(4)  The historic and environmental preservation board may require that the applicant provide a written report from a certified arborist before making any determinations in conjunction with this section. The historic and environmental preservation board may also require monitoring by a certified arborist during construction to assure tree preservation. 
(5)  In determining the required preservation, relocation, or replacement of trees, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  Existing tree coverage on the site and in the immediate surrounding area. 
b.  Number of trees to be removed on the entire site. 
c.  The type, size and condition of the tree(s) to be removed. 
d.  The feasibility of relocating the particular tree or trees. 
e.  Topography and drainage of the site. 
f.  The extent to which the trees contribute to the aesthetic, economic and environmental integrity of the surrounding area. 
g.  The nature of the existing and intended use of the property. 
(6)  Tree replacement. Tree replacement shall be as directed in subsection 17-6(a) which includes tree replacement chart 17.6.1.1 as well as tree species diversity chart 17.6.2.1 in subsection 17-6(b), tree species. 
(Code 1967, § 64-9; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-9; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-35. - Tree protection and survival. 
(a)  During construction, all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the destruction or damaging of trees shall be taken. Trees destroyed or receiving major damage must be replaced by trees of equal environmental value as specified in section 17-6 before occupancy or use unless approval for their removal has been granted under permit. 
(1)  Trees that are to remain shall be clearly identified with tags. 
(2)  During construction, protective barriers shall be placed with a radius of ten feet around the trees to remain in accordance with the landscape manual, unless a certified arborist otherwise determines in writing that a smaller or larger protected area is acceptable for each tree, or an alternative tree protection method is recommended. 
(3)  During demolition and/or development, including installation of irrigation systems or any other underground installations, protective barriers shall be placed around each tree and shall remain in order to prevent the destruction or damage to roots, stems or crowns of such trees. The barriers shall remain in place and intact until such time as approved landscape operations begin; however, barriers may be removed temporarily to accommodate construction needs, provided the manner and purpose for such temporary removal will not harm the trees. The trees shall be properly irrigated throughout the building process. Trees damaged during construction shall be subject to the provisions of section 17-9. 
(4)  If at all practical, underground utility lines, curbs and other above grade structures should be routed around existing trees to the outside of the drip line of the tree. In the event that this is not feasible, a tunnel made by a power-driven soil auger may be placed under the tree for installation of utility lines, or a trench passing by the side of the tree may be used for construction of curbing or to accommodate the installation of utility lines. If a trench is used, care should be taken that as few roots as possible are cut, that the cuts are made cleanly, and that the root ends are painted with a wound dressing of asphalt base paint and immediately covered with soil. 
(5)  During construction, unless otherwise authorized by the tree removal permit, no excess soil, additional fill, equipment, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the drip line of any tree that is required to be preserved in its present location unless the addition of excess soil or fill is required in order to comply with either the flood criteria requirements contained in chapter 11C of the Code of Metropolitan Dade County, Florida, and/or federal flood regulations in high flood hazard locations. 
(6)  Unless otherwise authorized by the tree removal permit, no soil is to be removed from within the drip line of any tree that is to remain at its original location. 
(7)  No wires or utility service attachments, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree. 
(8)  Subsequent to construction or the satisfactory stabilizing of a tree, all protective devices shall be removed. The owner of the project on which the tree is located, the applicant for a tree permit or the individual performing physical moving of a tree, shall be fully liable and responsible for removal of the devices. 
(b)  All trees transplanted pursuant to this article shall be maintained alive and healthy at the site of the transplant for a period six months following completion of construction work on the site. Any of such trees which die within such six months shall be replaced by the applicant. The code enforcement department shall retain jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this section. 
(c)  Tree pruning/trimming. The pruning or trimming of any tree shall be done in accordance with ANSI A-300 Tree Care Standards and the guidelines illustrated in the landscape manual, incorporated by reference herein. The practice known as "hatracking" or "topping" is not permitted and shall be considered a violation of this article. The historic and environmental reservation board may require that a certified arborist monitor the trimming and provide the department with photographic documentation following the trimming. Any other tree abuse, or activity that can effectively destroy a tree, shall also be considered a violation of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 64-10; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-10; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-36. - Environmental preservation review standards for tree removal and development activity. 
The following standards shall be used by the preservation officer or historic and environmental preservation board in reviewing all site plans, building plans and applications for tree removal within those areas designated as environmental preservation districts. These standards are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant, as well as to provide a basis for reviewing plans and proposals. These standards are not to be regarded as inflexible and are not intended to discourage innovation or creativity. Development should: 
(1)  Preserve the natural environmental character of all sites, insofar as practical, by minimizing removal of trees or other significant environmental features. 
(2)  Preserve or enhance existing topography and natural land features wherever possible. 
(3)  Use only those signs for identification of principal use. Signs should be of a size, shape and color which are compatible with the surrounding environment. The size of the signs should bear a direct relationship to the rate of speed of passersby, not exceeding a maximum size necessary for recognition. 
(4)  Provide visual screening of all parking areas, service areas or storage areas by using landscaping and building materials which are compatible with the surrounding landscape character. 
(5)  Maintain the continuity of landscape material and spacing characteristic of the surrounding area or scenic corridor. If the development occurs along a designated scenic corridor, the principal natural landscape or manmade elements which form the visual boundaries or enclosing space of the corridor shall be preserved, insofar as possible. 
(6)  Consider the impact of public and private improvements upon the ecological needs of the area. Roadway improvements within scenic corridors and other unique areas should not disrupt or distract from the existing natural environment. 
(Code 1967, § 64-11; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-11; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-37. - Exceptions and exemptions from article requirements. 
(a)  During the period of an emergency, such as hurricane, tropical storm, flood or other act of God, or in the event that any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety of the community, or when the tree prevents a person from the use or enjoyment of the property; or when removal of the tree will prevent further damage and its removal is required, the applicant shall provide photographs and any other supporting materials which will allow a sound judgment to be made. Upon such a finding, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city manager. 
(b)  Prohibited trees shall be exempt from the replacement requirements of this article, but shall require a tree removal permit. Prohibited trees are those tree species that are detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems, and human health, safety or welfare. Prohibited tree species includes those designated in the Miami-Dade County Landscape Manual, incorporated by reference herein, and the Ficus Benjamina/Weeping Fig. These species must be removed from sites upon site development. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the pruning of trees where necessary for proper landscape maintenance and safety provided that the pruning and trimming of trees is done in accordance with ANSI A-300 Tree Care Standards and the guidelines illustrated in the landscape manual. 
(Code 1967, § 64-12; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9427, § 1(D), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-12; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 13274, § 2, 6-23-11)  
Sec. 17-38. - Removal of trees from public lands. 
No tree shall be removed from any public land, public park or public right-of-way, except in accordance with article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 64-13; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-13; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-39. - Public notice of applications for special certificates of approval. 
Public notice is required for all applications for a special certificate of approval in environmental preservation districts. The type and manner of notice will be as follows: 
(1)  Posted notice. Property being considered for a permit under this article shall be posted with a sign at least ten days in advance of the public hearing. The sign shall measure at least three square feet in area, shall be of a color and shape distinguishable from the surrounding landscape, and shall contain substantially the following language: 
A public hearing involving approval of a permit for tree removal or development on this property will be held by the historic and environmental preservation board of the City of Miami. 
Description of activity: 
Place of hearing: 
Time: 
For additional information call 311. 
The sign shall be erected in full view of the public on each street side or side nearest a street of the property being considered for such permit. 
(2)  Mailed notice. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing by the historic and environmental preservation board shall be sent at least ten days in advance of the hearing, by mail, to the owner of the subject property and the owners of the adjacent property and other departments or agencies deemed appropriate by the board. 
(3)  Published notice. The published notice shall contain a description of the activity and the time and place of the hearing. Publication shall be made in the following: 
a.  A daily newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
b.  A daily newspaper of general circulation in the city, devoted primarily to reporting of financial, business, industrial and legal information; and 
c.  A newspaper devoted primarily to reporting information of interest in an area or locality of the city. 
Such publications shall be made not less than ten days in advance of the public hearing and shall be prepared and paid for by the city. These publications shall be sent to the NET office for distribution to the registered homeowners' associations. 
(Code 1967, § 64-14; Ord. No. 9427, § 1(C), 5-27-82; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-14; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-40. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the historic and environmental preservation board. Any citizen may appeal any decision of the department of planning, and the code enforcement department of any term or provision of this article to HEPB, by filing, within ten days after the date of the initial decision, a written notice of appeal with the city manager, with a copy to the city clerk and the preservation officer, which shall set forth precisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall be accompanied by the applicable fee. The enforcement agency shall immediately issue a stop work order for any work which could be affected by the subject appeal, pending final disposition of the appeal. The historic and environmental preservation board shall hear at a public hearing all facts material to the appeal and render a decision within 45 days of the filing of such appeal. The historic and environmental preservation board may affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from, provided that the board shall not take any action which conflicts with or nullifies any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Appeals to the city commission. Any citizen may appeal any decision of the historic and environmental preservation board as it relates to this article, to the city commission by filing within ten days after the date of the decision, a written notice of appeal with the city manager, with a copy to the city clerk and the preservation officer, which shall set forth precisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall be accompanied by the applicable fee. The enforcement agency shall immediately issue a stop work order for any work which could be affected by the subject appeal, pending final disposition of the appeal. The city commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision within 45 days of the filing of such appeal. The city commission may affirm, modify or reverse the board's decision. The decision of the city commission shall constitute final administrative review, and no petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-15; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-41. - Penalties, remedies cumulative. 
Any person, or agent thereof, violating the provisions of any section of this article shall upon conviction, be subject to the penalties in this chapter or any other penalties as provided by law. The removal, relocation or destruction of each tree for which a tree removal permit is required-without a proper permit on the job site shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(Code 1967, § 64-15; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-16; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-42. - Civil remedies. 
In addition to any other remedies provided by law and by this article, the enforcement agency shall have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this article or any permit condition promulgated under this article: 
(1)  The enforcement agency may institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and recover liquidated damages for each violation in an amount of not more than $5,000.00 per offense. Each tree unlawfully removed under the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(2)  The enforcement agency may institute a civil action in a court relief to enforce compliance with this article to enjoin any violation hereof and to seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the term of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-17; Ord. No. 13142, § 7, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-43. - Fees. 
(a)  Standard certificate of approval: Minimum $26.00 plus $5.00 for every tree to be removed, relocated or newly planted. 
(b)  Special certificate of approval: $26.00. 
(c)  All applications for permits for the removal of trees shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided for under section 10-4, as amended, "Building permit fee schedule." 
(d)  All appeals shall be accompanied by a fee of $300.00, except that no fee shall be charged for such appeals initiated by agencies of the city or by an owner in fact of a property adjacent to the subject property or by a nonprofit corporation dedicated to conservation and protection of the natural and physical environment. 
(Code 1967, § 64-16; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-18; Ord. No. 13142, § 7, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-44. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The department of code enforcement, its inspectors and the planning department shall have concurrent jurisdiction for the proper and effective enforcement of this article under chapter 2, article X entitled "Code enforcement." 
(b)  The enforcement agency shall immediately issue an order to cease and desist any work being carried out in violation of this article or any permit conditions promulgated under this article. Upon notice of such violation, no further work shall take place until appropriate remedial action is instituted, as determined by the enforcement agency. 
(c)  In cases where tree removal is carried out without the necessary permit under the terms and conditions of this article, the property owner shall be required to make application for an after-the-fact tree removal permit and certificate of approval, if applicable. The appropriate reviewing agency may grant an after-the-fact certificate of approval or tree removal permit only if it finds that the same application would have rightfully been approved prior to removal of the tree(s), and that each tree destroyed is to be replaced by trees of equal or greater value. Such replacement trees shall be located on the subject site wherever practical, or they may be required to be located on public property. Such replacement shall be assured by a performance bond or by a cash contribution to a tree planting fund established by the city. If the conditions for an after-the-fact tree removal permit are not fulfilled, the case shall be referred to the law department for appropriate action under sections 17-41 and 17-42. 
(Code 1967, § 64-17; Ord. No. 8798, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-78; Ord. No. 9769, § 1, 12-15-83; Code 1980, § 17-19; Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-45. - Fine. 
Any person, or agent thereof, who removes a tree without a tree removal permit, shall be fined a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation, per day for the first violation, and shall be fined up to $5,000.00 per tree for every repeat violation of this article, or a greater penalty as provided by law, and in addition undergo the tree replacement process in the form of replacement trees pursuant to article I. Each tree removed without a tree removal permit shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to a separate fine and tree replacement pursuant to article I. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-46. - Tree replacement required. 
In addition to the monetary fine established above, the planting of replacement trees shall be required. The number of trees required as replacement for each tree that was removed without a permit shall be based upon chart 17.10.2.1, Tree replacement chart for trees removed without a permit. If the total number of trees required as replacement trees cannot be reasonably planted on the subject property, the applicant may contribute into the city's tree trust fund in an amount based upon chart 17.10.2.1 for the balance number of replacement trees that cannot be planted on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-47. - Tree replacement for trees removed without a permit. 
Refer to the tree replacement chart 17.10.2.1 in article I. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-48. - Withholding of a new building permit. 
The removal of any tree in violation of this article shall constitute grounds for withholding new building permits directly related to said tree removal until the violation has been corrected, including the payment of all fines and the planting of all trees required as replacement trees pursuant to this section. Alternatively, in order to obtain the new building permit, the person in violation may post a payment and performance bond pursuant to F.S. § 255.05 naming the city as obligee. The bond shall be in the amount of ten percent of the construction cost or ten percent of the appraised value of the property, if no construction exists. The bond will be maintained in place until the violation has been corrected, pursuant to this section. In the event a bond is not feasible, the city may accept an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit, in the previously stated percentages, naming the city as payee. This section shall not apply to complete applications submitted to the city on the effective date of Ord. No. 13174. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-49. - Withholding of a certificate of occupancy. 
The department shall not approve the zoning inspection required for a temporary or final certificate of occupancy until all violations of this article have been corrected, including the payment of all fines and the planting of all trees required as replacement tree mitigation, pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 17-50. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative to all remedies provided by law and/or equity, and the election of one shall not preclude the other. 
(Ord. No. 13174, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Secs. 17-51—17-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
City Code cross references— Parks and recreation, ch. 38; streets and sidewalks, ch. 54; street grades and lines for shade trees, § 54-51. 
 
Sec. 17-71. - Authority of director of public works. 
The director of public works or his/her duly authorized representative, under the city manager, shall have the general management and supervision of all trees, shrubs and plants embraced by this article. 
(Code 1967, § 59-1; Code 1980, § 59-21; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 17-72. - Permits—Required to prune, plant or remove from public land. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trim or prune any tree, shrub, or plant or to remove any tree, shrub, or plant from any dedicated street, alley, highway, public right-of-way, or easement, public land lying between property lines on either side of a public street, highway, alley, public parking strip, public street, sidewalk or divider, public median strip or planting strip or other land or public place owned by the city without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the director of public works or authorized representative. 
(Code 1967, § 59-2; Code 1980, § 59-22; Ord. No. 13087, § 2, 9-10-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
Case Law reference— In suit against city for injuries sustained from electric shock incurred while pruning trees on a city right-of-way for a private individual, where neither the injured party nor his/her employer had acquired a permit as required and where both the injured party and his/her employer knew a permit was required, the injured party was a trespasser as to the city, to whom the city owed no greater duty than to avoid wilful and wanton conduct and, upon discovery of his/her presence, to give warning of known dangers not open to ordinary observation. Norris v. City of Miami, 367 So. 2d 1038.  
Sec. 17-73. - Same—Required to break, injure, etc., in public highway or park. 
No person shall, without a written permit from the director of public works, break, incline or in any way deface any living tree, shrub or vine in a public highway or park, or cut, disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree, shrub or vine in a public highway or park. 
(Code 1967, § 59-3; Code 1980, § 59-23)  
Sec. 17-74. - Same—Issuance; charges. 
The director of public works shall issue a written permit required by the two preceding sections to any applicant, without charge, when it is determined that the action proposed is necessary or desirable and not contrary to any city master plan for trees, shrubs or plants, and will be performed satisfactorily. 
(Code 1967, § 59-4; Code 1980, § 59-24; Ord. No. 13087, § 2, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 17-75. - Same—Contents. 
A permit issued as provided in the preceding section shall contain the location approved, the action allowed to be performed, the duration of the permit and any other requirements deemed necessary or desirable by the director of public works to regulate the cutting, trimming or removal of any trees, shrubs or plants within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 59-5; Code 1980, § 59-25)  
Sec. 17-76. - Placing guards during construction or repair of buildings. 
In the erection or repairing of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place such guards around all nearby trees, shrubs or vines in a public highway or park as shall effectively prevent injury to them. 
(Code 1967, § 59-6; Code 1980, § 59-26)  
Sec. 17-77. - Placing injurious substances on or near roots. 
No person shall throw or allow to be thrown any saltwater, oil or injurious substance upon any public highway or park where such material may enter the ground at the roots of any public tree, shrub or vine. 
(Code 1967, § 59-7; Code 1980, § 59-27)  
Chapter 18 - FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city to levy taxes, special assessments, § 3(a)—(c); power of city to contract debts and borrow money, § 3(d); borrowing to erect and add to public buildings such as hospitals, office buildings, city halls, etc., § 3(nn); borrowing to provide adequate waterworks system, § 3(oo); borrowing to purchase, hire, maintain, operate or lease public utilities, § 3(pp); borrowing money for engineering work necessary to effect public improvements, § 3(rr); budget and accounts for off-street parking facilities to be separate, § 23(g); finance generally, § 27 et seq.; pension funds, § 37; suits against city, § 44. 
City Code cross references— Finance department, § 2-466 et seq.; management and budget department, § 2-491 et seq.; improvement districts, § 2-726 et seq.; city-owned property, § 2-776 et seq.; local business taxes, ch. 31; parking rates, § 35-191; taxation, ch. 56. 
County Code cross references— Taxation generally, ch. 29; presentation by municipality or taxpayer's association to county tax assessor, etc., regarding overall assessments of real property in municipality or in a general area, § 29-17; presentation by a municipality or taxpayer's association to county tax assessor, etc., regarding personal property in a municipality or in a general area, § 29-31. 
Law review references— Articles on validation of bonds in Florida, 8 Miami L.Q. 253, 10 Miami L.Q. 244; article on special assessments in Florida, 10 Miami L.Q. 245; article on legal aspects of bond financing in Florida, 6 Fla. L. Rev. 287; article on developments in revenue bond financing, 6 Fla. L. Rev. 385. 
State Law reference— Municipal borrowing generally, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal finance and taxation generally, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; supplemental and alternative method of making local municipal improvements, F.S. ch. 170; foreclosure of municipal tax and special assessment liens, F.S. ch. 173; general financial provisions relating to political subdivisions of the state, F.S. § 218.01 et seq.; revenue sharing, F.S. § 218.20 et seq.; local financial management and reporting, F.S. § 218.30 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Depositories for city funds to contract by competitive bid for banking services; investment of idle funds. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to request bids from all federal- and Florida-chartered banks located within the city limits for all banking services required by the city for a three-year period. Such banking services required shall be defined by the director of finance in a request for proposals directed to the aforementioned banks. The city commission will award a contract for three years to the bank submitting the best bid upon the recommendation of the city manager. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 47 of the Charter, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is hereby delegated to the director of finance. The finance director is hereby authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are protected by the full faith and credit of the United States government and in bonds and obligations of agencies of the United States, provided such are guaranteed by the United States or by the issuing agency; general obligations of states, counties, municipalities, school districts, or other political subdivisions; revenue and excise tax bonds of the various municipalities of the State of Florida, provided none of such securities have been in default within five years prior to date of purchase; negotiable certificates of deposit; bankers acceptance drafts; or prime commercial paper from money in his/her custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he/she may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. For the purpose of this section, "prime" commercial paper shall be defined as that commercial paper which has received a Standard and Poor's rating of A-1 or Moody's rating of Prime-1. The city, through its investment policy committee, shall determine what portion of public funds may be deposited in time deposits bearing interest. From time to time the finance director shall redeem the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to this subsection so that proceeds may be applied to the purpose for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2; Ord. No. 8757, § 1, 2-23-78; Ord. No. 10121, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 18-2)  
Sec. 18-2. - Depositories of public moneys to pledge assets as security. 
(a)  The security to be given by such banks as may be designated under section 18-1 shall consist of any notes, bonds or other securities, other than shares of stock in which a state bank is authorized by applicable law or regulation to invest any of its funds, and shall be accepted as satisfactory security for the safekeeping and prompt payment of moneys deposited. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of finance to demand increased security from such banks commensurate with the funds on deposit therein at any time, and the director of finance is hereby authorized to reduce the amount of security at any time that the funds on deposit with any bank shall be diminished below the amount of security held by the city from such bank; provided that at no time the amount on deposit at any bank shall exceed the par value of the security furnished by such bank. 
(Code 1967, § 16-3; Ord. No. 8757, § 1, 2-23-78; Code 1980, § 18-3) 
State Law reference— Deposit of public funds, F.S. ch. 280.  
Sec. 18-3. - Deposit of daily collections, retention of funds for cash needs. 
The director of finance is hereby directed to deposit daily all money collected by the city, except such amount as it may be necessary to keep on hand in cash for the expeditious transaction of the city's business. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4; Code 1980, § 18-4)  
Sec. 18-4. - Fees for opening and closing graves at city-owned cemetery. 
(a)  Generally. The schedule of fees for opening and closing graves at the city-owned cemetery is as follows: 
		Minimum Notice of 24 Hours 	After 3:00 p.m. 
Weekdays ..... 	$184.00 	$236.00 
Saturdays ..... 	210.00 	262.50 
Sundays and holidays ..... 	289.00 	289.00 
Double-depth graves: 		
	First burial ..... 	210.00 	262.50 
	Second burial ..... 	131.00 	184.00 
Children's graves up to 36 inches ..... 	79.00 	105.00 
Interment of ashes ..... 	79.00 	105.00 
 
(b)  Veterans. The fees for war veterans interred in block 35 and a portion of block 42 and the north and south peripheral area of the city cemetery shall be as follows: 
Opening and closing of a grave where casket at outer case is: 
Less than 86 inches ..... $ 79.00 
Over 86 inches ..... 105.00 
Double depth (to permit burial of wife in same gravesite) ..... 157.50 
Fees for veterans interred in other sections of the city cemetery than those delineated above shall remain the same as heretofore established. 
(Code 1967, § 16-5; Ord. No. 9329, § 1, 9-24-81; Ord. No. 9339, § 1, 11-12-81; Code 1980, § 18-5; Ord. No. 13142, § 8, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 18-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12227, § 1, adopted May 9, 2002, repealed § 18-5 in its entirety, which pertained to the budget and finances review committee and derived from Ord. No. 11130, § 11, adopted March 24, 1994; the Code of 1980, § 18-12; Ord. No. 11564, § 9, adopted October 28, 1997.  
Sec. 18-6. - Safeguards. 
(a)  All persons contracting with the city under articles III and V of this chapter shall be required to certify their compliance with the antitrust laws of the United States and of the state and to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city for any noncompliance by said persons with the above laws. 
(b)  All persons contracting with the city under articles III and V of this chapter shall be obligated to pay whichever is the greater of the following: 
(1)  All applicable ad valorem taxes that are lawfully assessed against the property involved; or 
(2)  An amount to be paid to the city equal to what the ad valorem taxes would be if the property were privately owned and used for a profit-making purpose. 
Such taxes shall not be credited against any revenues accruing to the city under any contract that may be awarded under this section. 
(c)  Any proposal submitted pursuant to articles III and V of this chapter by a potential bidder or contractor that contemplates more than the estimated extent of the city's proposed commitment of funds, property, or services shall be ineligible for acceptance by the city commission. 
(d)  Any substantial increase in the city's commitment of funds, property or services, or any material alteration of any contract awarded for a unified development project shall entitle the city commission to terminate the contract after a public hearing. Prior to such public hearing, the commission shall seek and obtain a report from the city manager and from the review committee that evaluates the proposals for the project, concerning the advisability of exercising that right. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-86)  
Secs. 18-7—18-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALE OF CERTIFICATES FOR DELINQUENT LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENT LIENS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Assessments for local improvements to constitute lien on property assessed, § 30. 
State Law reference— Procedure for foreclosure of municipal special assessment liens, F.S. ch. 173; optional with the municipality, F.S. § 173.13. 
 
Sec. 18-36. - "Director of finance" defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "director of finance" shall mean the director of the finance department of the city or his/her authorized representative or such other persons as may be authorized by law to perform the duties required by this article. 
(Code 1967, § 16-8; Code 1980, § 18-33; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-37. - Alternate procedures for delinquent local improvement liens; applicability to all municipal liens. 
Unless the city commission shall elect to proceed by foreclosure proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction, either as to all or any one or more properties on which local improvement assessment liens are delinquent, and shall so order by resolution, all delinquent local improvement assessment liens shall be sold each year in the same manner and under the same provisions of law, both state and local, that govern and prescribe the proceedings and conditions under which certificates for delinquent city taxes are sold, except as to the time of such sale and the manner and method of notice thereof, as provided in this article. For the purposes of this article the term "local improvement assessment lien" shall be synonymous with special assessment lien and shall include all liens provided for by the City Charter or Code of Ordinances, the Metropolitan Dade County Charter or Dade County Code, the South Florida Building Code, Special Acts of the State of Florida and Statutes of the State of Florida as the same create local improvement or special assessment liens against the real property involved in accordance with their provisions. 
(Code 1967, § 16-9; Ord. No. 10501, § 1, 10-27-88; Code 1980, § 18-34)  
Sec. 18-38. - Time and place of sale. 
All unpaid balances of local improvement assessment liens which are delinquent on January 1 of any year, together with unpaid accrued interest thereon as hereinafter provided, shall be offered for sale by the director of finance at the same time and place as the sale of certificates for delinquent general city taxes of the immediately preceding year, but the sale of such certificates for local improvement assessment liens may be postponed and adjourned from day to day until the tax certificate sale shall have been completed. 
(Code 1967, § 16-10; Code 1980, § 18-35)  
Sec. 18-39. - Amount for which certificates to be sold; separate certificate for each lien. 
The certificate for any delinquent balance of an assessment lien shall be issued and sold for the amount of such balance of the principal amount, plus interest due and unpaid computed to the date on which any such tax sale is scheduled to commence, at the percentage per annum applicable to such lien, plus five percent to provide and defray the cost of such sale and the issuance of the certificate. A separate certificate shall be issued for each such lien. 
(Code 1967, § 16-11; Code 1980, § 18-36)  
Sec. 18-40. - Notice to be mailed to property owner; publication of notice in newspaper; incorporation by reference of statutes and county ordinances providing for the sale of delinquent special improvement or assessment certificates. 
(a)  The director of finance shall cause to be sent by mail to the last known owner of any lot or parcel of land upon which any such delinquent assessment lien balance exists, at his/her last known address, a written notice of intent to issue and sell a certificate thereon, which notice shall be mailed not more than 60 days and not less than 30 days prior to the date of commencement of such sale. Such notice shall contain and show the legal description of the affected property, the amount of delinquent principal of the lien, the amount for which the certificate is to be issued, the time and place of sale and the penalties and rates of charges which will result from and accrue after such sale. A separate notice shall be made for each property description, but the notice on any property description may include two or more delinquent assessment liens shown separately thereon. 
(b)  The director of finance shall also cause to be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city which has been designated by the city commission to publish the notice of delinquent tax and/or special assessment sales, in the manner provided by section 42 of the City Charter, namely that a notice of such sale shall be published in two issues of a newspaper of general circulation in said city, so that at least seven days shall elapse between the two publications, and at least seven days and not more than 28 days shall elapse between the last publication and the day of the sale. The notice shall plainly state that all real estate in the city upon which delinquent assessment liens are past due and unpaid will be sold in conformity with law, and the time and place of such sale shall be clearly stated. The notice need not be in any particular form but shall be brief, simple, plainly state the facts and give fair notice of the sale. It shall not be necessary that it contain the names of the owners of the real estate to be sold, nor state the amount of assessments which are due and unpaid. 
(c)  This section is supplemental to other laws and shall not repeal any other ordinance relating to the subject matter hereof but shall be an alternative and supplemental method to the publication of notices for the sale of delinquent special assessment liens. The collection, enforcement, publication, sale and foreclosure of special assessment liens may be, at the city's discretion, enforced by any of the methods provided for by section 18-14, Dade County Code, and F.S. chs. 170, 173 and 197, as they currently exist and may hereinafter be amended, and may further be accomplished by any other method established by law. 
(Code 1967, § 16-12; Ord. No. 10297, § 1, 7-9-87; Code 1980, § 18-37; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-41. - Sale to highest bidder; rights and remedies of purchaser. 
The director of finance shall offer and sell each such certificate separately to the bidder offering the best bid under the laws and rules then in force governing the sale of certificates for general city taxes. The purchaser of any such certificates shall be entitled to the same rates of interest from date of purchase to date of redemption, and the same remedies for nonpayment, such as the taking of a deed to the property through foreclosure or otherwise, as are at the time of such sale available to the purchasers of certificates for general city taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 16-13; Code 1980, § 18-38)  
Sec. 18-42. - Right of holder of mortgage or other lien to pay amount due city. 
At any time prior to the date of the certificate sale, the owner or the holder of a mortgage or other lien on the affected property may relieve the delinquency by the payment of any and all delinquent installments of principal, if the delinquency has been caused by failure to pay any such installment, and all delinquent interest, or, if no installment payment schedule has theretofore been established and entered upon, by the payment of the entire amount of principal and interest then due, and in either such case the director of finance shall withdraw from the sale the certificate on any such lien. 
(Code 1967, § 16-14; Code 1980, § 18-39)  
Sec. 18-43. - Disposition of proceeds. 
The proceeds of any sale under this article shall be used and applied to the reimbursement to the city of the reasonable and necessary costs of preparing, noticing and conducting the sale, to the extent of the five percent as provided by section 18-39, and to such other fund as may be proper for the repayment of the provision of funds by which the local improvement creating the lien was accomplished. 
(Code 1967, § 16-15; Code 1980, § 18-40)  
Secs. 18-44—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY OF MIAMI PROCUREMENT ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12271, § 2, adopted August 22, 2002, repealed and reenacted art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. III pertained to purchasing and contracts generally, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 18-11, 18-51, 18-51.1—18-51.6, 18-52, 18-52.1—18-52.9, 18-53, 18-54, 18-54.1—18-54.4, 18-55, 18-55.1—18-55.3, 18-56, 18-56.1—18-56.4, 18-57, 18-57; Ord. No. 9572, § 1, adopted February 10, 1983; Ord. No. 10032, §§ 1—4, adopted September 12, 1985; Ord. No. 10231, § 1, adopted March 13, 1987; Ord. No. 10328, § 1, adopted October 22, 1987; Ord. No. 11048, § 2, adopted March 25, 1993; Ord. No. 11072, § 1, adopted July 8, 1993; Ord. No. 11087, § 2, adopted September 27, 1993; Ord. No. 11564, § 9, adopted October 28, 1997; Ord. No. 11657, § 2, adopted May 26, 1998; Ord. No. 11688, § 1, adopted July 21, 1998; Ord. No. 11726, § 1, adopted November 17, 1998; Ord. No. 11727, § 2, adopted November 17, 1998; Ord. No. 11878, § 2, adopted January 13, 2000; Ord. No. 11890, § 3, adopted February 10, 2000; Ord. No. 12103, § 1, adopted September 13, 2001, and Ord. No. 12141, § 1, adopted October 25, 2001. 
Charter reference— Chief procurement officer, § 28; contracts for public works, improvements, real property, personal property, and unified development projects, § 29. 
City Code cross reference— Conflicts of interest, § 2-611 et seq. 
Law review references— Articles as to municipal contracts in Florida, 8 Miami L.Q. 257; 16 Miami L. Rev. 513. 
State Law reference— Purchases by municipality under state purchasing agreement, F.S. § 287.042(2); consultant's competitive negotiation act, F.S. § 287.055; preference to Florida business, F.S. § 287.084. 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prescribe the manner in which the city shall control the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services of the city, and to maintain a high ethical standard for all officers and employees of the city in connection therewith; to place city's purchasing function in a centralized system in which the city will be able to establish policies and procedures governing all purchases and contracts; to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons doing business with the city; to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-72. - Application and exclusions. 
(a)  Application. Regardless of the source of funds, including state and federal assistance monies, and except as otherwise specified by law, the provisions of this article shall apply to every purchase/procurement by: 
(1)  All city entities or boards, as hereinafter defined, except for the community redevelopment agencies. 
(2)  The Downtown Development Authority, the department of off-street parking, Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust, Civilian Investigative Panel, Bayfront Park Management Trust, and Virginia Key Beach Park Trust (each referred to herein as the "board" or "city entity," as applicable); provided, however, that: 
a.  With respect to each board, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
1.  "City" shall mean the board. 
2.  "City manager" shall mean the executive director of the board. 
3.  "Chief procurement officer" shall mean the executive director of the board or his or her designee. 
4.  "City commission" shall mean the board of directors of the board. 
b.  The cone of silence shall not apply to any board or city entity set forth in subsection 18-72(2) herein or the community redevelopment agencies. 
(b)  Exclusions. This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Procurement of dues and memberships in trade or professional organizations; registration fees for trade and career fairs; subscriptions for periodicals and newspapers; advertisements; postage; abstracts of titles for real property and title searches; title insurance for real property; water, sewer, and electrical utility services; copyrighted materials or patented materials including but not limited to technical pamphlets, published books, maps, testing or instructional materials; fees and costs of job-related seminars and training. 
(2)  The sale or lease of city-owned real property, as these are governed by the provisions of 3f(iii) and Section 29 A-D of the City Charter and chapter 18, article V of the City Code. 
(3)  Goods purchased with petty cash in accordance with established city procedures. 
(4)  Items purchased for resale to the general public. 
(5)  Purchase of groceries. 
(6)  Artistic services or works of art. 
(7)  Hotel accommodation and services. 
(8)  Public-owned transportation. 
(9)  Purchase of tickets for special events, tourist attractions and amusement parks. 
(10)  City-sponsored events at hotels, motels, restaurants, or other similar venues not owned by the city. 
(11)  Entertainment services for city-sponsored events. 
(12)  Purchases of motor vehicle license plates from a governmentally regulated monopoly or a government agency. 
(13)  Travel on city business as provided in APM-77, as amended. 
(14)  Persons retained as expert consultants, as defined herein. 
(15)  Maintenance and licensing agreements to support continued, on-going use of proprietary software applications, the original software purchase of which was procured and approved fully in accordance with chapter 18, article III of the City Code. 
(16)  Legal services coordinated by and through the office of the city attorney citywide, including, but not limited to: attorney services, paralegals, expert witnesses, jury consultants, legal support services, legal research, court reporters and stenographers. 
(17)  Water, sewer, electrical, telecommunications or utility relocation agreements within a prior approved easement, the construction relocation of which must be performed by the water, sewer, electrical, telecommunications or a utility owner's representative. 
(18)  Actuarial services procured in accordance with subsection 40-196(b)(6) of the City Code. 
(19)  Community Development Block Grant ("CDBG"), Housing Opportunities for People With AIDS ("HOPWA"), Emergency Shelter Grant ("ESG"), Neighborhood Stabilization Program ("NSP"), HOME, and similar programs (collectively "Community and Economic Development Programs"), providing however, that community and economic development programs shall follow 2 CFR part 200, as applicable, and as may be amended and supplemented from time to time. 
(20)  Aggregate of anti-poverty initiative funds in an amount up to $50,000.00 in any single city fiscal year to any single entity. 
(21)  Aggregate of Social Service gap funds in an amount up to $50,000.00 in any single city fiscal year to any single entity. 
(22)  Matching fund grant agreements to the city, inclusive of any city agency or instrumentality. 
For purposes of this subsection, matching fund grant agreements shall mean those eligible matching fund grant agreements, processed through and approved by the city office of grants administration or similar city department, where a grant is provided to the city requiring a city payment of matching funds in an amount or value equal to that of the grant. The grant required city match may be in the form of funds or in-kind goods or services as provided in the matching fund grant agreement. The exclusion to the city's procurement ordinance for matching fund grant agreements, as amended, shall extend to advertising of the same including, but not limited to, social media platforms, press releases, public relations, etc. as required or contemplated by the matching fund grant agreement. The exclusion above for the advertising of matching fund grant agreements shall only apply to the city's procurement ordinance, and any applicable competitive solicitation requirements as imposed by such agreements or federal, state or county laws shall continue to apply. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12354, § 1, 4-10-03; Ord. No. 13380, § 2, 5-9-13; Ord. No. 13586, § 2, 1-28-16; Ord. No. 13744, § 2, 2-8-18; Ord. No. 13773, § 2, 6-28-18; Ord. No. 13801, § 4, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 18-73. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Addendum means a formal amendment or supplement to a solicitation document: for example, items or information that have been added to or removed from a solicitation document. 
Administrative policies and procedures of purchasing means those appropriately promulgated directives having general or particular applicability designed to implement or interpret policy, or describing organization, procedure, or practice requirements. 
Amendment means a modification, deletion, or addition to an executed agreement. 
Bid means a formal written price offered by a business to the city to furnish specific goods, equipment and/or contractual services or public works or improvements in response to an invitation for bids or an invitation to bid. 
Bid award means award of a bid for which funds have lawfully been appropriated by the city commission. 
Bidder means a respondent to an invitation for bids or an invitation to bid. 
Blanket purchase order means a purchase order under which a contractual party agrees to provide goods or services to a purchaser on a demand basis; the purchase order generally establishes a maximum dollar limit, prices, terms, conditions, and the period covered, with no specified quantities; shipments are to be made as required by the purchaser. 
Brand name "or equal" specifications means specification(s) limited to one or more items by the manufacturer's names or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet the city's requirements and which provide(s) for the submission of equivalent products. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity. 
Change order means a written modification to a contract or purchase order, which normally revises the quantities or scope of services, and may include an extension of time to complete the contract. 
Chief procurement officer means the person holding the position as the director of the department of purchasing of the city. 
City entity(ies) means the city, the office of the mayor, the city commissioners, the city manager, the city clerk, all city departments and offices, the city commission, every agency, authority, advisory board, regulatory board, quasijudicial board, semiautonomous instrumentality, committee, task force, trust, or any group created and/or funded, in whole or in part, by the city commission, provided, with the exception of the community redevelopment agencies. 
Contract means: 
(1)  A legally binding promise enforceable by law; a written agreement between two (2) or more competent parties to perform or not perform a specific act or acts; 
(2)  All types of agreements for the procurement or disposal of goods, services or public works or improvements. 
Contractual party means a person or entity that enters into a contract with the city, or supplies goods, equipment or services to the city. 
Contractual services means contractual or general services that include, but are not limited to, cleaning and security guard services; grounds maintenance; leasing; and rental, maintenance or repair of equipment, supplies, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term shall not include professional or other personal services, which are by their nature unique or are not subject to competitive bidding. 
Cooperative purchasing means: 
(1)  Procurement conducted on behalf of two (2) or more public entities; 
(2)  The combining of requirements of two (2) or more public entities in order to obtain the benefits of volume purchasing and/or reduction in administrative expenses. 
Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior position. 
Electronic means electric, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other similar technology. 
Emergency procurement means a purchase made in response to a need when the delay incident to complying with all governing rules, regulations, and/or procedures would be detrimental to the life, health, welfare, safety or convenience of the city and/or its residents. 
Goods means any tangible personal property other than services or real property. 
Invitation for bids (IFB), aka invitation to bid (ITB), means the solicitation document and all attachments and addenda used for competitive sealed bidding for the procurement of public works or improvements, goods, equipment and/or contractual services. The IFB/ITB is used when the using agency is capable of specifically defining the scope of work for which a contractual or general service is required or when the using agency is capable of establishing precise specifications defining the actual commodity or group of commodities required. 
Local office means a business within the city which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has had a staffed and fixed office or distribution point, operating within a permanent structure with a verifiable street address that is located within the corporate limits of the city, for a minimum of twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received for the purchase or contract at issue; for purposes of this section, "staffed" shall mean verifiable, full-time, on-site employment at the local office for a minimum of forty (40) hours per calendar week, whether as a duly authorized employee, officer, principal or owner of the local business; a post office box shall not be sufficient to constitute a local office within the city; 
(2)  If the business is located in the permanent structure pursuant to a lease, such lease must be in writing, for a term of no less than twelve (12) months, been in effect for no less than the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received, and be available for review and approval by the chief procurement officer or its designee; for recently-executed leases that have been in effect for any period less than the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received, a prior fully-executed lease within the corporate limits of the city that documents, in writing, continuous business residence within the corporate limits of the city for a term of no less than the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received shall be acceptable to satisfy the requirements of this section, and shall be available for review and approval by the chief procurement officer or its designee; further requiring that historical, cleared rent checks or other rent payment documentation in writing that documents local office tenancy shall be available for review and approval by the chief procurement officer or its designee; 
(3)  Has had, for a minimum of twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received for the purchase or contract at issue, a current business tax receipt issued by both the city and Miami-Dade County, if applicable; and 
(4)  Has had, for a minimum of twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date bids or proposals were received for the purchase or contract at issue, any license or certificate of competency and certificate of use required by either the city or Miami-Dade County that authorizes the performance of said business operations; and 
(5)  Has certified in writing its compliance with the foregoing at the time of submitting its bid or proposal to be eligible for consideration under this section; provided, however, that the burden of proof to provide all supporting documentation in support of this local office certification is borne by the business applicant submitting a bid or proposal. 
Major projects means projects with anticipated costs to the city in excess of $500,000.00 and/or projects involving the sale/lease/rental of city-owned waterfront property. 
Most advantageous means a judgmental assessment of what is in the best interests of the city and denotes a condition, which will result in a maximum benefit being conferred upon the city. 
On-line procurement/bidding means a procurement process in which the purchasing department receives bids for goods, equipment, and contractual services, electronically transmitted over the internet in a real-time, open, interactive competitive bidding event. 
Persons retained as expert consultants means individuals acting as independent contractors retained by the city manager on a contract basis with a specific term for the purpose of performing specialized defined tasks that require knowledge, skills and training not otherwise available to the city by temporary or permanent members of the classified or unclassified service and which tasks, by their nature, require independent and autonomous judgment. Remuneration for the services of such persons shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) in any one year, and shall be payable on a per diem basis. 
Practicable means that which may be accomplished or put into practical application. 
Procurement means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any goods and/or services for public purposes in accordance with the law, rules, regulations and procedures intended to provide for the economic expenditure of public funds. It includes, but is not limited to, all functions which pertain to the obtaining of any supplies, materials, equipment and/or services, including public works and improvements and capital improvement projects, as defined herein, required by any department or agency of city government, regardless of the source of funds. For the purposes of this article, it excludes those items set forth in subsection 18-72(b). 
Professional and personal services means (a) services, the value of which is substantially measured by the professional competence of the person performing them, and which are not susceptible to realistic competition by cost of services alone; (b) services rendered by members of a recognized profession or persons possessing a specialized skill. Such services are generally acquired to obtain information, advice, training or direct assistance. 
"Professional and personal services" shall include but not be limited to services customarily rendered by architects, engineers, surveyors, auditors, software and system applications, planning, electronic, technology, technical and management consultants, appraisers, and medical-related providers. 
Proposal means an executed formal document submitted by a proposer to the city, stating the goods and/or services offered to satisfy the need as requested in the request for proposals, request for letters of interest or request for qualifications. 
Proposer means a respondent to a request for proposals, request for letters of interest or request for qualifications. 
Public notice unless otherwise specified herein, means publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within a reasonable time. 
Purchase means the same as procurement, as defined herein. 
Purchase order means the city's document used to authorize a purchase transaction with a contractual party. It should contain a description of goods and/or services ordered, applicable terms as to payment, discounts, date of delivery/performance, insurance and other factors or conditions relating to the transaction. Acceptance of a purchase order by a contractual party shall constitute a contract, except in those instances in which a purchase order is used only as an internal encumbrance document. 
Quotation or informal bid means any oral or written informal offer by an offeror to the city to furnish specific goods and/or services at a stated price. 
Request for letters of interest (RFLI) means a solicitation of responses from interested and prospective proposers to submit a summary of their qualifications and/or capabilities and state their interest in performing a specific job or service. Proposers may be given latitude in offering a service that may fulfill the city's need. 
Request for proposals (RFP) means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting competitive sealed proposals for goods and/or services. Evaluation of a proposal is based on prior established criteria wherein the RFP shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
Request for qualifications (RFQ) means a solicitation of responses from interested and prospective proposers in which factors other than price, including but not limited to financial capability, reputation, experience, and business competency, are considered and evaluated in order to develop a list of qualified proposers. 
Request or invitation for quotation means a competitive solicitation for an informal bid price for supplies or services that is conveyed by form, letter, telephone or other means and does not require advertisement or a sealed bid public opening, or public reading of bids. 
Responsible bidder, proposer, offeror, or respondent means a business which has submitted a bid, offer, proposal, quotation or response, which has the capability, as determined by the city, in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability of which give reasonable assurance of good faith and performance. 
Responsive bidder, proposer, offeror, or respondent means a business which has submitted a bid, offer, proposal, quotation or response which conforms in all material respects to the solicitation. 
Scope of work means a detailed description of the work set forth in the request for proposals, request for qualifications, or request for letters of interest which the contractual party will be required to perform. 
Signature means a manual or electronic identifier, or the electronic result of an authentication technique attached to or logically associated with a record that is intended by the person using it to have the same force and effect as a manual signature. 
Sole source means the only existing source of the item or service which meets the needs of the using agency, city department, office, board, city commission, or trust, as determined by a reasonably thorough analysis of the marketplace. 
Specifications means a concise statement of a set of requirements to be satisfied by a product, material, or process used in an invitation for bids, invitation to bid, or request or invitation for quotation to describe the goods, equipment, and/or contractual services to be purchased or otherwise acquired. 
Surplus personal property means surplus, obsolete or scrap supplies or equipment. "Surplus supplies or equipment" means those which are capable of being used but are in excess of the normal operating requirements of the city. "Obsolete supplies or equipment" means those which may no longer be used for their intended purposes because their use has become economically upgraded. "Scrap supplies or equipment" are those that can no longer be used either safely or economically for any purpose except for their possible salvage value. 
Using agency means any city entity which requests and uses goods, equipment and/or services procured pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12354, § 1, 4-10-03; Ord. No. 13380, § 2, 5-9-13; Ord. No. 13667, § 2, 3-9-17)  
Sec. 18-74. - Cone of silence. 
(a)  The requirements of subsection 2-11.1(t) ("Cone of Silence Ordinances") of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended, shall not be applicable to the city. 
(b)  Cone of silence. The cone of silence shall be applicable only to contracts for the provision of goods and services and public works or improvements for amounts greater than $200,000.00; provided, however, that the cone of silence shall not be applicable to the city attorney's office nor to the office of the independent auditor general. 
(c)  "Cone of silence" is defined to mean a prohibition on: 
(1)  Any communication regarding a particular request for proposals ("RFP"), request for qualifications ("RFQ"), request for letters of interest ("RFLI"), invitation for bids ("IFB") or any other advertised solicitation between a potential proposer, offeror, respondent, bidder, lobbyist, or consultant and the city's professional staff including, but not limited to, the city manager and his or her staff; 
(2)  Any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between the mayor, city commissioners or their respective staffs and any member of the city's professional staff including, but not limited to, the city manager and his or her staff; 
(3)  Any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between a potential proposer, offeror, respondent, bidder, lobbyist, or consultant and any member of the selection/evaluation committee therefor; 
(4)  Any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between the mayor, city commissioners or their respective staffs and any member of the selection/evaluation committee therefor; and 
(5)  Any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between a potential proposer, offeror, respondent, bidder, lobbyist, or consultant and the mayor, city commissioners, and their respective staffs; and 
(6)  Any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between any member of the city's professional staff, including but not limited to the city manager and his or her staff, and any member of the selection/evaluation committee therefor. The city manager and the chairperson of the selection/evaluation committee may communicate about a particular selection/evaluation committee's recommendation but only after the committee has submitted its written recommendation to the city manager and provided that should any change occur in the committee recommendation, the content of the communication and of the corresponding change shall be described in writing and filed by the city manager with the city clerk and be included in any recommendation memorandum submitted by the city manager to the city commission. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Cone of Silence shall not apply to: 
a.  Competitive processes for the award of CDBG, HOME, SHIP, HOPWA, and ESG (emergency shelter grants), Funds issued and administered by the city department of community development, and Law Enforcement Trust Fund (LETF) grants administered by the city police department; 
b.  Communications between a potential proposer, offeror, respondent, bidder, consultant or lobbyist and city purchasing staff regarding minority/women business and local vendor outreach programs; 
c.  Duly noticed pre-bid/proposal conferences and site inspections; 
d.  Duly noticed site visits to determine the competency of bidders/proposers regarding a particular solicitation during the time period between the opening of bids/receipt of proposals and the time the city manager makes his or her written recommendation to the city commission; 
e.  Emergency procurements; 
f.  Communications with the city attorney and his or her staff; 
g.  Communications regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between a potential proposer, offeror, respondent, bidder, lobbyist or consultant and the chief procurement officer, its staff, or any city purchasing agent, or its staff, responsible for administering the procurement process for such solicitation, prior to bid opening date or receipt of proposals, provided the communication is limited strictly to matters of process or procedure already contained in the corresponding solicitation; 
h.  Communications regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation between the chief procurement officer, its staff, or any city purchasing agent, or its staff responsible for administering the procurement process for such solicitation and a member of the corresponding selection/evaluation committee, provided the communication is limited strictly to matters of process or procedure already contained in the corresponding solicitation; 
i.  Sole source procurements; 
j.  Bid waivers; 
k.  Oral presentations before selection/evaluation committees and communications occurring during duly noticed meetings of selection/evaluation committees; 
l.  Competitive negotiations; 
m.  Public presentations made to the city commission and communications occurring during any duly noticed public meeting; 
n.  Communications in writing or by e-mail at any time with any city employee, official, mayor, or member of the city commission unless specifically prohibited by the applicable RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or other advertised solicitation. The city shall file a copy of any written communications with the city clerk; 
o.  Communications in connection with the collection of industry comments or the performance of market research regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation by the chief procurement officer or its staff; 
p.  Contract negotiations. 
q.  On-line procurements pursuant to section 18-114. 
r.  The downtown development authority, the department of off-street parking, the Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust, and the Civilian Investigative Panel. 
s.  Any portion of meetings that are exempted by and held fully in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 286.0113. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  Imposition. A cone of silence shall be imposed upon each RFP, RFQ, RFLI, IFB or any other advertised solicitation when the solicitation is advertised in a newspaper of general circulation. At the time of imposition of the cone of silence, the city manager or his or her designee shall provide for public notice of the cone of silence. The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a notice thereof to the affected department(s), the city clerk, each commissioner and to the mayor and shall include in any advertised solicitation a statement disclosing that the solicitation is subject to the cone of silence. 
(2)  Termination. Except as otherwise provided herein, the cone of silence shall terminate at the time the city manager's approval of the award or the city manager's written recommendation to the city commission, as may be applicable, is received by the city clerk, or at such time that bids or proposals are rejected by the city commission or the city manager; provided, however, that if the city commission refers the recommendation back to the city manager for further review, the cone of silence shall be reimposed until such time as the city manager's subsequent written recommendation is received by the city clerk. 
(e)  Penalties. Violation of the cone of silence by a particular bidder or proposer shall render the award to said bidder or proposer voidable by the city commission. Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance shall be prohibited from serving on a city competitive selection/evaluation committee unless such appointment is approved by a 4/5 vote of the city commission. A violation of this section by a particular bidder, proposer, offeror, respondent, lobbyist or consultant shall subject said bidder, proposer, offeror, respondent, lobbyist or consultant to potential debarment pursuant to this Code. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by law, violation of any provision of this article by a city employee shall subject said employee to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13439, § 2, 3-13-14; Ord. No. 13801, § 4, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 18-75. - Organization. 
The purchasing department is the centralized organization for all procurement and contracting for goods, material, equipment, contractual services, professional and personal services and consultant services, public works or improvements and/or combination of goods and services; for performance of the city's purchasing functions, and for implementation of the provisions of this article. The chief procurement officer shall be the director of this department. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-76. - Chief procurement officer. 
The city manager shall appoint a chief procurement officer who shall have authority over implementation of policies, procedures, regulations and forms governing city contracting methods and procedures; types of contracts; qualifications and duties; inspections and audits; disputes and remedies; ethics; and public access and information as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-76.1. - Duties of the chief procurement officer. 
Subject to the provisions of this article, the chief procurement officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the central purchasing and contracting system for the city; 
(2)  Procure or supervise the procurement of all goods and services as needed by the city in the manner provided by this article. 
(3)  Provide for the establishment/promulgation of administrative policies and procedures of purchasing, and its operations manual, which shall be reviewed by the city manager and amended from time to time; 
(4)  Take all necessary action to further the objectives of the city with regard to the promotion and encouragement of minority and women business participation in the procurement process; 
(5)  Be responsible for the provisions of the Anti-Deficiency Act contained in this article; 
(6)  Determine the method of selection for each type of procurement; 
(7)  Standardize, to the extent possible, contract clauses, terms and conditions, and documents; 
(8)  Maintain a current list of possible sources of supply for all goods and services purchased by the city; 
(9)  Have the authority to delegate any or all duties to individual purchasing agents assigned to city departments or offices, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(10)  Have the authority to approve the use of a competitive contract for the purchase of necessary goods or services which has been secured by or on behalf of any federal, state, county, or municipal government, or by any other governmental entity or by any not for-profit organization or state-funded institution. 
(11)  With such submissions as may be required from individual purchasing agents, departments, and offices, keep such records as will adequately reflect leases, specifications, invitations for bids, requests for proposals, requests for quotations, requests for qualifications, requests for letters of interest, bids, quotations, proposals received, actions taken, final dispositions, and the purchase of goods and services and disposal of all supplies, materials, equipment. 
(12)  Submit an annual report on the operation of the city's procurement system to the city manager, together with recommendations for its improvement. 
(13)  Sell, trade, exchange, transfer, or otherwise dispose of surplus city-owned personal property; 
(14)  Perform such other duties as may be provided for in other sections of this chapter, or as directed by the city manager, or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-77. - Authority of the chief procurement officer. 
All rights, powers, duties, and authority relating to the procurement and contracting of goods and/or services for the city, including the authority. 
(1)  To approve all purchases and awards up to $25,000.00; 
(2)  To certify for compliance with applicable procurement methods all purchases and awards not in excess of $50,000.00 for goods and services, and not in excess of $100,000.00 for contracts for public works and improvements, except as otherwise provided in this article; and 
(3)  To issue those purchase orders and change orders for the purchase of goods and services governed by this article, provided they are in conformance with the law and all applicable rules and regulations. 
The city manager retains sole authority to execute contracts and agreements except for purchase orders and change orders. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-78. - Delegation of authority by the chief procurement officer to other city purchasing agents. 
The chief procurement officer may delegate the following duties to city purchasing agents, including those in the purchasing department and those assigned to other departments or offices, which duties shall be performed under the general supervision of and subject to the policies, procedures, regulations and forms issued by the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-79. - General duties of city purchasing agents. 
(a)  To administer the procurement process for certain procurements as authorized by the applicable administrative policies and procedures of purchasing. 
(b)  To draft or cause to be drafted invitations for bids, requests for proposals, and other solicitations as may be permitted by law, and to prepare specifications or scope of work for same. 
(c)  To forecast departmental purchase requirements for future periods and to buy in quantities which are most economical for the city. 
(d)  To investigate new products and new sources of supply and to maintain, update and promulgate lists of qualified bidders and sources of professional services. 
(e)  To stimulate maximum competition among qualified suppliers of goods and services for the city's business. 
(f)  To provide for the inspection and testing of goods delivered in order to determine quantity, quality and adherence to provisions of invitations for bids, requests for proposals, and related specifications. 
(g)  To make transfers of supplies, materials and equipment which are not needed by a department or office to another department or office which may need them. 
(h)  To submit recommendations to the chief procurement officer concerning the operation of the city's procurement system. 
(i)  To take any other action consistent with existing law and with this article to make certain that city purchases, sales and leases are made on the basis of free and open competition, as prescribed in this article. 
(j)  To perform any other duty not inconsistent with existing law or this article. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-80. - Responsibilities of the chief procurement officer relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act. 
The chief procurement officer shall be responsible for the provisions relating to the Anti-Deficiency Act, set forth in sections 18-500 through 18-503, as follows: 
(1)  Requisitions. Assuring that all requisitions received have been properly authorized. 
(2)  Purchase orders. Assuring that the purchase order is issued for an amount not to exceed the amount set forth in the requisition, a resolution adopted by the city commission and any other legal authorization. 
(3)  City-wide contracts. Assuring that purchase orders authorized by a city-wide contract do not exceed the amount authorized by the city commission and any other legal authorization. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-81. - Estimates of requirements. 
All departments or offices of the city shall file with the chief procurement officer detailed estimates of all their requirements for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services in such a manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the city manager may prescribe; provided that the length of the periods shall not be less than three months. The requirement for preparing such estimates shall in no way prevent any using department or office from filing with the chief procurement officer, at any time, a requisition for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-82. - Disposal of surplus city-owned personal property. 
(a)  When a surplus of city-owned personal property exists, the chief procurement officer may transfer it to any other department or office which has need for it. The chief procurement officer shall also have power to sell all such supplies, materials and equipment which have become unsuitable for city use or to exchange for or trade in the same for new supplies, materials and equipment. When such surplus supplies, material and equipment have a limited use other than by the city, the city commission may classify the same as category "A" or category "B" stock. Category "A" stock shall be available for disposition as the city's contribution or the city's commitment in support of a particular public purpose which may include those community civic or social service programs as may be authorized by the city commission. Category "B" stock shall be that stock of surplus supplies, material and equipment which is available for disposition pursuant to the terms and provisions of subsection (b) hereof; namely, sale to sister cities or municipalities of friendly foreign countries. Not for profit organizations which provide a public purpose shall be offered first consideration as recipients for the disposition of category "A" and "B" surplus stock. Except for category "A" stock or category "B" stock and except in those cases in which the chief procurement officer determines that it is not practical to do so, any department or office that provides surplus stock for any such transfer, sale, exchange or trade-in shall receive credit therefor, based on the fair market value of such surplus; and any department or office receiving such surplus stock shall receive corresponding debit therefor, such credit and debit to be charged to the respective budgets of the departments or offices involved. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, when a foreign city enjoying a current, formally designated status as a "sister city," in accordance with the terms of Resolution No. 78-5, dated January 11, 1978, or a municipality of a friendly foreign country desires to purchase personal property owned by the city, including vehicles and equipment which are no longer needed for public use or which have become unsuitable for further use by the city, and where said property has been categorized as category "B" stock, such sale may be negotiated in accordance with the following procedure and criteria: 
(1)  All equipment proposed for sale to sister cities or municipalities of friendly foreign countries must be declared surplus, following then-existing administrative procedures. All such equipment must be offered to sister cities for a period of 30 days before being offered for sale to such municipalities. Note: "Friendly foreign countries" means those countries against which there are no trade embargoes or travel prohibitions imposed by the executive branch of the U.S. government. 
(2)  The prices negotiated for such sale must be equal to or greater than the prices which would be reasonably anticipated from the sale of such surplus equipment through public auction. This condition may apply to the total sale of a number of pieces of equipment rather than individual piece prices for the aggregate return on a given sale in determining whether the negotiated price is equal to or greater than could be expected at a public auction. 
(3)  The negotiated unit price shall not include any transportation or shipping costs; these costs will be borne by the sister city or the municipality purchasing said equipment. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-83. - Availability of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the chief procurement officer, city manager or purchasing agents shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or any open-market order unless and until availability of funds have been verified that there is to the credit of the using department or office a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the cost of such supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-84. - Methods of source selection. 
All purchases of goods, including but not limited to supplies, materials, equipment, printed materials and all purchases of services, including but not limited to personal, professional, management, technical, contractual and general services needed by the city, but not including legal services, may be obtained by contract or through city labor and materials and shall be exclusively made in the manner set forth in this article. 
All invitation for bids, request for letters of interest, request for proposals, request for qualifications or any other method of source selection, whether formal or informal, to be issued by the city shall be developed or drafted by city employee(s) and in the event that the same are not developed or drafted by city employee(s), the non-city employee(s) or firm assisting, developing, or drafting any portion of the solicitation document shall be prohibited from competing for the award of any contract resulting from such process and shall be treated as part of the city's professional staff under the cone of silence, when applicable; this provision does not apply to circumstances whereby the city engages non-city employee(s) or firm to collect or provide industry comments, conduct market research, or provide technical data. 
Any agreement for purchase entered into in any manner inconsistent with the procedures stated in this article by any person shall be voidable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12949, § 2, 10-11-07)  
Sec. 18-85. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Competitive sealed bidding shall be used for the award of all contracts for goods, equipment and services over $25,000.00, except as otherwise provided for in this article, where it is both practicable and advantageous for the city to specify all detailed plans, specifications, standards, terms and conditions so that adequate competition will result and award may be made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder principally on the basis of price; provided, however, when a responsive, responsible non-local bidder submits the lowest bid price, and the bid submitted by one or more responsive, responsible local bidders who maintain a local office, as defined in section 18-73, is within 15 percent of the price submitted by the non-local bidder, then that non-local bidder and each of the aforementioned responsive, responsible local bidders shall have the opportunity to submit a best and final bid equal to or lower than the amount of the low bid previously submitted by the non-local bidder. Contract award shall be made to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder submitting the lowest best and final bid. In the case of a tie in the best and final bid between a local bidder and a non-local bidder, contract award shall be made to the local bidder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may waive competitive sealed bidding methods by making a written finding which shall contain reasons supporting the conclusion that competitive sealed bidding is not practicable or is not advantageous to the city, which finding must be ratified and the award approved by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the city commission or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation after a properly advertised public hearing. When competitive sealed bidding methods are waived, other procurement methods shall be followed except for the cone of silence provisions, which shall not be applicable. This section shall not apply to transfers to the United States or any department or agency thereof, to the state or to any political subdivision or agency thereof. 
(b)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid submission requirements, including the time and date set for receipt of bids, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered, the maximum time for bid acceptance by the city, the right of the city manager to reject all offers or bids, and any other special information; 
(2)  The purchase description, qualification factors, delivery or performance schedule, and such inspection and acceptance requirements as may not be included in the purchase description; 
(3)  The contract terms and conditions, including warranty and bonding or other security requirements, as applicable; 
(4)  The date, time and place at which any prebid conference may be held and whether attendance at such conference is a condition for bidding; and 
(5)  The place where any documents incorporated by reference may be obtained. 
(c)  Bidders lists. Bidders lists may be compiled to provide the city with the names of businesses which may be interested in competing for various types of city contracts. Unless otherwise provided, inclusion or exclusion of the name of a business does not indicate whether that business is responsible in respect to a particular procurement or otherwise capable of successfully performing a particular city contract. 
(d)  Public notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a reasonable time prior to bid opening; but in any event at least 15 calendar days shall intervene between the last date of publication and the final date for submitting bids. Such notice shall state the general description of the goods or services to be purchased, the place where a copy of the invitation for bids may be obtained, and the time and place for opening of bids. In addition, the chief procurement officer may solicit bids from all responsible prospective suppliers listed on a current bidders list by sending such bidders copies of the notice to acquaint them with the proposed purchase. 
(e)  Prebid conferences. Prebid conferences may be conducted to explain the requirements of the proposed procurement and shall be announced to all prospective bidders known to have received an invitation for bids. Conferences should be held long enough after the invitations for bids have been issued to allow prospective bidders to become familiar with the proposed procurement, but sufficiently before bid submission to allow consideration of the conference results in preparing their bids. Nothing stated at a prebid conference shall change the invitation for bids unless a change is made by written addendum, which shall be supplied to all those prospective bidders known to have received an invitation for bids. All prebid conferences shall be recorded, and, if a transcript is made, such transcript shall be a public record. 
(f)  Bid opening. All bids shall be submitted sealed to the city clerk and shall be opened publicly by the city clerk or designee in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place stated in the public notice and in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as may be deemed desirable, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection. 
(g)  Bid acceptance and evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, quality, technique, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs shall be measured objectively. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation which were not set forth in the invitation for bids. The results of the evaluation and tabulation of bid prices shall be transmitted by the chief procurement officer to the city manager. 
(h)  Award. The procurement shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids except as otherwise provided in this section. For any procurement, including contracts, a bid to be awarded which exceeds $25,000.00 shall be awarded by the city manager only upon certification of the results of the evaluation and the bid tabulation by the chief procurement officer as being in compliance with competitive sealed bidding methods, except as otherwise provided in this article. Copies of the city manager's award shall be delivered to the chief procurement officer and all affected department directors. 
All bid awards in excess of $50,000.00 must be approved by the city commission upon recommendation by the city manager. The decision of the city commission shall be final. Threshold amounts referenced herein shall include the values associated with potential options of renewal. Awards made by the city manager or by the city commission shall include authority for all subsequent options of renewal, if any. The aforementioned options of renewal shall be exercisable at the option of the city manager if, after review of past performance under the contract, the city manager determines, in his/her sole discretion, that exercise of the option of renewal is in the best interest of the city. 
The city commission or the city manager shall have the authority to reject any or all bids or portions of bids, or to negotiate with the lowest bidder for better pricing. 
In the event only one bid is received, the city may award to the sole bidder, negotiate for better pricing or may re-bid, whichever is in the best interest of the city. 
The city manager shall submit to the city commission on a monthly basis a list of procurements or contracts awarded by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13170, § 2, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 13275, § 2, 7-14-11; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-86. - Competitive negotiations/competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. 
(1)  Competitive negotiations/competitive sealed proposals shall be used in those circumstances in which it is both practicable and advantageous for the city to consider a range of competing plans, specifications, standards, terms and conditions so that adequate competition will result and award be made not principally on the basis of price, but to the respondent whose proposal contains the most advantageous combination of price, quality or other features. All contracts shall be signed by the city manager. 
(2)  A contract may be entered into by use of the competitive negotiation/competitive sealed proposal methods when: 
a.  The chief procurement officer determines that the complex specialized nature or technical details of a particular procurement make the use of competitive sealed bidding either not practicable or reasonable, or not advantageous to the city; or 
b.  Specifications or scope of work cannot be fairly or objectively prepared so as to permit competition in the invitation for bids; or 
c.  Technology, electronic, software, and system applications are available from a limited number of sources; or 
d.  Qualifications and the quality of the service to be delivered can be considered more important than price. 
(3)  Competitive negotiations/competitive sealed proposals shall be used in the procurement of personal and professional services except for: 
a.  Professional services as defined in Florida Statute § 287.055, as amended from time to time. 
b.  Legal services. 
c.  Services related to the cultural, educational, recreational or park activities provided by non-profit organizations within city parks. These services may be awarded without competitive negotiations if the city manager makes a written finding, supported by reasons, to the city commission that competitive negotiation methods are not practicable or advantageous. Such finding must be ratified and the award approved by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the commission after a properly advertised public hearing. 
d.  Maintenance agreements to support proprietary software applications. 
(b)  Competitive negotiations method. Where the contract does not exceed $50,000.00, at least three written proposals shall be sought and the city shall enter into competitive negotiations to determine which proposal is most advantageous to the city. The written proposals received and the results of the evaluation shall be maintained as a public record. The contract may be awarded by the city manager upon certification of compliance with competitive negotiations method by the chief procurement officer. The city manager shall submit to the city commission on an annual basis a list of contracts awarded by the city manager through this method. 
(c)  Competitive sealed proposal method. Where the contract exceeds $50,000.00, the city may utilize the following competitive sealed proposal method: 
(1)  Request for proposals (RFP) or request for letters of interest (RFLI) or request for qualifications (RFQ) setting forth the terms and conditions of the professional or personal services sought, including but not limited to, scope of work and evaluation factors, shall be issued. The RFP, RFLI or RFQ, as applicable, may, in the exercise of the reasonable professional discretion of the city manager, director of the using agency, and the chief procurement officer, include a five percent evaluation criterion in favor of proposers who maintain a local office, as defined in section 18-73. In such cases, this five percent evaluation criterion in favor of proposers who maintain a local office will be specifically defined in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ, as applicable; otherwise, it will not apply. All RFPs involving major projects must be reviewed by the office of the independent auditor general ("auditor general") prior to submittal to the city commission for consideration. Additionally, after city commission is an award pursuant to a RFP for a major project, all resultant agreements must also be reviewed by the auditor general prior to execution. 
(2)  Mailing lists. Lists of prospective proposers/respondents may be compiled pursuant to section 18-85 (competitive sealed bidding). 
(3)  Public notice. Adequate public notice in a newspaper of general circulation shall be provided pursuant to section 18-85. 
(4)  Pre-proposal conference. A pre-proposal conference may be conducted to explain the requirements of the proposed procurement and shall be announced to all prospective proposers known to have received an RFP, RFLI, or RFQ. Conferences should be held long enough after the RFP, RFLI, or RFQ has been issued to allow prospective proposers to become familiar with the proposed procurement, but sufficiently before receipt of proposal to allow consideration of the conference results in preparing their proposals. Nothing stated at a pre-proposal conference shall change the RFP, RFLI, or RFQ unless a change is made by written addendum, which shall be supplied to all those prospective proposers known to have received an RFP, RFLI, or RFQ. All pre-proposal conferences shall be recorded, and, if a transcript is made, such transcript shall be a public record. 
(5)  Receipt of proposals. Sealed proposals must be received by the city clerk no later than the time and date specified for submission in the request for proposals or request for letters of interest or requests for qualifications. The name of each proposer shall be recorded by the city clerk or its designee, and the record and each proposal, to the extent consistent with applicable state law, shall be open to public inspection. 
(6)  Proposal evaluation. An evaluation committee shall be appointed by the city manager for the purpose of evaluating proposals based upon the criteria contained in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. As may be provided in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ, proposers may be invited to make oral presentations regarding their Proposals. The recommendations of the evaluation committee shall be submitted to the city manager. 
In the event only one proposal is received, the evaluation committee may proceed with the evaluation, or request the city manager to reject all proposals, whichever is in the best interests of the city. 
a.  After reviewing the evaluation committee's recommendation, the city manager may: 
1.  Approve the recommendation of the evaluation committee, and the city manager shall then authorize contract negotiations through city staff. Upon completion of contract negotiations, the city manager shall then submit his or her award recommendation and negotiated contract(s) to the city commission for approval, at which time, written notice shall be provided to all proposers; 
2.  Approve the recommendation of the evaluation committee, written notice of which shall be provided to all proposers, and the city manager shall then submit his or her recommendation to the city commission; 
3.  Reject the evaluation committee's recommendation and instruct the evaluation committee to re-evaluate and make further recommendations; 
4.  Reject all proposals; or 
5.  Recommend that the city commission reject all proposals. 
b.  After reviewing the city manager's recommendation, the city commission may: 
1.  Approve the city manager's award recommendation and negotiated contract(s); 
2.  Approve the city manager's recommendation and authorize contract negotiations; 
3.  Reject all proposals; 
4.  Reject all proposals and instruct the city manager to reissue a solicitation; or 
5.  Reject all proposals and instruct the city manager to enter into competitive negotiations with at least three individuals or firms possessing the ability to perform such services and obtain information from said individuals or firms relating to experience, qualifications and the proposed cost or fee for said services, and make a recommendation to the city commission. 
(7)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsive and responsible proposer whose proposal is most advantageous to the city as determined by the city commission in accordance with the evaluation criteria contained in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ. 
The decision of the city commission shall be final. Written notice of the award shall be given to the successful proposer. 
Threshold amounts referenced herein shall include the values associated with potential options of renewal. Awards made by the city manager or by the city commission shall include authority for all subsequent options of renewal, if any. The aforementioned options of renewal shall be exercisable at the option of the city manager if, after review of past performance under the contract, the city manager determines in his/her sole discretion that exercise of the option of renewal is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13275, § 2, 7-14-11; Ord. No. 13538, § 2, 7-23-15; Ord. No. 13667, § 2, 3-9-17)  
Sec. 18-87. - Professional services as defined in F.S. § 287.055, as amended from time to time; award of certain professional agreements not exceeding $500,000.00 by the city manager. 
(a)  In the procurement of professional services covered by the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act, the provisions of F.S. § 287.055, as amended, as supplemented by applicable provisions of the procurement ordinance, shall govern. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate and implement administrative procedures not inconsistent with Florida Statutes or the purchasing ordinance. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this section the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act, F.S. § 287.055, as amended: 
(1)  Agency. 
(2)  Firm. 
(3)  Compensation. 
(4)  Agency official. 
(5)  Project. 
(6)  Continuing contract. 
(7)  Design-build firm. 
(8)  Design-build contract. 
(9)  Design criteria package. 
(10)  Design criteria professional. 
(11)  Professional services. 
The following are additional definitions not defined in CCNA that may apply to projects under this section: 
(12)  Value-analysis means an organized approach to optimizing both cost and performance in a new or existing facility or eliminating items that add cost without contributing to required function. 
(13)  Life-cycle costing means that process whereby all the expenses associated with the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, and alteration costs of a facility are included. 
(14)  Capital Improvements Program (CIP) shall mean the work and materials authorized for construction, rehabilitation, restoration or betterment of streets, avenues and other public thoroughfares, public parks, buildings, and/or other public properties, and other municipal public improvements included within the city's adopted Capital Improvement Program, as amended or modified by the city commission from time to time. 
(d)  File of qualifications for CCNA firms. In the procurement of professional services covered by CCNA, the chief procurement officer may encourage the firms engaged in the lawful practice of their professions to submit a statement of qualifications and performance data. This information shall be held in the purchasing division and shall become part of the basis for selection of professional firms to serve the city. The list of qualifications shall contain the type of services provided by each firm, the staff available, their areas of specific expertise, and any forms then currently required by the city, the county or the state. The city may request supplemental information from any firm to be kept on file. 
(e)  Public announcement. The chief procurement officer shall publicly announce as required by the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act, F.S. § 287.055, as amended, each such occasion when Professional Services are required. The public announcement shall be made in a uniform and consistent manner. 
(f)  Review of qualifications. A selection committee appointed by the city manager shall review all qualifications and submittals of those firms responding to the public announcement for professional services issued by the city. As provided by CCNA, the firms desiring to provide professional services must first be certified by the city as fully qualified to provide the required service. Among the factors to be considered in making this finding are the capabilities, adequacy of personnel, past record, and experience of the firm. 
(g)  Short list. The selection committee shall reduce the number (short-list) at least three firms for further discussion. This requirement is not applicable if fewer than three firms deliver submittals. 
(h)  The committee shall conduct discussions with, and may require public presentations by, no fewer than three firms. The requirements for the discussion or presentation will be the same for each firm short-listed. The committee shall select, in order of preference, no less than three firms (unless fewer than three firms deliver submittals) determined to be the most highly qualified to perform the required services. In making such determinations the committee shall consider the factors set forth in CCNA, as amended. Any applicable local preference awarded pursuant to law shall not violate the principal of selection of the most qualified firm. 
(i)  Ranking reported. On completion of the committee selection process the committee shall report the ranking order of the firms to the city manager. The city manager shall immediately advise the mayor and city commission in writing of the three or more firms selected and their ranking order of preference. The city clerk will be provided with a copy of each report and memo referenced in this section. 
(j)  Negotiations proceed if no concern is expressed. If no commissioner or the mayor individually indicate a concern with the ranking of the selection committee within five working days of the transmittal of the memo reporting the ranking the city manager will proceed with negotiations. 
(k)  Procedure if a concern is expressed. If the mayor or a commissioner have concerns which cannot be resolved without impacting the order of the ranking or selection, an item shall be placed before the city commission to approve the selection and ranking or, alternatively, to refer the item back to the selection committee. 
(l)  Negotiations. The city manager may, after five consecutive business days of notification of the ranking to the mayor and the city commission attempt to negotiate with the highest ranked firm to perform services at compensation which is, in the opinion of the city manager, determined to be fair and reasonable. Compensation include all reimbursable expenses. If the city manager is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm obtaining the highest-ranking negotiations with that highest ranked firm shall be terminated. The city manager shall then undertake negotiations with the second ranked firm. If these negotiations also prove unsatisfactory, negotiations will again be terminated and the city manager will negotiate, in turn, with each firm in accordance with it's ranking by the committee, until an agreement is reached, or the short list is exhausted. When a short list is exhausted, a new solicitation shall be initiated by the city, unless otherwise decided by the city commission. 
(m)  Award of contract. Notwithstanding any other provision of the purchasing ordinance, at the successful conclusion of negotiations the city manager may award and execute contracts for professional services, as defined by CCNA, which do not exceed $500,000.00 in total compensation. The decision of the city manager shall be final. Compensation referenced herein shall include all reimbursable expenses and contract values associated with potential options for renewal. All professional service contract awards of $500,000.00, or more in total compensation under this section shall be made by the city commission, whose decision shall be final. 
Awards made by the city manager or city commission, as applicable, shall include authority for all subsequent options of renewal, if any. 
(n)  Report to city commission. The city manager shall submit to the city commission, on a bi-monthly basis, a listing of any contracts including the names of the firms, the names of the projects, and the amount of compensation of any contracts the city manager has awarded under this section. 
All contracts awarded under this section shall be executed by the city manager, approved as to insurance requirements by the risk manager, and approved as to legal form by the city attorney. 
(o)  Delegation of authority. Excepting the execution of contracts, the city manager may delegate his or her duties under this section to the chief procurement officer or the administrative head of the using agency. 
(p)  Community business enterprise ("CBE") participation requirements. Except where state or federal laws, regulations, or grant requirements mandate to the contrary, and subject to reservations or limitations provided in state, federal, or city laws, regulations, or grant requirements, firms must assign a minimum of 15 percent of the contract value to firms currently certified by Miami-Dade County as a community business enterprise ("CBE") if it is included in the request for proposals ("RFP"), request for letters of interest ("RFLI"), request for qualifications ("RFQ"), or other solicitation for professional services. Firms shall place a specific emphasis on using CBEs from within the city's municipal boundaries. All RFP's, RFQ's and RFLI's shall include provisions in the evaluation criteria that award five bonus points to firms who meet the CBE participation requirement through use of the firms from within the city's municipal boundaries. The adoption of these provisions in the procurement ordinance by the city will be deemed an adoption by the city, as herein modified, and as may be amended from time to time by the city of the Miami-Dade County Community Business Enterprise ("CBE-A/E") Program for Architectural, Landscape Architectural, Engineering, and Surveying and Mapping Professional Services as set forth in section 2-10.4.01, Miami-Dade County Code. The definitions, program components, certification requirements, sanctions for contractual violations, and administrative penalties, from section 2-10.4.01 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended, are deemed as being incorporated by reference herein. 
CBE participation requirements shall apply only to contracts with a professional services contract value greater than $100,000.00 that include such requirement in the RFP, RFQ, RFLI or other solicitation for professional services. 
These CBE participation requirements shall apply to any competitively procured contract under this section unless: 
(1)  It meets one of the exclusion provisions noted above or is not included in the solicitation for professional services; 
(2)  The city manager or designee deems the requirements unfeasible prior to issuance of the competitive selection document in which case the requirements of this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive selection document; 
(3)  It is disallowed by federal or state law; 
(4)  Funding sources require alternate, contradictory or specifically exclude CBE participation requirements; 
(5)  These requirements are waived by the city commission by resolution, prior to issuance of the competitive solicitation document, upon written recommendation of the city manager or manager's designee, when the commission finds this is to be in the best interest of the city, in which case the requirements of this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive selection document. 
(Ord. No. 12349, § 2, 3-27-03; Ord. No. 13331, § 2, 7-26-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12349, § 2, adopted March 27, 2003, amended § 18-87 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 18-87 pertained to professional services as defined in F.S. § 287.055, as amended from time to time, and derived from Ord. No. 12271, § 2, adopted August 22, 2002.  
Sec. 18-88. - Small purchases. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All purchases of goods, supplies, equipment, and services, the estimated cost of which does not exceed $25,000.00 may be made using the simplified small-purchase procedures prescribed in this section, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Division of requirements. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to permit use of small-purchase procedures described in this section instead of the methods otherwise applicable. 
(c)  Soliciting quotations. Goods, supplies, equipment and contractual services. 
(1)  Small purchases more than $10,000.00. Insofar as it is practicable, as determined by the chief procurement officer, for small purchases of more than $10,000.00, at least five quotations shall be sought. Award shall be made on the basis of competitive bidding, except as otherwise provided in this article. The names of the offerors submitting written, electronic or facsimile quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(2)  Small purchases up to $10,000.00. Insofar as it is practicable, as determined by the chief procurement officer, for small purchases of up to $10,000.00, at least three quotations shall be sought except as otherwise provided in this article. Award shall be made on the basis of competitive bidding. The names of offerors submitting written, electronic or facsimile quotations and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(3)  Small purchases up to $5,000.00. The chief procurement officer shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases up to $5,000.00. Such procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the goods and services being purchased insofar as it is practicable and shall require the maintenance of adequate written records to document the purchasing decision. Such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Award. 
(1)  Goods, supplies, equipment and contractual services. Small purchases up to $25,000.00 shall be approved by the chief procurement officer on the basis of competitive bidding methods. However, if the amount of the quotation submitted by an offeror with a local office is not more than ten percent in excess of the lowest other responsive and responsible offeror, such offeror may be offered the opportunity of accepting the contract at the lowest informal bid amount. The chief procurement officer shall have the authority to reject any or all informal bids. 
(2)  Professional and personal services. Except for the performance of legal services, whenever the total cost for a contract for professional or personal services is $25,000.00 or less, one written proposal shall be sought and the award shall be made by the chief procurement officer on the basis of competitive negotiations. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-89. - Contracts for public works or improvements. 
(a)  Any public work or improvement may be executed either by contract or by the city labor force, as may be determined by the city commission. There shall be a separate accounting as to each work or improvement. Before authorizing the execution by the city labor force of any work or improvement or phase thereof, the city manager shall submit to the city commission a description of the anticipated scope of work and related cost estimates. 
(b)  All contracts for public works or improvements in excess of $25,000.00 shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder after public notice on the basis of competitive sealed bidding methods, as provided herein or as provided in applicable Florida Statutes, whichever is determined to be in the best interest of the city. For contracts for public works and improvements in excess of $25,000.00 where it is both practicable and advantageous for the city to specify all detailed plans, specifications, standards, terms and conditions so that adequate competition will result and award may be made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder principally on the basis of price; provided, however, when a responsive, responsible non-local bidder submits the lowest bid price, and the bid submitted by one or more responsive, responsible local bidders who maintain a local office, as defined in City Code section 18-73, is within 15 percent of the price submitted by the non-local bidder, then that non-local bidder and each of the aforementioned responsive, responsible local bidder(s) shall have the opportunity to submit a best and final bid equal to or lower than the amount of the low bid previously submitted by the non-local bidder. Contract award shall be made to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder submitting the lowest best and final bid. In the case of a tie in the best and final bid between a local bidder and a non-local bidder, contract award shall be made to the local bidder. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may establish a pool of pre-qualified contractors for the city construction projects ("pilot program"). The prequalification pool of contractors for city construction projects pilot program ("pool"), will participate in an expedited, competitive sealed bidding process, as identified in Exhibit "A" [to Ord. No. 13625], which is deemed as being incorporated by reference herein. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may waive competitive sealed procurement methods by making a written finding, supported by reasons, that a valid emergency exists or that there is only one reasonable source of supply, which finding must be ratified by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the city commission after a properly advertised public hearing. When competitive sealed procurement methods are waived, other procurement methods as may be prescribed by ordinance shall be followed, except for the cone of silence provisions. 
(c)  Public notice shall be in accordance with the applicable Florida Statutes. 
(d)  Award. 
(1)  All contracts for public works or improvements which do not exceed $25,000.00 shall be awarded on the basis of competitive negotiations. 
(2)  All contracts for public works or improvements of $25,000.00 or more shall be awarded by the city manager only upon certification of the results of the evaluation and the bid tabulation by the chief procurement officer as being in compliance with competitive sealed procurement methods or in accordance with applicable Florida Statutes. 
(3)  All contracts in excess of $100,000.00 must be approved by the city commission upon recommendation by the city manager. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(4)  The city commission or the city manager shall have the authority to reject any or all bids or portions of bids, and re-bid or elect not to proceed with the project. 
(5)  When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the city manager to make alterations or modifications in a contract for any public work or improvement which increases the contract to a total amount in excess of $100,000.00, such alterations or modifications shall be made only when authorized by the city commission upon the written recommendation of the city manager. No such alteration shall be valid unless the price to be paid for the work or material, or both, under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractual party and the city manager prior to such authorization by the city commission. 
(6)  Copies of the city manager's award shall be delivered to the director of the department of resilience and public works and to the chief procurement officer. 
(7)  The city manager shall submit to the city commission on a monthly basis a list of contracts for public works or improvements awarded by the city manager. 
(e)  Community small business enterprise ("CSBE"). 
(1)  Except where state or federal law, regulations, or grant requirements mandate to the contrary, and subject to reservations or limitations provided in state, federal, or city laws, regulations, or grant requirements, respondents must assign a minimum of 15 percent of the contract value to a respondent or to a construction related enterprise currently certified by Miami-Dade County as a Community Small Business Enterprise ("CSBE"). Respondents shall place a specific emphasis on utilizing local small businesses from within the city's municipal boundaries. The adoption of these provisions in the procurement ordinance of the city will be deemed an adoption by the city, as herein modified, and as may be amended from time to time of the Miami-Dade County Community Small Business Enterprise ("CSBE") Program, as set forth in section 10-33.01, section 10-33.02, Miami-Dade County Code. The definitions, program components, subcontractor goals, contract measures, certification requirements, enforcement and administrative remedies from section 10-33.02, of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended, are deemed as being incorporated by reference herein. 
(2)  Five percent of the bid amount shall be retained by the city for the CSBE participation requirements until said requirements are fulfilled and verified by the city manager or authorized designee as being fulfilled within six months of contract completion; failure to satisfactorily meet, document, and present to the city manager or authorized designee the Community Small Business Enterprise ("CSBE") requirements within six months of contract completion shall result in the forfeiture of the retained amount to the city. This five percent retainage is included within the ten percent retainage normally withheld by the city. 
(3)  The respondent selected as the contractor shall have a third party independently verify and certify compliance with these requirements on a quarterly basis. Said third party shall be unaffiliated with the respondent and be properly licensed under the provisions of F.S. chs. 454, 471, 473, or 481. The person performing the verification shall have a minimum of two years of prior professional experience in contracts compliance, auditing, personnel administration, or field experience in payroll, enforcement, or investigative environment. The cost for this verification and certification shall be included in the related contract costs. 
Community small business enterprise ("CSBE") requirements shall apply only to contracts with a contract value greater than $100,000.00 and with an on-site labor component greater than or equal to 25 percent of the contract value. 
These CSBE requirements shall apply to any competitively procured contract under this section unless: 
• It meets one of the exclusion provisions noted above; 
• The city manager or designee deems the requirements unfeasible prior to issuance of the competitive selection document in which case the requirements of this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive selection document; 
• It is disallowed by federal or state law; 
• Funding sources require alternate, contradictory or specifically exclude CSBE participation requirements; 
• These requirements are waived by the city commission by resolution, prior to issuance of the competitive solicitation document, upon written recommendation of the city manager or manager's designee, when the commission finds this is to be in the best interest of the city, in which case the requirements of this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive selection document. 
(f)  Local workforce participation requirements. 
(1)  Except where state or federal law, regulations, or grant requirements mandate to the contrary, and subject to reservations or limitations provided in state, federal, or city laws, regulations, or grant requirements, respondents must employ the following minimum percentage requirements for on-site labor from persons residing within Miami-Dade County (an individual whose primary place of residence is within Miami-Dade County), for the duration of the project. City construction contracts with a construction cost of up to $250,000.00 shall have no local workforce participation requirement. Construction contracts with a construction cost of $250,000.00 or more but less than $500,000.00 shall have a minimum local workforce participation requirement of ten percent. Construction contracts with a construction cost of $500,000.00 or more but less than $750,000.00 shall have a minimum local workforce participation requirement of 15 percent. Construction contracts with a construction cost of $750,000.00 or more but less than $4,000,000.00 shall have a minimum local workforce participation requirement of 20 percent. Construction contracts with a construction cost of $4,000,000.00 or more shall have a minimum local workforce participation requirement of 40 percent. "Construction costs" as referenced herein shall mean the total or estimated cost to the owner of all elements of the project being awarded, including, at current market rates, (with reasonable and customary allowance for overhead and profit), the costs of labor and materials, and any equipment or supplies that have been specified in the competitive solicitation document, but not including compensation for the architect, engineer, landscape architect, surveyor, mapper, or similar professional consultants. Local workforce participation requirements must be met by new hires and "laborer" as referenced herein shall mean a person as defined by F.S. § 713.01, who is retained by the contractor. All local workforce participation percentage requirements listed above shall be applied on the construction project's on-site labor force. The contractor shall strive to employ a minimum of 50 percent of the aforementioned minimum local workforce participation percentage requirements from within the city commission district where the project is located (e.g. if the project is in District X and the minimum local participation percentage requirement is ten percent then the contractor shall make its best efforts to employ a minimum of five percent of the required local workforce from District X). The county residency of the onsite labor component will be subject to verification by the issuing department. 
(2)  Five percent of the bid amount shall be retained by the city for the local requirements until said requirements are fulfilled and verified by the city manager or authorized designee as being fulfilled within three months of contract completion. Failure to satisfactorily meet, document, and present to the city manager or authorized designee the local workforce participation requirements within three months completion after the project has reached final completion, shall result in the forfeiture of the retained amount to the city. This five percent retainage is included within the ten percent retainage normally withheld by the city and will comply with percentages specified in F.S. § 218.735. 
(3)  For contracts with a bid amount between $1,000,000.00 and $2,000,000.00, the contractor shall be required to hold one job fair within the local community for the purpose of encouraging local workforce participation. For contracts with a bid amount greater than $2,000,000.00, the respondent shall be required to hold two job fairs within the local community for the purpose of encouraging local workforce participation. The contractor shall coordinate job fairs and hiring initiatives with South Florida Workforce or a similar state chartered regional workforce development board acceptable to the city manager. 
(4)  Bid and proposal documents to which a local workforce participation requirement goal has been applied shall require the contractor to develop and submit to the city, within 30 days of notification of award of the construction contract, a workforce plan (plan) outlining how the goal will be met and containing the following information and elements required by this section. The plan shall specify the total number of persons that will be used by the contractor, broken down by trade and labor category, minimum qualifications for each category, and the number of persons to be utilized in each category. The plan shall identify by name, address, and trade category of all persons proposed to perform work under the contract currently on the contractor's payroll or positions to be hired by the contractor, who reside within Miami-Dade County. The city will not enter into the contract until it receives the contractor's plan and deems the plan acceptable. An updated plan shall be submitted to the city's project manager on a monthly basis. In the event that during the contract period a new hire or a person identified in the plan as meeting the local workforce participation requirement goal is replaced, the city may require the contractor to immediately identify the replacement. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary above, the contractor may be relieved from the requirements of this provision, in part or in whole, if such contractor can demonstrate that it has utilized its best efforts to achieve the goal in accordance with the prescribed provisions under this section. 
(5)  The respondent shall have a third party independently verify and certify compliance with these requirements on a quarterly basis. Said third party shall be unaffiliated with the respondent and be properly licensed under the provisions of F.S. ch. 454, 471, 473, or 481. The person performing the verification shall have a minimum of two years of prior professional experience in contracts compliance, auditing, personnel administration, or field experience in payroll, enforcement, or investigative environment. The cost for this verification and certification shall be included in the related contract costs. 
The city shall consider the contractor's adherence to the city's local workforce participation requirements within the past three years in making any future contract awards to which this section applies. The solicitation documents will include the contractor's past compliance with these requirements of the city. 
Local participation requirements shall apply only to public works or improvements contracts with a contract value greater than $250,000.00 and with an on-site labor component greater than or equal to 25 percent of the contract value. 
These local workforce participation requirements shall apply to any competitively procured contract under this section unless: 
• It meets one of the exclusion provisions noted above; 
• The city manager or designee deems the requirements unfeasible prior to issuance of the competitive solicitation document, in which case the requirements in this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive solicitation document; 
• It is disallowed by federal or state law or grant requirements; 
• Funding sources require alternate, contradictory or specifically exclude or disallow local workforce participation requirements; 
• These requirements are waived by the city commission by resolution, prior to issuance of the competitive solicitation document, upon written recommendation of the city manager or manager's designee, when the commission finds this is to be in the best interest of the city, in which case the requirements of this section will be stated as not being applicable in the competitive selection document. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12654, § 2, 2-10-05; Ord. No. 12780, § 2, 3-9-06; Ord. No. 13275, § 2, 7-14-11; Ord. No. 13331, § 2, 7-26-12; Ord. No. 13332, § 2, 7-26-12; Ord. No. 13493, § 2, 1-22-15; Ord. No. 13625, § 2, 9-8-16; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 18-90. - Emergency procurements. 
In case of emergency, it is not advantageous or practicable for the city to use competitive bidding methods. Therefore, the city may purchase directly those goods or services whose immediate procurement is essential to the life, health, welfare, safety or convenience of the city. Such emergency procurements shall nevertheless be made with such competition as may be practicable under the circumstances. 
(1)  In seeking a waiver of competitive bidding methods for emergency procurements that do not exceed $25,000.00, the head of the using department or office shall submit to the chief procurement officer in writing a full explanation of the circumstances of the emergency and the reasons for selection of a particular firm, along with a list of others which may have been solicited, with an approved requisition by the director of the requesting department. 
(2)  In seeking the waiver of competitive sealed bidding methods for emergency procurements exceeding $25,000.00, the head of the using department or office shall submit to the chief procurement officer and the city manager in writing a full explanation of the circumstances of the emergency and the reasons for selection of a particular firm, along with a list of others which may have been solicited, and certification of fund availability from the director of the department of management and budget. The city manager may then waive competitive sealed bidding requirements after making a written finding, supported by reasons, that an emergency exists. Such finding must be ratified by an affirmative four-fifths vote of the city commission or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation at the next available city commission meeting. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, the city manager may direct the chief procurement officer to purchase directly those goods and/or services required by the urban search and rescue task force when activated to perform its obligations under the existing provisions of the memorandum of understanding with the state and/or the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Such emergency procurements shall nevertheless be made with such competition as may be practicable under the circumstances. If necessary, the city manager may waive competitive sealed bidding methods for such emergency procurements, after making a written finding, supported by documentation that the urban search and rescue task force has been officially activated. Such finding and waiver must be ratified by an affirmative four-fifths vote of the city commission or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation at the next regularly available city commission meeting for contracts exceeding $25,000.00. 
All emergency awards shall be filed and maintained by the purchasing department as a permanent and public record of the purchase. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13170, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 18-91. - Cancellations. 
The city shall have the right to cancel all invitations for bids, requests for proposals, request for quotations, or other solicitations before bid opening, proposal submission, or receipt of quotations and to reject all bids, proposals, quotations, or offers after receipt. All invitations for bids, requests for proposals, request for quotations, or other solicitations shall contain a reservation of the foregoing rights. In the event of such cancellation or rejection, the chief procurement officer shall promptly notify all affected bidders or proposers and make available to them a copy of the written explanation for such cancellation or rejection, which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-92. - Sole-source contracts. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Since it is not practicable for the city to use competitive bidding methods to secure goods or services if there is only one reasonable source of supply, sole-source awards may be made as an exception to the other methods prescribed in this section under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the compatibility of equipment, accessories, or replacement parts permits one reasonable source of supply; 
(2)  Where the goods or services available from a single source are needed for trial use or testing; and 
(3)  Where the unique and specialized expertise of one source of services is unlikely to be obtained from any other source. 
(b)  Determination, approval, and award. The determination that an award shall be made on a sole-source basis shall be made by the chief procurement officer. Such determination shall be made in writing and provide complete justification as to why no other sources of goods or services could be obtained to meet the city's requirements. The determination shall also certify that the terms and conditions of the award have been negotiated so as to obtain the most favorable terms and conditions, including price, as may be offered to other customers or clients by the proposed contractual party. For all contracts in excess of $25,000.00, such determination shall be submitted to the city manager who may waive competitive sealed bidding after he or she makes a written finding, supported by reasons, that only one reasonable source of supply exists. Such finding must be ratified and the award approved by an affirmative four-fifths vote of the city commission or an unanimous vote of the quorum that exists because of either abstentions or vacancies resulting from resignation, death, suspension, or physical incapacitation after a properly advertised public hearing. 
(c)  Public notice and disclosure. Notice that the city intends to award a sole-source contract exceeding $25,000.00 shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city prior to contract award, but in any event at least 15 calendar days shall intervene between the last date of publication and the date of award. Such notices shall state the intention to award a sole-source contract, the nature of goods or services to be acquired, the name of the proposed contractual party, and the name and telephone number of a cognizant city official who may be contacted by other potential sources who feel they might be able to satisfy the city's requirements. A record of such notices and responses thereto shall be maintained in the contract file along with the written determination required above, and a compilation of all sole source awards shall be maintained by the chief procurement officer and shall include: 
(1)  The name of the sole-source contractual party; 
(2)  The nature of the goods or services procured; 
(3)  The reasons no other source could satisfy city requirements; 
(4)  The amount and type of contract; and 
(5)  The identification number for each contract file. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13170, § 2, 5-13-10)  
Sec. 18-93. - Types of contracts. 
Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which will promote the best interests of the city may be used, except that the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. 
(1)  Fixed-price contracts. Fixed-price contracts shall ordinarily be used for those purchases of goods and services or sales and leases where the terms, conditions, specifications and other factors of the contract can be specified with a high degree of certainty and where use of a fixed-price contract will result in substantial competition between bidders or offerors willing to compete for the contract. Incentives based on various performance factors and escalation clauses or other economic adjustments may be included as appropriate to serve the best interests of the city in achieving the most economical contract performance. 
(2)  Cost-reimbursement contracts. Cost-reimbursement contracts shall ordinarily be used for those purchases of goods and services or sales and leases where the terms, conditions, specifications and other factors of the contract cannot be specified with a high degree of certainty or the use of fixed-price contracts is not likely to result in substantial competition between bidders or offerors willing to compete for the contract. Incentives based on various performance factors and escalation clauses or other economic adjustments may be included as appropriate to serve the best interests of the city in achieving the most economical contract performance. 
(3)  Blanket purchase orders. The chief procurement officer or individual purchasing agents may issue purchase orders for indeterminate amounts of repair parts, supplies and services to the account of any department or office, but only when based upon a definite contract or price agreement which shall be negotiated in the same manner as if the item to be purchased thereunder were to be individually purchased or contracted for under the provisions of article III of this chapter. Such orders shall state a specific monetary limit which may not be exceeded except on written approval by the chief procurement officer. 
(4)  Multi-year contracts. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services, sales, or leases may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the city, provided that the term of the contract and conditions for renewal or extension, if any, are included in the invitation for bids or request for proposals, and provided that funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contract award. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor and shall be so stipulated in the contract. 
b.  Prior to the utilization of a multiyear contract, it shall be determined in writing by the using department or office and by the chief procurement officer that the estimated requirements over the period of the contract are reasonably firm and continuing; and that such a contract will serve the best interests of the city by promoting more effective competition or otherwise promoting economies to the city. 
c.  Accounting suitability. Except with respect to firm fixed-price contracts with no provisions for incentives, escalation or any other adjustments, no type of contract shall be used unless it has been determined in writing by individual purchasing agent or the chief procurement officer that: 
1.  The accounting system of the contractual party will permit timely development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specific type of contract contemplated; and 
2.  The accounting system of the contractual party is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-94. - Qualifications and duties of contractual parties. 
The city shall attempt to secure the most qualified contractual parties in its dealings with the private sector in accordance with the provisions of this article. The chief procurement officer or individual purchasing agent shall determine responsibility as part of the duties and qualifications of prospective contractual parties in accordance with this article and other applicable laws and requirements, provided that the awarding authority may make its own determination. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13379, § 2, 4-25-13)  
Sec. 18-95. - Determination of responsibility. 
(a)  Prior to contract award, the chief procurement officer or individual purchasing agent shall determine in writing that the bidder or offeror is responsible. 
(b)  If a prospective contractual party who would otherwise have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a copy of the determination and the reasons therefor shall be sent promptly to such party, which shall be given a reasonable opportunity for rebuttal prior to a final determination of nonresponsibility. 
(c)  Factors to be considered in determining responsibility of prospective contractual parties shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Availability of appropriate financial, material, equipment, facility, and personnel resources and expertise, or the ability to obtain them, to meet all contractual requirements; 
(2)  A satisfactory record of performance; 
(3)  A satisfactory record of integrity; 
(4)  Qualified legal standing to contract with the city; and 
(5)  Compliance in supplying all requested information connected with the inquiry concerning responsibility. 
(d)  Prior to contract award, the city, through the chief procurement officer or individual purchasing agent, shall determine whether a prospective contractual party is a nonresponsible bidder or offeror, and, therefore, ineligible for the pending award when: 
(1)  The city has terminated, suspended or cancelled a city contract within the past five years, in whole or in part, for cause, due to a default by a bidder or offeror not otherwise formally debarred or suspended from doing business with the city pursuant to the provisions of section 18-107 herein, where a court of competent jurisdiction has not reversed the action on appeal; or 
(2)  A bidder or offeror has received a formal notice of delinquency by the city in writing of monies owed to the city within the past five years, and thereafter has either withheld payment, failed to pay moneys or is formally disputing the monies allegedly due to the city, unless the full amount of such moneys due the city have been (i) deposited with a court of competent jurisdiction in Miami-Dade County, Florida, pursuant to the provisions of Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.600 titled "Deposits in Court", as amended, or other applicable federal, state or local rules of court; or (ii) are placed in escrow pursuant to an escrow agreement negotiated with the city attorney; and are subject to distribution to the city or withdrawal by the city by order of the court or in accordance with the terms of an escrow agreement. 
(e)  The prospective contractual party shall provide any information requested by the chief procurement officer or purchasing agent concerning responsibility. If such contractual party fails to provide the requested information, the determination of responsibility may be made upon available information or the prospective contractual party may be found nonresponsible. The prospective contractual party may demonstrate the availability of necessary financial, equipment, facility, and personnel resources by submitting. 
(1)  Evidence that the contractual party possesses such necessary resources; 
(2)  Acceptable plans to subcontract for such necessary resources; or 
(3)  A documented commitment for, or explicit arrangement with, satisfactory sources to provide such necessary resources. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13379, § 2, 4-25-13)  
Sec. 18-96. - Prequalifications. 
Prospective contractual parties may be prequalified as part of the process for compiling bidder lists. Such prequalification, however, does not necessarily constitute a finding of responsibility for any particular contract award. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-97. - Cost or pricing data. 
(a)  Contractor certification. A contractual party shall upon request make available all costs or pricing data supporting the bid or offer and shall certify that, to the best of its knowledge, such data was accurate, complete and current at the time of the submission of bids or offers or at the time of contract modifications. 
(b)  Price adjustment. Any contract, change order or modification shall contain a provision that the price to the city, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any sums by which the city finds that such price was increased because the cost or pricing information submitted by the contractual party was inaccurate, incomplete or not current. 
(c)  Exclusions. Contractual parties need not make available costs or pricing data or certify their accuracy, completeness and currency when: 
(1)  The contract price is based on price competition resulting from sealed bids; 
(2)  The contract price is based on established catalog or market prices set and offered to the general public or to governmental entities; 
(3)  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or 
(4)  The city manager determines that such requirements for cost or pricing data and certification should be waived, and the reasons for such waiver are stated in writing and approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-98. - Bond of successful contractual parties. 
(a)  In the case of contracts for public works or improvements or purchases involving large sums of money, the city manager may provide that the successful bidder shall post a surety bond in any amount that the city manager or his/her designee deems proper. Each call for bids for any public work or for the furnishing of any material, supplies, equipment or services, as well as any specification documents prepared and issued thereon, shall specify that the bid bond, performance bond, or any other guarantee required in connection therewith shall be accompanied by an affidavit of a qualified officer of the entity tendering such bond or guarantee, or by the attorney in fact of such entity, setting forth the amount of capital and the amount of surplus held by such entity as of its last published report, and the date of such report. The limit of surety acceptable from any one risk shall be ten percent of the combined capital and surplus shown by such affidavit. No bid bond, performance bond, surety bond or other guarantee shall be accepted unless it is signed by a licensed agent of the state as attorney in fact for the entity writing the same and unless the same is written by a properly licensed insurance agent located in the county. The right of rejection of any and all tenders of such surety bonds shall be reserved in all cases, which fact and reservation shall be clearly set forth in the call for bids and specification documents. The city manager shall cause each such surety tendered to the city to be reviewed to determine whether the entity or agency making such tender is qualified to meet the obligation to be assumed, and shall recommend to the city commission the rejection of any such tender from any entity or agency not found to be fully qualified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may accept, in lieu of a bid bond, a cashier's check, an irrevocable letter of credit drawn upon a local bank, or cash, upon a finding that the city's interests would be protected by such acceptance. 
(b)  The director of finance shall cause a list to be kept of all sureties filed with the city, by names of guarantor and amounts, and shall report quarterly to the city manager full details as to bid bonds, performance bonds, or other like bonds then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-99. - Inspections and audits for accuracy and accountability. 
The city shall be entitled to insist that all parties dealing with it observe the highest degree of accuracy and accountability in all of their dealings with the city. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-100. - Right to conduct inspections and audits. 
(a)  The city may, at reasonable times, inspect that part of any contractual party's plant or place of business and audit those books and records which are related to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city. Circumstances warranting such inspections and audits shall include, but not be limited to, concern as to whether standards of responsibility specified in section 18-95 have been, are being, or are capable of being met, and concern as to whether the contract is being performed in accordance with its terms and conditions. 
(b)  The city may enter a contractual party's plant or place of business to: 
(1)  Inspect goods or services for acceptance by the city pursuant to the terms of the contract. 
(2)  Audit cost or pricing data or audit books and records. 
(3)  Conduct investigations of responsibility pursuant to section 18-95 or those related to actions to debar or suspend a contractual party from consideration for award of contracts pursuant to section 18-107. 
(c)  Books and records relating to performance of city contracts shall be maintained by contractual parties for a period of three years from the date of final payment unless a shorter period is authorized in writing by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-101. - Inspections. 
(a)  Solicitations and contractual provisions. City contracts shall provide that the city may inspect goods or services at the facilities of the contractual party and perform tests to determine whether they conform to solicitation requirements contained in invitation for bids or requests for proposals or, after award, to the terms and conditions of the contract. Such inspections and tests shall be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the solicitation and contract. 
(b)  Procedures for tests and inspections. 
(1)  The chief procurement officer may specify general operational procedures governing the test and inspection of all goods or services, sales or leases being performed under city contract by city departments, offices and individual purchasing agents. 
(2)  The chief procurement officer shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services or performance under lease agreements to determine conformance with the terms and conditions upon which the order or contract was based. Any purchasing agent or department may be authorized by the chief procurement officer to inspect deliveries or contract performance in the manner stipulated with the approval of the city manager. 
(3)  The chief procurement officer may prescribe chemical, physical and other performance tests for goods or services, including samples submitted with bids or offers and samples of deliveries and performance to determine their quality and conformance with the terms and conditions of the solicitation or contract. In the performance of such tests or inspections, the chief procurement officer shall have the authority to make use of the laboratory facilities of any department of the city or any outside laboratory or special expertise available to evaluate service performance. 
(c)  Conduct of inspections. Whenever possible, inspections and tests shall be performed so as not to unduly delay or inconvenience the contractual parties. Contractual parties shall make available at no charge to the city all reasonable facilities and assistance, in order to facilitate the performance of inspections or tests by city representative. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-102. - Audits. 
(a)  Solicitations and contractual provisions. City contracts shall provide that the city may inspect the books and records of contractual parties to determine conformance with the solicitation requirements contained in the invitation for bids or request for proposals or, after award, with the terms and conditions of the contract. 
(b)  Procedures for audits. 
(1)  The chief procurement officer may specify the general procedures for inspection of books and records and for the conduct of audits of all goods or services, sales or leases under city contracts. 
(2)  An audit may be required when, in respect to an actual or prospective contractual party, there is: 
a.  A question as to the adequacy of accounting policies or cost systems; 
b.  A substantial change in the methods or levels of operations; 
c.  Previous unfavorable experience indicating doubtful reliability of estimating, accounting or purchasing methods; 
d.  A lack of cost experience due to the procurement of a new supply or service; or 
e.  Other evidence that an audit is in the city's best interests as determined by the chief procurement officer, the city manager or the city commission. 
(c)  Conduct of audits. Whenever possible, audits shall be performed so as not to unduly delay or inconvenience the contractual party. Contractual parties shall make available at no charge to the city all reasonable facilities and assistance, for the convenience of the city representatives performing the audit. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-103. - Disputes and legal remedies. 
The following procedure in sections 18-104 through 18-107 shall be used for arriving at early settlement of grievances by interested parties who have participated in the city's procurement process. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-104. - Resolution of protested solicitations and awards. 
(a)  Right to protest. The following procedures shall be used for resolution of protested solicitations and awards except for purchases of goods, supplies, equipment, and services, the estimated cost of which does not exceed $25,000.00. Protests thereon shall be governed by the administrative policies and procedures of purchasing. 
(1)  Protest of solicitation. 
a.  Any prospective proposer who perceives itself aggrieved in connection with the solicitation of a contract may protest to the chief procurement officer. A written notice of intent to file a protest shall be filed with the chief procurement officer within three days after the request for proposals, request for qualifications or request for letters of interest is published in a newspaper of general circulation. A notice of intent to file a protest is considered filed when received by the chief procurement officer; or 
b.  Any prospective bidder who intends to contest bid specifications or a bid solicitation may protest to the chief procurement officer. A written notice of intent to file a protest shall be filed with the chief procurement officer within three days after the bid solicitation is published in a newspaper of general circulation. A notice of intent to file a protest is considered filed when received by the chief procurement officer. 
(2)  Protest of award. 
a.  Any actual proposer who perceives itself aggrieved in connection with the recommended award of contract may protest to the chief procurement officer. A written notice of intent to file a protest shall be filed with the chief procurement officer within two days after receipt by the proposer of the notice of the city manager's recommendation for award of contract. The receipt by proposer of such notice shall be confirmed by the city by facsimile or electronic mail or U.S. mail, return receipt requested. A notice of intent to file a protest is considered filed when received by the chief procurement officer; or 
b.  Any actual responsive and responsible bidder whose bid is lower than that of the recommended bidder may protest to the chief procurement officer. A written notice of intent to file a protest shall be filed with the chief procurement officer within two days after receipt by the bidder of the notice of the city's determination of non responsiveness or non responsibility. The receipt by bidder of such notice shall be confirmed by the city by facsimile or electronic mail or U.S. mail, return receipt requested. A notice of intent to file a protest is considered filed when received by the chief procurement officer. 
c.  A written protest based on any of the foregoing must be submitted to the chief procurement officer within five days after the date the notice of protest was filed. A written protest is considered filed when received by the chief procurement officer. 
The written protest may not challenge the relative weight of the evaluation criteria or the formula for assigning points in making an award determination. 
The written protest shall state with particularity the specific facts and law upon which the protest of the solicitation or the award is based, and shall include all pertinent documents and evidence and shall be accompanied by the required filing fee as provided in subsection (f). This shall form the basis for review of the written protest and no facts, grounds, documentation or evidence not contained in the protester's submission to the chief procurement officer at the time of filing the protest shall be permitted in the consideration of the written protest. 
No time will be added to the above limits for service by mail. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this section, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. Intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation of the time for filing. 
(b)  Authority to resolve protests; hearing officer(s). Hearing officers appointed by the city shall have authority to resolve protests filed under this chapter of the City Code. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer, from a separate list of potential hearing officers pre-approved by the city commission, to resolve protests filed in accordance with this section, no later than five working days following the filing of a bid protest. The hearing officer shall have the authority to settle and resolve any written protest. The hearing officer shall submit said decision to the protesting party and to the other persons specified within ten days after he/she holds a hearing under the protest. 
(1)  Hearing officer. The hearing officer may be a special master as defined in chapter 2, article X, section 2-811 of the City Code, or a lawyer in good standing with the Florida Bar for a minimum of ten years with a preference given to a lawyer who has served as an appellate or trial court judge. The hearing officer may be appointed from alternative sources (e.g. expert consulting agreements, piggyback contracts, etc.) where the city commission adopts a recommendation of the city attorney that such action is necessary to achieve fairness in the proceedings. The engagement of hearing officers is excluded from the procurement ordinance as legal services. The hearing officers appointed in the pre-qualified group should be scheduled to hear protests on a rotational basis. 
(2)  Right of protest. Any actual bidder or proposer who has standing under Florida law dissatisfied and aggrieved with the decision of the city regarding the protest of a solicitation or the protest of an award as set forth above in this section may request a protest hearing. Such a written request for a protest hearing must be initiated with a notice of intent to protest followed by an actual protest as provided in subsection 18-104(a). The notice of intent to protest and the actual protest must each be timely received by the chief procurement officer and must comply with all requirements set forth in subsection 18-104(a). Failure to submit the required notice of intent to protest and the actual protest within the specified timeframes will result in an administrative dismissal of the protest. 
(3)  Hearing date. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice of protest, the chief procurement officer shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer, at which time the person protesting shall be given the opportunity to demonstrate why the decision of the city relative to the solicitation or the award, which may include a recommendation for award by the city manager to the city commission, as applicable, should be overturned. The party recommended for award, if it is a protest of award, shall have a right to intervene and be heard. 
(4)  Hearing procedure. The procedure for any such hearing conducted under this article shall be as follows: 
a.  The city shall cause to be served by certified mail a notice of hearing stating the time, date, and place of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address of the protester. 
b.  The party, any intervenor, and the city shall each have the right to be represented by counsel, to call and examine witnesses, to introduce evidence, to examine opposing or rebuttal witnesses on any relevant matter related to the protest even though the matter was not covered in the direct examination, and to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him/her to testify. The hearing officer may extend the deadline for completion of the protest hearing for good cause shown, but such an extension shall not exceed an additional five business days. The hearing officer shall consider the written protest and supporting documents and evidence appended thereto, supporting documents or evidence from any intervenor, and the decision or recommendation as to the solicitation or award being protested, as applicable. The protesting party, and any intervenor, must file all pertinent documents supporting his/her protest or motion to intervene at least five business days before the hearing, as applicable. The hearing officer shall allow a maximum of two hours for the protest presentation and a maximum of two hours for the city response. When there is an intervenor, a maximum of two hours will be added for the intervenor. In the event of multiple protests for the same project, the hearing officer shall allocate time as necessary to ensure that the hearing shall not exceed a total of one day. 
c.  The hearing officer shall consider the evidence presented at the hearing. In any hearing before the hearing officer, irrelevant, immaterial, repetitious, scandalous, or frivolous evidence shall be excluded. All other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in trial in the courts of Florida. The hearing officer may also require written summaries, proffers, affidavits, and other documents the hearing officer determines to be necessary to conclude the hearing and issue a final order within the time limits set forth by this section. 
d.  The hearing officer shall determine whether procedural due process has been afforded, whether the essential requirements of law have been observed, and whether the decision was arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or unsupported by substantial evidence as a whole. Substantial evidence means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion. 
e.  Within ten days from the date of the hearing, the hearing officer shall complete and submit to the city manager, the city attorney, any intervenor, the chief procurement officer, and the person requesting said hearing a final order consisting of his/her findings of fact and conclusions of law as to the denial or granting of the protest, as applicable. 
f.  The decisions of the hearing officer are final in terms of city decisions relative to the protest. 
Any appeal from the decision of the hearing officer shall be in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(c)  Compliance with filing requirements. Failure of a party to timely file either the notice of intent to file a protest or the written protest, together with the required filing fee as provided in subsection (f), with the chief procurement officer within the time provided in subsection (a), above, shall constitute a forfeiture of such party's right to file a protest pursuant to this section. The protesting party shall not be entitled to seek judicial relief without first having followed the procedure set forth in this section. 
(d)  Stay of procurements during protests. Upon receipt of a written protest filed pursuant to the requirements of this section, the city shall not proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the contract until the protest is resolved by the chief procurement officer or the city commission as provided in subsection (b) above, unless the city manager makes a written determination that the solicitation process or the contract award must be continued without delay in order to avoid an immediate and serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(e)  Costs. All costs accruing from a protest shall be assumed by the protestor. 
(f)  Filing fee. The written protest must be accompanied by a filing fee in the form of a money order or cashier's check payable to the city in an amount equal to one percent of the amount of the bid or proposed contract, or $5,000.00, whichever is less, which filing fee shall guarantee the payment of all costs which may be adjudged against the protestor in any administrative or court proceeding. If a protest is upheld by the chief procurement officer and/or the city commission, as applicable, the filing fee shall be refunded to the protestor less any costs assessed under subsection (e) above. If the protest is denied, the filing fee shall be forfeited to the city in lieu of payment of costs for the administrative proceedings as prescribed by subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13629, § 2, 9-8-16)  
Sec. 18-105. - Resolution of contract disputes. 
(a)  Authority to resolve contract disputes. The city manager, after obtaining the approval of the city attorney, shall have the authority to resolve controversies between the contractual party and the city which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between them; provided that, in cases involving an amount greater than $25,000.00, the city commission must approve the city manager's decision. Such authority extends, without limitation, to controversies based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation or lack of complete performance, and shall be invoked by a contractual party by submission of a protest to the city manager. 
(b)  Contract dispute decisions. If a dispute is not resolved by mutual consent, the city manager shall promptly render a written report stating the reasons for the action taken by the city commission or the city manager which shall be final and conclusive. A copy of the decision shall be immediately provided to the protesting party, along with a notice of such party's right to seek judicial relief, provided that the protesting party shall not be entitled to such judicial relief without first having followed the procedure set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-106. - Remedies prior to award. 
If prior to contract award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award is in violation of law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled by the city commission, the city manager or the chief procurement officer, as may be applicable, or revised to comply with the law. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-107. - Debarment and suspensions. 
(a)  Authority and requirement to debar and suspend. After reasonable notice to an actual or prospective contractual party, and after reasonable opportunity for such party to be heard, the city manager, after consultation with the chief procurement officer and the city attorney, shall have the authority to debar a contractual party, for the causes listed below, from consideration for award of city contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not fewer than three years. The city manager shall also have the authority to suspend a contractual party from consideration for award of city contracts if there is probable cause for debarment, pending the debarment determination. The authority to debar and suspend contractors shall be exercised in accordance with regulations which shall be issued by the chief procurement officer after approval by the city manager, the city attorney, and the city commission. 
(b)  Causes for debarment or suspension. Causes for debarment or suspension include the following: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or incident to the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, which is regarded by the chief procurement officer to be indicative of nonresponsibility. Such violation may include failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the terms and conditions of a contract or to perform within the time limits provided in a contract, provided that failure to perform caused by acts beyond the control of a party shall not be considered a basis for debarment or suspension. 
(5)  Debarment or suspension of the contractual party by any federal, state or other governmental entity. 
(6)  False certification pursuant to paragraph (c) below. 
(7)  Found in violation of a zoning ordinance or any other city ordinance or regulation and for which the violation remains noncompliant. 
(8)  Found in violation of a zoning ordinance or any other city ordinance or regulation and for which a civil penalty or fine is due and owing to the city. 
(9)  A contractual party who has defaulted under the terms of a contract with the city or any of its boards, agencies, trusts, authorities, councils or committees and has failed to cure such default. 
(10)  Any other cause judged by the city manager to be so serious and compelling as to affect the responsibility of the contractual party performing city contracts. 
(c)  Certification. All contracts for goods and services, sales, and leases by the city shall contain a certification that neither the contractual party nor any of its principal owners or personnel have been convicted of any of the violations set forth above or debarred or suspended as set forth in paragraph (b)(5). 
(d)  Debarment and suspension decisions. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (a), the city manager shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the debarment or suspension. A copy of the decision shall be provided promptly to the contractual party, along with a notice of said party's right to seek judicial relief. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 12312, § 1, 1-9-03)  
Sec. 18-108. - Ethics. 
Any attempt by city employees to realize personal gain by conduct inconsistent with proper discharge of their duties is a breach of public trust. The provisions of city ordinances, county ordinances, and state statutes shall be strictly enforced to preserve the public trust. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-109. - Public access and information. 
The public shall have access to all documents and information pertaining to city contracts, subject to the provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-110. - Adoption of Florida Veteran Business Enterprise Opportunity Act. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts F.S. § 295.187, the "Florida Veteran Business Enterprise Opportunity Act," as amended, and incorporates it by reference into the city procurement ordinance, as such may be modified or amended from time to time. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section the following words shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in "Florida Veteran Business Enterprise Opportunity Act," as amended: 
(1)  "Certified veteran business enterprise." 
(2)  "Service-disabled veteran." 
(3)  "Veteran business enterprise." 
(4)  "Wartime veteran." 
(c)  The city, after applying the local preference provided in the city procurement ordinance, when considering two or more bids, proposals or other replies for the procurement of goods, equipment and contractual services, at least one of which is from a certified veteran business enterprise, which are equal with respect to all relevant considerations, including, without limitation, price, quality, and service, shall award such procurement or contract to the certified veteran business enterprise. 
(d)  If a certified veteran business enterprise entitled to the vendor preference under this section and one or more businesses entitled to this preference as provided in this section or another vendor preference under the city procurement ordinance submit bids, proposals, or replies for procurement of goods, equipment and contractual services which are equal with respect to all relevant considerations, including price, quality, and service, the city shall award the procurement or contract to the business having the smallest net worth. 
(Ord. No. 13339, § 2, 9-27-12) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 18-110 by Ord. No. 13339, § 2, adopted September 27, 2012, Ord. No. 13332, § 2, adopted July 26, 2012, repealed the former section 18-110 in its entirety, which pertained to first-source hiring agreements, and derived from Ord. No. 12271, § 2, adopted August 22, 2002.  
Sec. 18-111. - Contracts of other governmental entities. 
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, in the purchase of necessary goods and/or services the city may, in lieu of other city competitive bidding procedures, accept a competitive bid which has been secured by or on behalf of any federal, state, county or municipal government or from any other governmental entity, state funded institutions and not-for-profit organizations, subject to a determination by the chief procurement officer that the contract was entered into pursuant to a competitive process in compliance with city laws, policies and procedures; provided, however, that in the purchase of goods or services in excess of $25,000.00, such contracts shall be approved by the city manager, and purchases of goods or services in excess of $50,000.00, shall be subject to approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-112. - Contracts with other governmental agencies or state funded public institutions. 
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the city shall be exempt from all competitive bidding procedures when it enters into an agreement with other governmental agencies or state funded institutions for the purchase or acquisition of goods or services; provided, however, that in the purchase or acquisition of said goods or services in excess of $25,000.00, such agreement shall be approved by the city manager, and purchases of goods or services in excess of $50,000.00 shall be subject to approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-113. - Cooperative purchasing. 
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the city's purchasing department may either participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any goods or services with one or more public entities. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to joint or multiparty contracts between public entities. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-114. - Online procurement. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may engage in electronic on-line bidding to obtain competitive bids from bidders for the purchase of goods and services whenever the chief procurement officer determines that electronic on-line bidding is more advantageous than other procurement methods provided by this article. 
(b)  Bidding process. The solicitation must designate an opening date and time. The closing date and time may be fixed or remain open, depending on the structure of the item being bid on-line. Information regarding the closing date and time must also be included in the solicitation. At the opening date and time, the chief procurement officer or its designee must begin accepting on-line electronic bids, and must continue accepting bids until the bid is officially closed. Bidders will be required to register before the opening date and time and, as part of that registration, bidders must agree to any terms, conditions, or other requirements of the solicitation. The chief procurement officer may also pre-qualify bidders and allow only those bidders who are pre-qualified to submit bids on-line. 
(c)  Provisions of section 18-85 of this Code do not apply. Provisions of section 18-85 "competitive sealed bidding" shall not apply to solicitations issued pursuant to this section. However, requirements for contract awards shall be consistent with those set forth in subsection (h) of section 18-85, subject to a certification by the chief procurement officer that the contract was entered into pursuant to a competitive process in compliance with the provisions of this section 18-114. 
(d)  Bid results public information. All bids submitted electronically through an on-line bidding process are public information and subject to the State of Florida Public Records Act, as amended. 
(e)  Remedies. All remedies available to bidders through the sealed bidding process under section 18-104 of this Code, resolution of protested solicitations and awards, are available to bidders in an on-line bidding process in accordance with section 18-114. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-115. - Acceptance of donations. 
The city manager is authorized to accept donations up to an estimated value of $50,000.00 on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13772, § 2, 6-28-18)  
Sec. 18-116. - Persons retained as expert consultants. 
The city manager shall have the authority and sole discretion to contract with persons retained as expert consultants, without city commission approval. No employment emoluments shall be provided to persons retained as expert consultants. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 2, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-117. - Economic stimulus awards and agreements. 
(a)  This section, to be known as the economic stimulus awards and agreements, is intended to provide an expedited process to award contracts related to certain capital construction projects, identified in attachment "A" or by city commission resolution, with the express purpose of stimulating the local economy. 
(b)  The expedited process set forth herein, shall be applicable to the processing, design, and construction of capital improvement projects identified in attachment A. The city commission may, from time to time, by passage of resolutions, add or delete projects from the list of economic stimulus projects to which this section applies. 
(c)  All actions taken under this section shall be subject to review by the office of strategic planning, budgeting, and performance to ensure funding is available for each project. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, including, without limitation, the city procurement ordinance, to the contrary, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the following authority only with respect to the identified economic stimulus projects: 
(1)  To appoint evaluation, selection and negotiation committees to obtain professional services as defined by and in accordance with F.S. § 287.055 ("The Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act or CCNA") as amended, eliminating the requirements of subsection 18-542(12) requiring that the majority of evaluation committee be from the public, and provided that each such committee should contain, whenever possible, representation from the user department. 
(2)  To issue bid and proposal documents including addenda thereto. 
(3)  To receive, open, review and evaluate bids and proposals. 
(e)  The city manager may award and execute contracts including professional services agreements and construction contracts in accordance with F.S. § 255.20 ("Local bids and contracts for public construction works") as amended, without city commission approval and issue the notice to proceed on each where: 
(1)  The award value of the contract has been reviewed approved by the office of strategic planning, budgeting, and performance; 
(2)  The value of the recommended award does not exceed the estimated cost of construction by more than ten percent; 
(3)  At least three bids are received from responsive and responsible bidders; 
(4)  The contractor or professional services firm receiving the award is in good standing with the city including but not limited to having no outstanding debts to the city and proves demonstrated acceptable past performance; 
(5)  The contractor has submitted required insurance, bonds, affidavits, and documentation required by the solicitation; and 
(6)  None of the bidders or proposers have timely filed a bid protest. 
(f)  The city manager shall submit to the city commission, on a bi-monthly basis, a listing of any contracts including the names of the firms, the names of the projects, and the amount of compensation of any contracts the city manager has awarded under this section. 
(g)  Excepting for the execution of contracts, the city manager may delegate his or her duties under this section to the director of the capital improvements programs, the chief procurement officer or the administrative head of the user agency. All contracts awarded under this section shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(h)  Contract contingency allowances of ten percent for economic stimulus projects will be utilized to minimize disruptions in the flow of the work. Change orders will be submitted for city commission approval if they increase the contract contingency as set forth herein. Such change orders will include a report on the draws against the initial contingency. 
(i)  This section shall sunset upon completion of the approved list of projects, as may be amended unless this section is earlier repealed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13045, § 2, 12-11-08) 
Editor's note— The attachment referred to in this section is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 18-118. - Public-private partnerships. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts F.S. § 287.05712, "Public-private partnerships," and expressly incorporates it by reference into the city procurement ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the words defined in F.S. § 287.05712(1) (entitled "Definitions") including, without limitation, "qualifying project," shall have the same meaning in this section. 
(c)  Conditions for use. 
(1)  Competitive negotiations/competitive sealed proposals may be used for a qualifying project in which it is both practicable and advantageous for the city to consider a range of competing plans, specifications, standards, terms and conditions so that adequate competition will result and award be made not principally on the basis of price, but to the respondent whose proposal contains the most advantageous combination of price, quality or other features. All contracts shall be signed by the city manager. 
(2)  A contract may be entered into by use of the competitive negotiation/competitive sealed proposal methods when: 
a.  The chief procurement officer determines that the complex specialized nature or technical details of a particular procurement make the use of competitive sealed bidding either not practicable or unreasonable, or not advantageous to the city; 
b.  Specifications or scope of work cannot be fairly or objectively prepared so as to permit competition in the invitation for bids; or 
c.  Qualifications and the quality of the service to be delivered can be considered more important than price. 
(d)  Competitive sealed proposal method. Where the contract exceeds $50,000.00, the city may utilize the following competitive sealed proposal method: 
(1)  Request for proposals (RFP), request for letters of interest (RFLI), or request for qualifications (RFQ) setting forth the terms and conditions of the professional or personal services sought for the qualifying project, including but not limited to, scope of work and evaluation factors, shall be issued. The RFP, RFLI, or RFQ, as applicable, may, in the exercise of the reasonable professional discretion of the city manager, director of the using agency, and the chief procurement officer, include a five percent evaluation criterion in favor of proposers who maintain a local office, as defined in section 18-73. In such cases, where applicable, this five percent evaluation criterion in favor of proposers who maintain a local office will be specifically defined in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ. 
(2)  Financing. Public-private partnerships traditionally involve long-term financing agreements between the parties. RFPs, RFLIs or RFQs for a qualifying project that contemplate long-term financing wherein the city would incur a debt obligation must be reviewed and approved in advance of advertisement as to form by the finance committee of the city. 
(3)  Mailing lists. Lists of prospective proposers/respondents may be compiled pursuant to section 18-85 (Competitive sealed bidding). 
(4)  Public notice. Adequate public notice in a newspaper of general circulation shall be provided pursuant to section 18-85. 
(5)  Pre-proposal conference. A pre-proposal conference may be conducted to explain the requirements of the proposed procurement and shall be announced to all prospective proposers known to have received an RFP, RFLI, or RFQ. Conferences should be held long enough after the RFP, RFLI, or RFQ has been issued to allow prospective proposers to become familiar with the proposed procurement, but sufficiently before receipt of proposal to allow consideration of the conference results in preparing their proposals. Nothing stated at a pre-proposal conference shall change the RFP, RFLI, or RFQ unless a change is made by written addendum, which shall be supplied to all those prospective proposers known to have received a RFP, RFLI, or RFQ. All pre-proposal conferences shall be recorded and be maintained as a public record. 
(6)  Receipt of proposals. Sealed proposals must be received by the city clerk no later than the time and date specified for submission in the RFP, RFLI, or RFQ. The name of each proposer shall be recorded by the city clerk or his/her designee, and the record and each proposal, to the extent consistent with applicable state law, shall be open to public inspection. 
(7)  Proposal evaluation. An evaluation committee shall be appointed by the city manager for the purpose of evaluating proposals based upon the criteria contained in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ. This evaluation committee shall be comprised predominantly of individuals who are not city personnel and which are deemed subject matter experts in the project areas concerned (for example: an architect, engineer, certified public accountant, financial advisor, etc. who are certified or registered as required by the law). No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. As may be provided in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ, proposers may be invited to make oral presentations regarding their proposals. The recommendations of the evaluation committee shall be submitted to the city manager. 
In the event only one proposal is received, the evaluation committee may proceed with the evaluation, or request the city manager to reject all proposals, whichever is in the best interests of the city. 
a.  After reviewing the evaluation committee's recommendation, the city manager may: 
1.  Approve the recommendation of the evaluation committee, written notice of which shall be provided to all proposers, and the city manager shall then submit his/her recommendation to the city commission; 
2.  Reject the evaluation committee's recommendation and instruct the evaluation committee to re-evaluate and make further recommendations; 
3.  Reject all proposals; or 
4.  Recommend that the city commission reject all proposals. 
(8)  Award. For agreements that involve long-term financing wherein the city would incur a debt obligation, the city manager's award recommendation shall be reviewed and approved by the finance committee of the city before being submitted for consideration by the city commission. Award shall be made to the responsive and responsible proposer whose proposal is most advantageous to the city as determined by the city commission in accordance with the evaluation criteria contained in the RFP, RFLI or RFQ. 
a.  After reviewing the city manager's recommendation, the city commission may: 
1.  Approve the city manager's recommendation and authorize contract negotiations; 
2.  Reject all proposals; 
3.  Reject all proposals and instruct the city manager to reissue a solicitation; or 
4.  Reject all proposals and instruct the city manager to enter into competitive negotiations with at least three individuals or firms possessing the ability to perform such services and obtain information from said individuals or firms relating to experience, qualifications and the proposed cost or fee for said services, and make a recommendation to the city commission. 
The decision of the city commission shall be final. Written notice of the award shall be given to the successful proposer. 
Threshold amounts referenced herein shall include the values associated with potential options of renewal. Awards made by the city manager or by the city commission shall include authority for all subsequent options of renewal, if any. The aforementioned options of renewal shall be exercised at the option of the city manager, subject to confirmation by the city commission if, after review of past performance under the contract, the city manager determines in his/her sole discretion that exercise of the option of renewal is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13447, § 2, 4-10-14; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-119. - Unsolicited proposals. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts F.S. § 287.05712, "Public-private partnerships", and expressly incorporates it as by reference into the city procurement ordinance, as such may be modified. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in F.S. § 287.05712: 
(1)  "Qualifying project"; 
(2)  "Private entity"; 
(c)  Conditions for use. The city may receive unsolicited proposals for a qualifying project and may thereafter enter into an agreement with a private entity, or a consortium of private entities, for said qualifying project, subject to the procedures and conditions set forth herein. Any unsolicited proposal shall include sufficient detail and information for the city to evaluate the proposal in an objective and timely manner. 
(d)  Application fee. Any private entity or consortium of private entities desiring to submit an unsolicited proposal for a qualifying project shall submit to the city an application fee of $25,000.00 payable to the city in the form of a money order or cashier's check at the time of unsolicited proposal submittal. If the cost of evaluating the unsolicited proposal exceeds $25,000.00 the application fee shall be increased to a reasonable fee to pay the costs of evaluating the unsolicited proposal. The proposer will be notified and will promptly pay the balance of the application fee needed to pay the costs of evaluating the unsolicited proposal. As provided for in F.S. § 287.05712(4)(a), the purpose of this application fee is to pay the costs of evaluating the unsolicited proposal. The city may need to engage the services of a private consultant to assist in the evaluation of the unsolicited proposal. The city shall refund any portion of the initial application fee paid in excess of its direct costs associated with evaluating the proposal. 
(e)  Public notice. If the city receives an unsolicited proposal for a qualifying project pursuant to this section and the city desires to enter into an agreement with the private entity or consortium of private entities submitting same, the city shall first notify the commission of the receipt of said unsolicited proposal by placement of a discussion item on the next available commission meeting agenda. Upon the commission's approval to proceed with said unsolicited proposal project, the city shall publish public notice in the Florida Administrative Register and a newspaper of general circulation at least once a week for two weeks stating that the city has received an unsolicited proposal and that the city will accept other proposals for the same qualifying project. The city shall additionally furnish a copy of the same notice to any homeowners or neighborhood associations currently registered with the city's Neighborhood Enhancement Team ("NET") office. The city shall set forth in each such request for proposals the criteria to be evaluated and how such private partner shall be selected from the proposals submitted. The entity submitting the original unsolicited proposal may submit a more detailed proposal in response to the city's notice. The timeframe for allowing other proposals shall be no fewer than 21 days but no more than 120 days after the initial date of publication. A copy of the notice must be mailed to each local government in the affected area of the qualifying project which shall mean Miami-Dade County and/or any municipality and/or special district in which all or a portion of the qualifying project is located. 
(f)  Receipt of proposals. Sealed proposals must be received by the city clerk no later than the time and date specified for submission in the publication. The name of each proposer shall be recorded by the city clerk or its designee, and the record and each proposal, to the extent consistent with applicable state law, shall be open to public inspection. 
(g)  Proposal evaluation. An evaluation committee shall be appointed by the city manager for the purpose of evaluating and ranking the proposals based upon factors that include, but are not limited to: professional qualifications and experience, general business terms, innovative design techniques or cost-reduction terms, and finance plans. Proposers may be invited to make oral presentations regarding their proposals. The recommendations of the evaluation committee shall be submitted to the city manager. 
In the event only one proposal is received, the evaluation committee may proceed with the evaluation, or request the city manager to reject all proposals, whichever is in the best interests of the city. 
(1)  After reviewing the evaluation committee's recommendation, the city manager may: 
a.  Approve the recommendation of the evaluation committee, written notice of which shall be provided to all proposers, and the city manager shall then submit his or her recommendation to the city commission; 
b.  Reject the evaluation committee's recommendation and instruct the evaluation committee to re-evaluate and make further recommendations; 
c.  Reject all proposals; or 
d.  Recommend that the city commission reject all proposals. 
(h)  Award. For agreements that involve long-term financing wherein the city would incur a debt obligation, the city manager's award recommendation shall be reviewed and approved by the finance committee of the city before being submitted for consideration by the city commission. Award shall be made to the highest-ranked responsible proposer whose proposal is most advantageous to the city as determined by the city commission in accordance with the criteria the evaluation committee used in evaluating and ranking the proposals. 
(1)  After reviewing the city manager's recommendation, the city commission may: 
a.  Approve the city manager's recommendation and authorize contract negotiations; 
b.  Reject all proposals; 
(2)  The decision of the city commission shall be final. Written notice of the award shall be given to the successful proposer. 
Unsolicited proposals may only be awarded by the city commission subject to the procedures set forth herein. Awards made by the city commission shall include authority for all subsequent options of renewal, if any. The aforementioned options of renewal shall be exercised at the option of the city manager, subject to confirmation by the city commission if, after review of past performance under the contract, the city manager determines in his/her sole discretion that exercise of the option of renewal is in the best interest of the city. All agreements shall be in a form acceptable to the city commission or city manager, as applicable, and are subject to approval as to legal from by the city attorney. The chief financial officer or his/her designee shall review all finance plans and documents related to the private entity's performance, payment of subcontractors and similar responsibilities. The director of risk management shall review all insurance and related requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13447, § 2, 4-10-14; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-120. - Responsible wage construction contracts. 
(a)  In addition to the other elements of the term "responsible bidder" in law or in the discretion of the city commission, as defined per section 18-73 of the City Code, and as applies to competitively bid city contracts in excess of $250,000.00 for the construction, alteration, and/or repair, including painting or decorating, of public buildings or public works, shall mean a bidder who provides documented proof in its bid that the various classes of laborers and mechanics will be paid no less than the specified overall hourly rates as set forth in the contract specifications. All leases and contracts entered into after the effective date of this section derives which provide for privately funded construction, alteration or repair of buildings or improvements located on city-owned land shall require laborers and mechanics performing such work be paid no less than the overall hourly rates required on competitively bid city construction contracts under this section unless specifically exempted below. Fees for monitoring compliance with this section shall be charged as provided in the most current city-wide budget as follows: for city construction contracts, the department of capital improvements and transportation projects ("CITP") shall charge the using department therefor; for leases and contracts which provide for privately funded construction, alteration or repair of buildings or improvements on city-owned land, the party contracting with the city shall be charged therefor. 
(b)  The specifications for each competitively bid city contract in excess of $250,000.00 for the construction, alteration and/or repair, including painting or decorating, of public buildings or public works shall specify an initial overall per hour rate to be paid to each craft or type of employee necessary to perform the contract work as listed in local area nondiscriminatory negotiated contracts (hereinafter referred to for purposes of this subsection (b) as "negotiated contracts") between organizations which represent employees and contractors. In ascertaining the initial overall per hour rate to be paid, the minimum standard shall be the combined overall dollar value on an hourly basis of the wages (paid as set forth below) and of the hospitalization, medical, pension and life insurance benefits (paid as set forth below) for such craft or type of employee under negotiated contracts in effect as of January 1st of the calendar year in which said proposal bid is expected to be advertised, or, in the case of a lease or contract providing for privately funded construction on city-owned land subject to this section, under the negotiated contracts in effect as of January 1st of the calendar year in which said proposed lease or contract is expected to be executed. Thereafter, the specifications shall provide that the overall per hour rate to be paid for work performed under the contract during each subsequent calendar year shall be the overall per hour rate in effect as of January 1st, of the year in which the work is performed. If a particular craft or type of employee is not listed in such negotiated contracts, in ascertaining the initial overall per hour rate to be paid those employees, the minimum standard shall be the combined overall dollar value on an hourly basis of the "basic hourly rate of pay" (as defined in 29 CFR 5.24) (paid as set forth below) and of the fringe benefits payments (paid as set forth below) for hospitalization, medical pension and life insurance benefits for such craft or type of employee under the secretary of labor's wage determination (made pursuant to the provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act) in effect for the city, as of the end of the calendar year in which the proposed bid is expected to be advertised. The foregoing and the provisions of subsection (e) notwithstanding, where not otherwise precluded by state or federal law, the overall per hour rate shall be the higher rate under this section 18-120 or the rate of wages to be paid under the requirements of the Davis-Bacon Act; provided, further, that the overall per hour rate shall not be the higher rate if the federal government requires the city as a condition of receiving federal funds for a project to pay no more than the wages as determined by the U.S. Department of Labor under the Davis-Bacon Act on project contracts. The specifications for such contracts shall: 
(1)  Include a sum certain in dollars and cents as an initial overall per hour rate for each craft or type of employee to be paid for work performed during the period commencing on the date of issuance of the notice to proceed and continuing through the calendar year (or, in the case of a lease or contract providing for privately funded construction on city-owned land subject to this section, ending the last day of the calendar year in which the lease or contract was executed). The specifications shall further provide that the overall per hour rate to be paid for work performed during the year period commencing the next January 1st after the date of issuance of the notice to proceed (or, in the case of a lease or contract providing for privately funded construction on city-owned land subject to this Section after the date of execution of such lease or contract) shall be such rate (as determined in accordance with subsection (b) above) for that calendar year and shall be updated thereafter on each subsequent January 1st to the rate (as determined in accordance with subsection (b) above) for the ensuing calendar year until completion of the contract work; and 
(2)  Mandate the contractor to whom the contract is awarded, and any of its subcontractors performing any of the contract work, pay not less than the specified overall per hour rate adjusted over the term of the contract as provided in subsection (1) above; and 
(3)  Provide that the contractor, and any of its subcontractors, may fulfill the obligation to pay such specified overall per hour rate by payment to the employee of the hourly wage rate listed in the negotiated contracts (or, if applicable, under subsection (1) above, the "basic hourly rate of pay" as defined in 29 CFR 5.24 contained in the secretary of labor's wage determination) for such craft or type of employee plus either: (a) payment on the employee's behalf of the cost (on an hourly basis) of the hospitalization, medical, pension and life insurance benefits specified for such craft of type of employee; or, (b) payment to the employee (in addition to the listed hourly wage rate, or "basic hourly rate of pay" if applicable) of an amount equal to the hospitalization, medical, pension and life insurance benefits (on an hourly basis) contractors are required to provide under the negotiated contracts (or, if applicable, under subsection (1) above, an amount equal to the fringe benefit payments on an hourly basis for hospitalization, medical, pension and life insurance benefits contained in the secretary of labor's wage determination) for such craft of type of employee. Payments to employees shall be counted towards fulfillment of the above obligation only to the extent that such payments are made by check or money order; and 
(4)  Provide that the contractor, and each subcontractor under the contractor, shall post in a conspicuous place on the site where such contract work is performed: (a) the schedule of the specified overall per hour rate for each applicable classification specified by such negotiated contracts; (b) the amount of liquidated damages for any failure to pay such rates; and (c) the name and address of the responsible official in the city to whom complaints should be given; and 
(5)  Provide that there may be withheld from the contractor so much of accrued payments as may be considered necessary by the contracting officer to pay to employees employed by the contractor (or any subcontractor under the contractor) in the performance of the contract work the difference between the overall per hour rate required by the contract to be paid employees on the work and the amounts received by such employees and not refunded to the contractor, and any of its subcontractors or their agents; and 
(6)  Require the contractor and each subcontractor under the contractor to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate written records signed under oath as true and correct showing the names, Social Security numbers, and craft classifications of all employees performing work on said contract, the hours and fractions of hours for every type of work performed by each employee, the combined dollar value of all wages, any contributions to benefit plans and payments made to each employee of the overall per hour rate required by this section and further require the contractor to submit to the city a list of all subcontractors and the names and Social Security numbers of all employees thereof who performed work each day on the contract and further require each subcontractor to also submit to the city a list of the names and Social Security numbers of its employees who performed work each day on the contract; and 
(7)  Provide that no contractor (or subcontractor under the contractor) may terminate an employee performing work on the contract because of the employee's filing a complaint regarding payment of required overall per hour rates. 
(c)  City shall periodically examine the records required to be kept under subsection (6) of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The city manager shall establish an administrative procedure for monitoring compliance with and enforcement of the requirements of this section. Such procedure shall provide that: 
(1)  CITP may conduct investigations of compliance with the requirements of this section and issue written notices to a contractor (or subcontractor under the contractor) when it determines based on such investigation that the contractor (or subcontractor) has not complied herewith; 
(2)  The contractor or subcontractor shall respond in writing to the notice of noncompliance; 
(3)  Based on the response, CITP may determine to rescind the notice of noncompliance or to conduct a compliance meeting with the affected contractor or subcontractor at which any additional evidence may be presented; 
(4)  CITP shall make a written compliance determination following any compliance meeting. A determination that the contractor or subcontractor has not complied with the requirements of this section shall state the basis therefore and shall advise the contractor or subcontractor of its right to file a written request with the city manager within 30 calendar days to schedule an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to appeal the determination as provided below; and 
(5)  A contractor or subcontractor who fails to respond to a notice of noncompliance, fails to attend a compliance meeting, or who does not timely request an administrative hearing from an adverse compliance determination made by CITP after a compliance meeting shall be deemed not to have complied with the requirements of this section as stated in the notice or determination of non-compliance and, in the case of underpayment of the required overall per hour rate, an amount sufficient to pay any underpayment shall be withheld from contract proceeds and remitted to the employee and the contractor or subcontractor shall be fined the applicable penalty for such underpayment as provided in this subsection (d). A contractor or subcontractor who does not make the required payment of the underpaid wages or who does not pay any fine imposed hereunder shall not be deemed responsible to perform subsequent city construction contracts and shall be ineligible to be awarded such contracts for so long as the identified underpayment or any penalties imposed therefor remain outstanding, not to exceed three years. 
Upon timely receipt of a request for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to appeal a determination of non-compliance, the city manager shall appoint a hearing officer and fix a time for an administrative hearing thereon. A notice of hearing (together with a copy of CITP's determination of non-compliance) shall be served upon the contractor (or subcontractor). Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit proposed written findings and recommendations together with a transcript of the hearing to the city manager within a reasonable time. The city manager shall determine whether the contractor (or subcontractor) failed to comply with the requirements of this section. If the manager's determination is that the contractor (or subcontractor) failed to comply, and that such failure was pervasive, the manager may order that the contract work be suspended or terminated, and that the noncomplying contractor (or subcontractor) and the principal owners thereof be prohibited from bidding on or otherwise participating in city contracts for the construction, alteration and/or repair, including painting or decorating of public buildings or public works for a period of up to three years. In addition, in the case of underpayment of the required overall per hour rate, an amount sufficient to pay any underpayment shall be withheld from contract proceeds and remitted to the affected employees and the contractor or subcontractor shall be fined the penalties provided below. If the manager's determination is that the contractor (or subcontractor) failed to comply and that such failure was limited to isolated instances and was not pervasive, the city manager may, in the case of underpayment of the required overall per hour rate, order an amount equal to the amount of such underpayment be withheld from the contractor and remitted to the employee, and may also fine the contractor or subcontractor for such noncompliance as follows: for the first underpayment, a penalty in an amount equal to ten percent of the amount thereof; for the second underpayment, a penalty in an amount equal to 20 percent thereof; for the third and successive underpayments, a penalty in an amount equal to 30 percent thereof. A fourth violation shall constitute a default of the subject contract and may be cause for suspension or termination in accordance with the contract's terms and debarment in accordance with the debarment procedures of the city. Monies received from payment of penalties imposed hereunder shall be deposited in a separate account and shall be utilized solely to defray CITP's costs of administering this section. If the required payment is not made within a reasonable period of time, the noncomplying contractor (or subcontractor) and the principal owners thereof shall be prohibited from bidding on or otherwise participating in city contracts for the construction, alteration, and/or repair, including painting or decorating of public buildings or public works for a period of three years. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to city contracts for construction or alteration which are federally funded or which are otherwise subject to the provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276(a)). 
(f)  This section shall not apply to any contract for which authority to advertise for bids has been obtained prior to the effective date of this section. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to contracts designed to consolidate an indeterminate number of individual smaller construction, repair/replacement or alteration activities which may be needed over a fixed period of time throughout the city's facilities and which are addressed by building specialty/trades contractors pre-qualified to provide such services to the city. 
(h)  As used in the construction of this section, references to the masculine shall include the feminine and references to the singular shall include the plural, and vice-versa. 
(i)  Exemption for certain privately funded construction. This section shall not apply to leases and contracts entered into after the effective date of this section which provide for privately funded construction, alteration or repair of buildings or improvements located on city-owned lands whose estimated cost is equal to or less than $5,000,000.00 which are financed: 
(1)  Solely through private sources, without $1.00 or more of financing provided through any federal, state, county, city, local governmental entity or bond sources; or 
(2)  By entities which meet all three of the following conditions: exemption from federal income taxes pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, not-for-profit status and community-based. 
(j)  The foregoing notwithstanding, any lease or contract entered into after the effective date of this section which provides for privately funded construction, alteration or repair of buildings or improvements located on county-owned land whose estimated cost is equal to or less than $5,000,000.00, receives bond financing and also receives state and/or local development incentives (including but not limited to: waiver of or reduced impact or permit fees and reduced property or other taxes) based on job creation shall not require payment of the overall hourly rates provided by this section. Such lease or contract shall provide that in the event the job creation requirements on which the foregoing development incentives were conditioned are not fulfilled, the lessee shall be required to pay a penalty of up to 20 percent of the cost of such construction, alteration or repair. Said penalty shall be in addition to any rental or other payments required in each lease or contract to which this subsection applies. Said penalty shall be paid to the City of Miami and shall be used to cover the costs of monitoring compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 13500, § 2, 2-26-15)  
Sec. 18-121. - Procurements, grants, subgrants, and compliance utilizing requirements for federal disaster assistance. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any conflicting provisions in the City Code and/or the laws of the state, as amended, all procurements of goods, services, equipment, projects, personnel, grants, subgrants, or other resources for which the city intends to seek federal disaster assistance (as defined below) shall follow the federal disaster requirements (as defined below). 
(b)  As used herein: 
Federal disaster assistance means the collective multiple types of major disaster assistance in funding, personnel, equipment, facilities, goods, services, projects, grants, processes, coordination, resources, and other recovery assistance and efforts created and authorized from time to time by the federal government. 
Federal government means the government of the United States of America. 
Federal requirements means collectively, the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, 42 U.S. C. 5121 et seq., as amended ("Stafford Act"), and all other federal rules, procurement thresholds, compliance, audit and reporting procedures, regulations, and guidelines established for federal disaster assistance from time to time. 
(c)  The city commission delegates authority to and authorizes the city manager or designee to procure, negotiate, execute, and approve, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, all necessary procurements, awards, and purchases for the city's recovery from any federally declared disaster for which the city intends to seek federal disaster assistance. The city manager shall provide to the city commission on a bi-monthly basis a report of such procurements, awards, and purchases through the recovery period and until the completion of recovery, including but not limited to all audit periods related to such federal disaster assistance. 
(Ord. No. 13783, § 2, 7-26-18)  
Secs. 18-122—18-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13031, § 2, adopted October 16, 2008, repealed article IV, §§ 18-136—18-146 in its entirety, which pertained to the minority and women business affairs and procurement program, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 18-67—18-77; Ord. No. 10062, §§ 1—7, adopted December 19, 1985; Ord. No. 10332, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 22, 1987; Ord. No. 10538, §§ 1—5, adopted January 12, 1989; Ord. No. 11272, § 2, adopted June 1, 1995. 
 
Secs. 18-136—18-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SALE OR LEASE OF CITY'S REAL PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Powers with respect to acquiring and disposing of property, § 3(f); contracts for sales or lease of real property, §§ 29-A(d), 29-B. 
 
Sec. 18-176. - Methods and procedures for sales and leases. 
(a)  Any sale, conveyance or disposition of any interest, including any leasehold in real property, owned by the city, the off-street parking department, or the downtown development authority shall be made in the manner set forth in this article, and said sale, conveyance or disposition shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this article V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive the special requirements for leases and contracts of waterfront property provided elsewhere in this Code or in the City Charter. 
(b)  In order to facilitate the implementation of a city policy before considering proposals requiring deferrals, abatements, credits or other reductions in payments to the city for leases and any other agreements for the use of the city's real property, including but not limited to license agreements, permits, use agreements and other related agreements, four affirmative votes of the city commission shall be required for approval of any such deferrals, abatements, credits or other reductions in payments. 
(c)  Before the city considers proposals requiring deferrals, abatements, credits or other reductions in payments to the city for leases and any all other agreements for the use of the city's real property, the lessee or party using the city's property shall provide an audited financial statement. Audited financial statements shall: 
(1)  Be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the United States; 
(2)  Be complete and include all notes to the statements and any auditor's reports associated with the audited financial statements; and 
(3)  Include, if associated with the financial statement, an auditor's opinion. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-78; Ord. No. 13151, § 2, 4-8-10)  
Sec. 18-176.1. - Unified development projects. 
Unified development projects shall be as set forth in Charter Section 29-A. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 3, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-176.2. - Cone of silence; exceptions. 
The cone of silence shall be as set forth in section 18-74, except that, in the case of unified development projects or other matters governed by this article, the cone of silence shall be applicable only to contracts for amounts in excess of $500,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 3, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-176.3. - Procedures for resolution of protested UDP's and awards. 
Procedures for resolution of protested UDP's and solicitations, awards, or recommendations for awards, shall be as set forth in section 18-104 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 12271, § 3, 8-22-02; Ord. No. 13629, § 2, 9-8-16)  
Sec. 18-177. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Competitive sealed bidding shall be used in those circumstances in which it is practicable and advantageous for the city to specify all detailed plans, specifications, standards, terms and conditions relating to a property interest already owned by the city or to be acquired and disposed of by the city, so that adequate competition will result and award may be made to the highest responsible and responsive bidder. In all other instances there shall be a public notice required prior to the sale or disposition of city-owned property in order to allow potential purchasers to compete. 
(b)  Invitations for bids. An invitation for bids shall include, but not be limited to, all relevant items stipulated in section 18-79(b), as well as all information necessary to describe the particular property interest owned or to be acquired and disposed of, including any conditions or restrictions upon the use of such property. 
(c)  Public notice. Notice inviting bids shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 18-79(d). 
(d)  Prebid conferences. Prebid conferences to discuss the contemplated purchase or disposition of property interest may be held in accordance with provisions of section 18-79(e). 
(e)  Bid opening. Bid opening shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 18-79(f). 
(f)  Bid acceptance and evaluation. Bid acceptance and evaluation shall be in accordance with the procedures established by the chief procurement officer. 
(g)  Award. The city manager shall submit recommendations as to the award to the city commission, which may reject all bids. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the responsible and responsive bidder whose bid offers the city the highest total compensation from the proposed sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition, as the case may be. The decision of the city commission shall be final. All contracts shall be approved as to form and correctness by the city attorney, and a copy shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-78.1) 
City Code cross reference— Competitive sealed bidding generally, § 18-79.  
Sec. 18-178. - Emergency conveyances. 
The city commission or department of off-street parking board or the downtown development authority board of directors, as appropriate, may by resolution waive the requirement of sale, conveyance or disposition to the highest responsible bidder by means of the following procedure: The city manager, the director of the off-street parking department, or the director of the downtown development authority, as appropriate, must make a written finding, supported by reasons, that a valid emergency exists. Such finding must be ratified by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the city commission or applicable board, after a properly advertised public hearing. In such event the city manager, the director of the off-street parking department, or the director of the downtown development authority, as appropriate shall solicit as many proposals as practicable for the sale, lease or conveyance or disposition of the property. The commission or applicable board, as appropriate, shall accept the proposal that is most advantageous. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-78.2)  
Sec. 18-179. - Sales to only possible bidder. 
The requirement of competitive bidding may be dispensed with upon a written finding by the city manager that such methods would be futile for the reason that only one possible bidder could be chosen. In those instances the property shall be sold for the amount and in accordance with the procedure outlined in section 18-182(a)(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-78.2.1)  
Sec. 18-180. - Cancellations. 
The city, the off-street parking authority, and the downtown development authority shall have the right to cancel all invitations for bids or requests for proposals before bid opening or proposal submission and to reject all bids or proposals after receipt. All invitations for bids and requests for proposals shall contain a reservation of the foregoing rights. In the event of such a cancellation or rejection, the city manager or its designee shall promptly notify all affected bidders or offerors and make available to them a copy of the written explanation for such cancellation or rejection, which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-78.3; Ord. No. 12271, § 3, 8-22-02)  
Sec. 18-181. - Applicability to off-street parking/downtown development authorities. 
With the exception of the requirement for advertisement prior to sale of real property, as contained in subsection 18-85(d) of this article, the provisions contained elsewhere in this article are not required to be followed in effecting the sale, conveyance or disposition of real property owned by the Miami Parking Authority or the Downtown Development Authority. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-79)  
Sec. 18-182. - Authority to sell. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to sell any real property owned by the city not needed for public use or that may have become unsuitable for use by any city department, provided that: 
(1)  Such property cannot be leased so as to produce revenue to the city. 
(2)  Such property shall not be sold for less than its appraised or assessed value, unless express authority is given by the city commission. 
(3)  The deed of conveyance for such property shall contain a provision which requires that in the event the property is ever immune or exempt from the payment of ad valorem taxes, the grantee, or any of the grantee's assigns, heirs, or successors, shall pay to the city an annual payment which shall be equal to what the city would have received as ad valorem taxes based on the valuation method employed by the county property appraiser pursuant to F.S. ch. 193, as amended. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, appraised values shall be those determined by at least two independent appraisers, both of whom shall be members of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, unless said appraisers cannot agree on value, in which case the higher value shall be deemed the appraised value. 
(c)  The city commission may declare an exemption from the restrictions contained in subsection (a) above and declare them inapplicable by resolution provided that the city manager has made a written finding that it is in the best interest of the city, which findings must be ratified by an affirmative vote of 2 / 3 of the commission after a properly advertised public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-80; Ord. No. 11422, § 2, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 11640, § 2, 4-14-98)  
Sec. 18-183. - Commission on sale. 
The city will pay a real estate percentage commission of five percent on all real estate sold by the city whenever a bid is made at a private sale through the efforts of a broker and the party making such bid is the purchaser of the property. The director of finance is hereby authorized to pay the same out of the proceeds of the sale. 
Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-81)  
Sec. 18-184. - Expenses of abstract of title. 
The director of finance is authorized to pay for the expense of updating or obtaining an abstract of title on all property sold by the city, to be paid out of the sale price of the property. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-82)  
Sec. 18-185. - Payment to be in cash, certified check. 
Terms are deemed to be all cash at time of closing. All costs involved in the sale of the property shall be the responsibility of the buyer, with the exception of the abstract and all customary prorations of prepaid or delinquent costs. Buyer may pay cash, by cashier's check, by certified check, or by a combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-83)  
Sec. 18-186. - City attorney responsible for closing of sale. 
It shall be the responsibility of the city attorney to effect the closing of any city property which is sold under this article. 
(Ord. No. 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-84)  
Sec. 18-187. - Disposition of proceeds from sale. 
All money received from sales under this article shall be delivered over to the director of finance in accordance with the City Charter. 
(Ord. No 9572, § 1, 2-10-83; Code 1980, § 18-85)  
Sec. 18-188. - Discrimination by lessees of city-owned property—Prohibited. 
The lessee of any property of which the city is the owner shall not discriminate against or refuse or deny to any person or persons, guests or permittees the use of the facilities leased from the city because of race, creed, religion, color or national origin. 
(Code 1967, § 38-9.1; Code 1980, § 37-13)  
Sec. 18-189. - Same—Requirements for organizations using city facilities. 
In order to facilitate the implementation of the policy of the city as set forth in section 18-188, in instances wherein leases are entered into between the city and organizations or clubs for the use of city property or city facilities by the members thereof, such organizations or clubs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Membership. 
a.  Membership in the club or organization shall be available to all persons without discrimination as defined in section 18-188. 
b.  There shall be no requirement that applicants for enrollment be sponsored by anyone as a condition to such applicant being processed or accepted for membership. 
c.  The club or organization shall make a minimum of five percent of existing enrollment of the various types of membership in such club or organization available for new enrollment for a minimum period of 30 days of each year. The enrollment period shall commence July 1 of each year. In the event there is more than one type of membership available, this shall mean five percent of each type of membership shall be open to the general public. 
d.  Acceptance into membership shall be determined by simple majority vote of the general membership at a meeting designated for such purpose, and there shall be no secret ballot for admission to membership. 
e.  In the event there are a greater number of applicants than there are openings available for membership under the annual five percent of enrollments as set forth above, then, and in that event, new members in this enrollment period shall be selected by lot. 
f.  Within the 30-day period prior to the date of the commencement of the enrollment period described above in subparagraph (1)c, the club or organization shall advertise twice in two daily newspapers of general circulation published in the city a notice of the acceptance of new members as hereinabove provided, and notice of the purposes of the club or organization and of the programs offered by the club or organization to the public. The notice shall be printed on June 1 and June 14 of each year. 
(2)  Dues. All members in each of the various categories of membership shall pay equal dues, if any, within such categories. 
(3)  Minutes of meetings. All minutes of meetings, whether regular meetings or special meetings, or however designated, of such club or organization shall be posted upon the bulletin board upon the club premises within 30 days after the date of such meetings, and a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the city manager, or his/her designee. 
(4)  Privileges. All members in each category shall have equal rights and privileges. 
(Code 1967, § 38-9.2; Code 1980, § 37-14; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-190. - Same—Provisions of sections 18-188 and 18-189 to be part of lease. 
The foregoing matters as set forth in sections 18-188 and 18-189 being an implementation of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States of America and the constitution of the state, such provisions are to be considered a part of every such lease as described above entered into between the city and any person, firm, corporation, club or organization, regardless of the specific written terms of any lease now existing or to be entered into in the future. 
(Code 1967, § 38-9.3; Code 1980, § 37-15)  
Sec. 18-191. - Same—Termination of lease for violations. 
Any person, firm, corporation, club or organization violating the terms and conditions of sections 18-188 through 18-190 shall be subject to having its lease forthwith terminated by the city for such violation, upon due notice to the violator and upon an opportunity to be heard before the city commission concerning such violation. 
(Code 1967, § 38-9.4; Code 1980, § 37-16)  
Secs. 18-192—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SELF-INSURANCE AND INSURANCE TRUST FUND 
 
Sec. 18-221. - Created; sources. 
(a)  There is hereby created a city self-insurance and insurance trust fund, the fund to which shall be credited all money deposited in the city treasury by appropriation or from any other source, together with any unexpended balance of any appropriation heretofore made for the expenditure of public funds, for or accruing from: 
(1)  The payment of claims and judgments against the city involving the acts of officers or employees of the city or property belonging to the city. 
(2)  Insuring or providing for the insurance of any real or personal property or operation of the city against risks or hazards. 
(3)  The maintenance of hurricane disaster funds. 
(4)  The recovery of tort claims against other parties. 
(5)  Fines and forfeitures levied against employees as a result of being found responsible for preventable accidents. 
(6)  Amounts received from parties contracting with the city for providing insurance coverage to protect the parties for any and all risks involving activities or property associated with the contracts. 
(7)  Income accruing from the investment of the trust funds. 
(b)  Such funds are to be expended in accordance with the provisions and for the purposes stated in this article. The fund shall be segregated from other funds in the city treasury and shall be administered by the board of trustees appointed for that purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 16-47; Code 1980, § 18-93)  
Sec. 18-222. - Appropriation of money. 
All money accumulated in the fund is hereby appropriated for the purposes for which designated, to be expended in accordance with the provisions and procedures established by this article. 
(Code 1967, § 16-48; Code 1980, § 18-94)  
Sec. 18-223. - Board of trustees—Composition; discharge of duties; compensation; powers. 
(a)  The board of trustees for the city self-insurance and insurance trust fund, referred to as "the trustees," shall be composed of the city manager as chairman, the director of finance and the insurance manager. The trustees shall discharge their duties during normal duty hours and shall not be entitled to additional compensation by reason of their services as trustees. However, they shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred. The trustees shall invest all the trust funds to the fullest extent consistent with the cash requirements and investment objectives of the fund. 
(b)  The trustees shall have the power to make purchases, sales, exchanges, investments and reinvestments for and on behalf of the fund. It shall be the duty of the trustees to see that the money invested is at all times handled in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-49; Code 1980, § 18-95)  
Sec. 18-224. - Same—Oath of office. 
Each trustee shall take an oath of office and make written acknowledgment of his/her acceptance of the duty, responsibility and authority of a trustee. 
(Code 1967, § 16-50; Code 1980, § 18-96; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-225. - Same—Meetings. 
The board of trustees shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly each year and special meetings at such time as the chairperson may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 16-51; Code 1980, § 18-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-226. - Disbursement of money. 
The trustees shall disburse money from the fund to the director of finance upon his/her requisition and certification that the expenditure of the funds so requisitioned is to accomplish the purpose of the self-insurance and insurance program. The receipt for such funds shall constitute a full acquittance to the trustees. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52; Code 1980, § 18-98; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-227. - Sale or exchange of securities and investments. 
Securities or investments purchased or held under the provisions of this article may be sold or exchanged for other securities or investments, provided that no sale or exchange shall be at a price less than the market price of the securities or investments to be sold or exchanged. 
(Code 1967, § 16-53; Code 1980, § 18-99)  
Sec. 18-228. - Investment of funds. 
Trust funds may be invested without limitation in: 
(1)  Bonds, notes or other obligations of the United States or those guaranteed by the United States or for which the credit of the United States is pledged for the payment of the principal and interest or dividends thereof. 
(2)  Certificates of deposit of any bank incorporated under the laws of this state or any national bank organized under the laws of the United States to do business and situated in this state, to the extent that such savings accounts are insured with the federal government or any agency thereof, and if the certificates of deposit are secured by the deposit of securities of the United States government. 
(Code 1967, § 16-54; Code 1980, § 18-100)  
Sec. 18-229. - Self-insurance and insurance committee—Appointment; composition; chairperson. 
There shall be appointed annually by the city manager a committee to be known a the city self-insurance and insurance committee. The committee shall be composed of three members who shall be selected from among the officers or employees of the city. The city manager shall designate one of the members to act as chairperson. The committee shall administer the self-insurance program and maintain appropriate records which shall reflect the status of the program and be in such detail as required to enable the committee to determine appropriate reserves. The committee shall determine and recommend to the city commission the amount of reserves to be accumulated and maintained and the amount to be appropriated annually to finance the self-insurance and insurance program. 
(Code 1967, § 16-55; Code 1980, § 18-101; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-230. - Same—Responsibilities. 
The committee shall, as expeditiously as possible, with due regard to the financial security of the city, proceed to establish the means whereby the city shall become self-insured in primary insurance coverage while maintaining umbrella coverage to insure against catastrophic losses. The means contemplated include the establishment of financial reserves and securing adequate qualified personnel, supplies and equipment to perform required services in an economical and efficient manner. The committee is specifically authorized and directed to ascertain that the city's financial interest is fully protected at all times. Any provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event that adequate financial reserves have not been provided or an analysis of the costs involved demonstrates that it is more economical for the city to maintain coverage for certain specific risks through commercial insurance policies, the committee is authorized and directed to procure such coverage. The premiums shall be paid from trust funds unless the city commission shall have directed otherwise and provided funds for that purpose. The committee shall utilize the services of regular city employees to the greatest extent practical, but may procure specialized services on a fee basis from independent contractors when such action is not prohibited by law. Where personal services for the program rendered by regular city employees require the expenditure of a substantial portion of the employees' working time on a regular or recurring basis the pro rata costs of such time, including all emoluments, shall be charged as an expense of the program. The commission may provide for the payment of such expenses during the regular budgeting process by providing funds for the payment of such personnel in the appropriate departmental budget with a corresponding reduction in the amount appropriated directly to the trust fund. In the event that the program shall require personnel services, payment for which shall not have been provided in the budget, the trustees shall provide funds expended or to be expended for such services. 
(Code 1967, § 16-56; Code 1980, § 18-102)  
Sec. 18-231. - Operation and function of insurance program. 
It is the intention of the commission of the city that the insurance program shall operate and function in a manner similar to a commercial insurance company. Accordingly, all expenses arising from the operation of the program shall be paid from the fund to the same extent as similar expenses would be discharged by the payment of premiums to a commercial insurance carrier. 
(Code 1967, § 16-57; Code 1980, § 18-103)  
Sec. 18-232. - Responsibilities of city attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney shall perform or supervise the performance of all legal services required to accomplish the purposes of the self-insurance and insurance program. Legal services shall include, but not be limited to, the defense or prosecution or negotiation of settlement agreements of all claims or suits, the investigation of all claims and settlement of those claims found to be well founded for which the amounts claimed are payable from the trust fund. 
(b)  The city attorney and such of his/her assistants and claims adjusters as he/she may designate may compromise, settle and pay all claims which may be discharged by payment of an amount not to exceed $25,000.00 for each individual claim. Such settlements or compromises shall be for all damages claimed for personal injury, property damage, or both. 
(c)  Proposed settlements in excess of $25,000.00 shall be submitted to the city commission for its approval prior to acceptance. The city commission shall waive its attorney-client privilege of confidentiality for said settlements for purposes of review by the Financial Emergency Oversight Board. 
(d)  Upon approval by the city commission or the city attorney, as specified in the two preceding paragraphs [subsections (b) and (c) of this section], the city attorney shall authorize the payment of the claim by the finance director and provide such documents as the finance director may require. 
(e)  The city attorney shall render such report or reports for the settlement of claims to the committee and the city commission as they shall require. 
(Code 1967, § 16-58; Ord. No. 8718, § 1, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 10072, § 1, 1-23-86; Code 1980, § 18-104; Ord. No. 11583, § 1, 12-30-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Secs. 18-233—18-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - REDEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— The project referred to herein is the "Southeast Overtown/Park West Community Redevelopment Plan." 
 
Sec. 18-261. - Payments into fund by city. 
There shall be paid into the fund, and the city hereby appropriates, commits and sets over for payment into the fund, a sum equal to that increment from the income proceeds, revenues and funds of the city derived from, or held in connection with the project area, and the city's undertaking and carrying out of the project area therein. Such increment shall be determined and appropriated annually, and shall be an amount equal to the difference between: 
(1)  That amount of general operating and debt service ad valorem taxes levied each year by the city on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the project area; and 
(2)  That amount of operating and debt service ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for the city upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the project area as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by the city, last equalized January 1, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 9590, § 1(1), 4-6-83; Code 1980, § 18-111)  
Sec. 18-262. - Annual appropriations by city. 
The city will annually appropriate to the fund the aforestated sum at the beginning of the city's fiscal year. The fund shall receive the tax increment above described only as, if and when such taxes may be collected by the city. The city's obligation to annually appropriate to the fund shall commence immediately upon the effective date of this article and continue until all loans, advances and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon incurred by the city as a result of the project have been paid and only to the extent that the tax increment recited above accrues. 
(Ord. No. 9590, § 1(2), 4-6-83; Code 1980, § 18-112)  
Sec. 18-263. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager is directed to develop and promulgate rules, regulations and criteria whereby the fund may be promptly and effectively administered, including the establishment and the maintenance of books and records and adoption of procedures whereby the city may, expeditiously and without undue delay, utilize such funds for their allocated statutory purpose. 
(Ord. No. 9590, § 1(3), 4-6-83; Code 1980, § 18-113)  
Sec. 18-264. - Responsibility for fund monies. 
The city accepts full responsibility for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management and proper application of all monies paid into the fund. 
(Ord. No. 9590, § 1(6), 4-6-83; Code 1980, § 18-114)  
Secs. 18-265—18-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER UTILITY FEES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13366, § 2, adopted March 14, 2013, changed the title of article VIII from "Stormwater Utility Fees and Fund" to "Stormwater utility fees." 
City Code cross references —Environmental preservation, ch. 17; landfills and waterfront improvements, ch. 29; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 49; subdivisions, ch. 55. 
 
Sec. 18-291. - Authority. 
The city is authorized by the provisions of F.S. ch. 166 and the Florida Constitution to construct, reconstruct, improve, and extend stormwater utility systems and to issue revenue bonds and other debts if needed to finance in whole or part the cost of such system and to establish just and equitable rates, fees, and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 1, 3-10-88; Code 1980, § 53.5-21)  
Sec. 18-292. - Findings and determinations. 
It is hereby found, determined, and declared as follows: 
(1)  Those elements of the system which provide for the collection of and disposal of stormwater and surface water and regulation of groundwater are of benefit and provide services to all property within the city including property not presently served by the storm elements of the system. 
(2)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements, and extension thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the benefits enjoyed and services received therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 2, 3-10-88; Code 1980, § 53.5-22)  
Sec. 18-293. - Stormwater utility fee for the stormwater management system. 
(a)  A stormwater utility fee is hereby imposed upon each developed lot and parcel within the city for services and facilities provided by the stormwater management system. For purposes of imposing the stormwater utility fee, all lots and parcels within the city are classified into the following two customer classes: 
(1)  Residential. 
(2)  Nonresidential. 
The city manager or his/her designee is directed to prepare a list of lots and parcels within the city and assign a classification of residential or nonresidential to each lot or parcel. 
(b)  There are hereby established the following procedures and criteria used to determine rates for the services and facilities of the municipal stormwater management system: 
(1)  Hereby established are reasonable rates for stormwater management systems for each residential dwelling unit, i.e., single-family detached home, condominium unit, apartment or townhouse unit, or mobile home unit shall be billed at a flat fee as established herein for an equivalent residential unit. An equivalent residential unit is hereby defined as the statistical average horizontal impervious area of all residences in the city which have been appraised as residences by the county property appraiser's office. The total impervious area of each residence includes all areas covered by structures and impervious amenities such as, but not limited to, rooftops, patios, porches, and driveways. In the city an equivalent residential unit (ERU) equals 1,191 square feet. 
(2)  For all nonresidential properties, i.e., enterprise, business establishment, building, or other occupancy not covered by subsection (b)(1) of this section, the rate shall be computed based on the total impervious area of the property divided by the average impervious area of an equivalent residential unit times the rate established for an equivalent residential unit. The billing amount shall be updated by the department of resilience and public works based on any additions to the impervious areas. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 3, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 10616, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 53.5-23; Ord. No. 11282, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 13366, § 2, 3-14-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13366, § 2, adopted March 14, 2013, changed the title of section 18-293 from "Stormwater management system fee" to "Stormwater utility fee for the stormwater management system." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 18-294. - Schedule of rates. 
The department of resilience and public works with the approval of the city manager shall establish the following base rates as necessary to reasonably cover the cost of providing such services which are on file in the department of resilience and public works: 
(1)  The rates to be charged for stormwater management for each residence or dwelling unit shall be the current base rate per month. 
(2)  The rates to be charged for nonresidential properties, i.e., all occupancies other than provided for in subsection (1) of this section, shall be the rate established in subsection (1) (the current base rate per month) multiplied by the number of equivalent residential units. The number of equivalent residential units equals the total square footage of impervious area of the property divided by 1,191 square feet (statistically developed average for a residence in the city). Equivalent residential units will be rounded to the nearest tenth of a unit. A minimum charge based on one-half of one equivalent residential unit (0.5 ERU) will be assigned to any property calculated to be less than 0.5 ERU. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 4, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 10616, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 53.5-24; Ord. No. 11282, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 18-295. - Collection of charge. 
The stormwater utility fee is to be paid as billed by the owner, tenant, or occupant of each lot or parcel which is subject to the stormwater utility fee. Persons using the services and facilities of the stormwater management system shall be rendered bills or statements for the use of these services and facilities of said system by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the Miami-Dade Water and Sewer Department of Miami-Dade County, which said bills or statements shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same discontinuance of service of said system of the Miami-Dade Water and Sewer Department as set forth under the terms and conditions of sections 2-340 and 2-341 of the Code of Miami-Dade County as amended. 
(2)  The owner, tenant, or occupant of lots or parcels subject to the stormwater utility fee and not otherwise charged shall receive an annual or semiannual bill or statement directly from the city, which said bills or statements shall be payable within the same time limits and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as prescribed for waste fees under sections 22-88 and 22-89 of this Code, except that the nonpayment of the stormwater utility fee shall not cause the unpaid amount to become a lien against all improved real property subject to the stormwater utility fee. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 5, 3-10-88; Code 1980, § 53.5-25; Ord. No. 11282, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 13366, § 2, 3-14-13)  
Sec. 18-296. - Adjustment of stormwater utility fees. 
(a)  Requests for adjustment of the stormwater utility fee shall be submitted through the director of the department of resilience and public works, herein referred to as director, who shall be given authority to administer the procedures and standards and review criteria for the adjustment of fees as established herein. The following procedures shall apply to all adjustment requests of the stormwater utility fee: 
(1)  Any owner, tenant or occupant who has paid his/her stormwater utility fees and who believes the contribution rate component of his/her stormwater utility fee to be unjust or inequitable may, subject to the limitations set forth in this article, submit his/her adjustment request to the director. 
(2)  Adjustment requests for stormwater utility fees paid by an owner, tenant or occupant making the request shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
(3)  Adjustment requests made during the first calendar year that the stormwater utility fee is imposed will be reviewed by the director within a one-year period from the date of filing of the adjustment request. Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the beginning of billing, but shall not exceed three years. 
(4)  All adjustment requests for the stormwater utility fee shall be reviewed by the director within a four-month period from the date of filing of the adjustment request. Adjustments resulting from such requests shall be retroactive to the date of filing of the request. Under no circumstances will the city be financially liable beyond the time limits set forth herein. 
(5)  The owner, tenant or occupant requesting the adjustment may be required, at his/her own cost, to provide supplemental information to the department of resilience and public works including, but not limited to, survey, data and engineering reports, approved by either a registered professional land surveyor (R.P.L.S.) or professional engineer (P.E.). Failure to provide such information may result in the denial of the adjustment request. 
(6)  Adjustments to the stormwater utility fee will be made upon the granting of the adjustment request, in writing, by the director. All adjustments will be prorated in accordance with the established procedures of the Miami-Dade Water and Sewer Department. Denials of adjustment requests shall be made in writing by the director. 
(b)  The following standards and review criteria shall apply to all adjustment requests of the stormwater utility fee: 
(1)  Existing or special characteristics of the site or parcel for which the adjustment request is made will be considered. 
(2)  The amount of on-site impervious area. 
(3)  The design storm frequency and storm duration criteria currently in use by the department of resilience and public works at the time of the adjustment request will be the minimum accepted and the standard recognized by the director for stormwater management systems draining the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Ponds, exfiltration systems or positive drainage facilities accepting stormwater from the public right-of-way must meet applicable city, state, and federal requirements including groundwater protection devices and outfall treatment and conveyance systems required by all governing bodies. 
(5)  Ponds, exfiltration systems or positive drainage facilities accepting stormwater from the public right-of-way must be maintained according to city standards and must function in accordance with required city design standards. 
(6)  Adjustments will not be granted for swimming pools, reflecting pools, existing open ditch systems, and swales. 
(7)  Adjustments will not be granted for compliance with on-site storm drainage/retention rules and regulations for private property development. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the written denial of the adjustment request, the owner, tenant or occupant who initially requested the adjustment may, within 30 days of receipt of such denial, apply to the director for review of the denial. 
(1)  The director, exclusive of his/her designee, shall complete his/her review within 60 days of receipt of said request for review. The director's determination on the review shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the reasons for his/her decision. 
(2)  In reviewing denials of adjustment requests, the director, exclusive of his/her designee, shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in this section. In the event of a hardship the director, exclusive of his/her designee, may base his/her determination on written grounds other than those contained herein. 
(3)  All determinations of the director arising out of this section will be final. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 6, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 11076, § 1, 7-22-93; Code 1980, § 53.5-26; Ord. No. 13366, § 2, 3-14-13; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13366, § 2, adopted March 14, 2013, changed the title of section 18-296 from "Adjustment of fees" to "Adjustment of stormwater utility fees." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 18-297. - City manager to keep records. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep an accurate record of all persons using the services and facilities of the said municipal stormwater management system of the city and to make changes in accordance with the rates and charges established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 7, 3-10-88; Code 1980, § 53.5-27)  
Sec. 18-298. - Stormwater utility fee account. 
There shall be established a stormwater utility fee account(s), in lieu of a trust fund, for the deposit of all fees and charges collected by the stormwater utility fee. These funds shall be for the exclusive use of the stormwater management system for the following expenditures: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system. 
(2)  Funding of pollution abatement devices constructed on stormwater systems discharging to Biscayne Bay and its tributaries. 
(3)  Administrative costs associated with the management of the stormwater management system. 
(4)  Debt service financing. 
(5)  Expansion of the existing storm drainage system. 
(6)  Annual fair share funding support for the Miami River commission. 
(7)  Compliance with federal, state and county regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10395, § 8, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 10616, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 53.5-28; Ord. No. 11282, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 11996, § 2, 11-16-00; Ord. No. 13366, § 2, 3-14-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13366, § 2, adopted March 14, 2013, changed the title of section 18-298 from "Stormwater utility trust funds" to "Stormwater utility fee account." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Secs. 18-299—18-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCIAL POLICIES  
DIVISION 1. - ANTI-DEFICIENCY ACT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Ch. 2, Art. XII. 
 
Sec. 18-500. - Established. 
Regulations, to be known as the Anti-Deficiency Act, are hereby established to provide mandatory procedures to be used by department directors, the city manager, city attorney, city clerk, mayor, commissioners, and executive directors of agencies, authorities, trusts, boards, or commissions funded in whole or in part by the city, with authority to direct obligation or disbursement of city funds. However, the herein regulations shall not apply to the three City of Miami Retirement Trusts which are the City of Miami Firefighters' and Police Officers' Retirement Trust, the City of Miami General Employees' and Sanitation Employees' Retirement Trust, and the City of Miami Elected Officers' Retirement Trust. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 2, 2-10-00; Ord. No. 12026, § 2, 2-22-01)  
Sec. 18-501. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Agency or agencies shall mean, including, but not limited to, any agency(s), authority(s), trust(s), board(s), or commission(s) funded in whole or in part by the city, except the City of Miami Firefighters' and Police Officers' Retirement Trust, the City of Miami General Employees' and Sanitation Employees' Retirement Trust, and the City of Miami Elected Officers' Retirement Trust. 
Authority to direct obligation or disbursement shall mean any permission, approval, consent, or signature from a department director or executive director of an agency, authority, trust, board, or commission funded in whole or in part by the city, except for the City of Miami Firefighters' and Police Officers' Retirement Trust, the City of Miami General Employees' and Sanitation Employees' Retirement Trust, and the City of Miami Elected Officers' Retirement Trust (the "Retirement Trusts"), or a single individual, specifically designated in writing by a department director or executive director of an agency, authority, trust, board, or commission funded in whole or in part by the city, except for the Retirement Trusts, and acknowledged and accepted in writing by the designee, and kept on file within the department, agency, authority, trust, board, or commission funded in whole or in part by the city, except for the Retirement Trusts, regardless of form, which permits or authorizes expenditure of funds, excluding documents or forms which process such authority. 
Department directors shall mean directors of all departments of the city including heads of offices and shall include persons responsible for individual budgets as set forth in the annual appropriations ordinance. Notwithstanding any delegation of authority for the act of budget oversight, heads of departments or offices shall not be relieved of responsibility related to this act. 
Executive director shall mean the executive directors of all agencies, authorities, trusts, boards, or commissions, including heads of offices, funded in whole or in part by the city, and shall include persons responsible for the individual annual budgets for each agency, authority, trust, board or commission approved by the city commission, except for the City of Miami Firefighters' and Police Officers' Retirement Trust, the City of Miami General Employees' and Sanitation Employees' Retirement Trust, and the City of Miami Elected Officers' Retirement Trust. Notwithstanding any delegation of authority for the act of budget oversight, the executive director shall not be relieved of responsibility related to this Act. 
Obligational authority shall mean any document, ordinance, resolution or paper, regardless of form, which grants permission for an expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 2, 2-10-00; Ord. No. 12026, § 2, 2-22-01)  
Sec. 18-502. - Procedures and implementation. 
The procedures set forth herein apply where a continuing ordinance or resolution of the city commission which specifically directs an expenditure of funds, and identifies a source of funds to increase the obligation/expenditure authority has not been enacted, extended, or renewed by the city commission to provide temporary obligational authority. Notwithstanding the adoption of an ordinance or resolution by the city commission expending funds, any ordinance or resolution which exceeds an approved departmental or agency budget may be considered voidable and shall be placed on the next regular city commission agenda by the city manager or executive director for budget approval and adjustments as deemed appropriate. Nor may any individual in authority instruct an employee of the city to exceed, without legal authority, the annual budget appropriation for any department or agency. This following Anti-deficiency Act is hereby enacted and regulations set forth as follows: 
(1)  This section applies to all obligations chargeable to annual appropriations, and prior year billing, or multiple-year appropriations which have expired, and for which the obligational authority has not been extended. This section shall additionally apply to the city manager, department directors, and executive directors with authority to approve overtime budgets. 
(2)  The city manager, assistant city managers, department directors, and executive directors with authority to direct obligation or disbursement of city funds may not enter into contracts or any other agreements for the future payment of money in excess of those funds approved in the current year budget by ordinance or resolution. However, the terms and conditions set forth in the document related to debt issuance and long-term capital improvement projects and other approved multi-year agreements shall be controlling. 
(3)  Any obligation incurred in excess of an annual departmental or agency appropriation represents a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act. No such obligation shall be incurred unless the city commission or city manager through emergency powers, has enacted legislation or exercised authority extending a department's or agency's obligational authority of a department or agency. However, should an emergency, defined under state law as any occurrence, or threat thereof, whether natural, technological, or manmade, in war or in peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property, occur and temporary obligation authority is authorized, said obligations and authority shall require an ordinance or resolution for the ratification, approval and confirmation of said action together with such other necessary actions to ensure a balanced year-end budget by an affirmative majority vote of the members of the city commission at the next immediate regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission or special meeting called for that purpose. 
(4)  The prohibitions contained herein are applicable to the city manager, department directors, or executive directors with the authority to verify and/or approve the availability of funds, disburse or obligate funds for the city. The provisions contained herein apply to the offices of the mayor, city clerk, city attorney, city commission, the city manager, all departments and agencies budgets which incorporate overtime budgets and prior year billings, and funds, including but not limited to non-departmental accounts and the capital improvements program. 
(5)  The city manager shall promulgate policies which instruct department directors with authority to direct obligation or disbursement of city funds to assure compliance with this act. 
(6)  The city commission shall promulgate policies which instruct executive directors with authority to direct obligation or disbursement of city funds to assure compliance with this act. 
(7)  The official or employee verifying the availability of funds, and/or approving budget authority and/or certifying a voucher, purchase order or any other paper indicating availability of funds is responsible for ensuring that the expenditure will not exceed the department's or agency's current year budget appropriations for that line item. 
(8)  Any employee of the city who has knowledge or a reasonably based belief that a budget of the city may be in violation of this act shall have the right to be heard under the provisions for a monthly status of the city budget set forth below. Any such person shall not be penalized in any manner for actions taken to report violation of this act. 
(9)  A department director or executive director with obligation or disbursement authority shall be in violation of this act if he/she willfully withholds invoices, payments, settlement, or any other instrument of city debt which were incurred and due in the current fiscal year in an effort to avoid exceeding the approved current year budget. 
(10)  The city manager shall have the authority to adjust line items in an amount not to exceed ten percent of a department's budget so long as the total annual projected expenditures of a department do not exceed the department's current budget, and said adjustment is verified by the department of management and budget. Additionally, all proposed budget adjustments between departments, including capital improvements projects shall require approval by city commission ordinance or resolution. During the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, any changes or deviations in excess of $5,000.00 per transaction from the current approved budget for those departments under the authority of the city manager shall require city manager approval, with the advice and written concurrence of the member of the city commission designated as the presiding officer, a copy of which shall be provided to the city clerk. 
(11)  The executive director shall have the authority to adjust line items in an amount not to exceed ten percent of an agency's budget so long as the total annual projected expenditures of the agency does not exceed the agency's current budget, and said adjustment is verified in a manner using acceptable accounting principles. During the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, any changes or deviations in excess of $5,000.00 per transaction from the current approved budget for those agencies shall require written concurrence of the member of the city commission designated as the presiding officer, a copy of which shall be provided to the city clerk. 
(12)  Notification of possible deficiency. Any department director, executive director or individual with authority to verify the availability of funds, or direct obligation or disbursement of city funds who anticipates or has reason to believe that the annual budget of a department or agency may exceed the sum appropriated in the approved budget ordinance or resolution (a "deficiency") shall immediately provide written notification to the mayor, the city commission, city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and the director of the department of management and budget. Said notification shall include the cause of the deficiency, the amount of the deficiency and the recommended remedial action to cure the deficiency. 
(13)  The city manager shall present monthly, except during the month of September, a written report on the status of the city budget at a city commission meeting. The executive directors of all agencies shall each present quarterly, except during the month of September, a written report on the status of the individual agency's budget at a city commission meeting. At a minimum, this report should generally include, but not be limited to, the following information in a form acceptable to the city commission: fund summary, revenues by category and expenditures by major object, revenues by category and expenditure by department, or revenues by minor object-recurring/non-recurring, expenditures by minor object-recurring/non-recurring, revenues by minor object-recurring, revenues by minor object-non-recurring, expenditures by minor object-recurring, expenditures by minor object-non-recurring, bank reconciliation memo, cash positions for all funds, investments outstanding as of the preceding month, cash received year to date, cash received for the current month or preceding month, human resource personnel reports, including computation which details sworn or unsworn personnel. The city external auditor shall present the comprehensive annual financial report or status thereof no later than the end of the second quarter of each fiscal year. The external auditors engaged by the individual agencies shall each present the agencies' comprehensive annual financial reports or status thereof no later than the end of the second quarter of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 2, 2-10-00; Ord. No. 12026, § 2, 2-22-01)  
Sec. 18-503. - Violations of act; penalties. 
(1)  A duly adopted ordinance or resolution shall provide obligational authority and if enacted will not constitute a violation of this act. 
(2)  No provision contained in this section shall be construed to violate fair labor laws or any provision of the current, approved union contracts, or any other legally binding issues which have been the subject of collective bargaining. 
(3)  Effective January 1, 2000, the violation of any provisions of this act shall constitute a civil offense and be punishable by civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00, in a court of competent jurisdiction. Without regard to culpability, violation of this law may serve as one element of a basis for employment termination. 
(Ord. No. 11727, § 2, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 11890, § 2, 2-10-00)  
Secs. 18-504—18-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FINANCIAL INTEGRITY PRINCIPLES 
 
Sec. 18-541. - Established; implementation; review; reports. 
Financial integrity principles and policies to assure and maintain financial integrity in the city are hereby established and shall be implemented immediately upon adoption of this division. 
The financial integrity principles as set forth herein shall be reviewed and updated as necessary, at least every three years. The city's auditor general shall be responsible for preparation of a written report to be transmitted to the mayor and the members of the city commission by July 1 of each year as to compliance with the principles and policies set forth in this division. The report shall include recommendations for additional policies or actions, to be considered for action after reviewing the latest annual audit comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR), single audit report, and management letter comments. 
(Ord. No. 11890, § 4, 2-10-00; Ord. No. 12276, § 2, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 12727, § 2, 9-22-05; Ord. No. 13767, § 2, 5-10-18)  
Sec. 18-542. - Financial integrity principles. 
The following financial integrity principles are hereby adopted: 
(1)  Structurally balanced budget. The city shall maintain a structurally-balanced budget. Recurring revenues will fund recurring expenditures. 
(2)  Revenue estimating conference process. The city shall adopt budgets and develop its long and short-term financial plan utilizing a professional revenue estimating conference process. Conference principals shall include, but not be limited to: one principal from the budget office; one principal from the finance department, and two non-staff principals with public finance expertise. 
(3)  Interfund borrowing. The city shall not borrow or use internal fund transfers to obtain cash from one fund type or reserve to fund activities of another fund type or reserve unless such use is deemed lawful, and unless the revenue estimating conference has determined that (a) the funds to be loaned will not be needed during the lending period, and (b) the funds for repayment will be available within a two-year period. Any actions taken to borrow funds under these conditions must be separately presented to and approved by the city commission and the term of such borrowing shall not extend beyond the last day of the subsequent fiscal year. 
Recognizing that some programs are funded by grants or other entities on a reimbursement basis, the city shall apply for such reimbursements on a timely basis to minimize the period that city funds are used as float. In the event loans/float for these reimbursements extend beyond the end of a fiscal year, such reimbursements shall be reflected as receivables in the comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) to the extent allowed under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The department of finance shall make a quarterly determination of the amount of expenses incurred which may not be reimbursable under these programs. A quarterly report of expenses incurred but not reimbursable shall be presented to the city commission, together with the actions needed to avoid project deficits. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, city-wide surplus for any fiscal year is defined as the increase in unreserved general fund balance as reflected in the city's CAFR). City-wide deficit for any fiscal year is defined as the decrease in unreserved general fund balance as reflected in the city's CAFR). Budget surplus of any office, department or elected official is defined as the excess of budgeted expenses over actual expenses in any fiscal year. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the total amount of budget surplus to be added to designated reserves and special revenue funds pursuant to this section (together, the "rollover amounts") is limited to city-wide surplus for any fiscal year. In the event the rollover amounts would result in a city-wide deficit, then each budget surplus within the rollover amounts shall be reduced proportionately so the city's CAFR) will reflect no change in undesignated, unreserved general fund balance. In the event that a city-wide deficit would result before effecting the rollover amounts in any fiscal year, then no rollover amounts shall be available. 
a.  Budget surpluses in an elected official's budget in any fiscal year shall be reflected as designated reserves at the end of the fiscal year in which such surplus arose and be appropriated for discretionary use of such elected official for the following fiscal year. 
b.  Budget surpluses of the parks and recreation department shall be allocated, as of the end of the fiscal year in which such surplus arose, to a parks special revenue fund. Allowed expenditures from the parks special revenue fund shall be limited to the purchase of parks recreational and maintenance equipment, capital improvements for the city's parks, and the direct operations of recreational programs in and for the city's parks, subject to appropriation by the city commission. 
c.  Budgeted surpluses of the department of real estate and asset management shall be allocated, as of the end of the fiscal year in which such surplus arose, to a public facilities special revenue fund. Allowed expenditures of the public facilities special revenue fund shall be limited to capital improvements for the city's public facilities, subject to appropriation by the city commission. 
d.  Budgeted surpluses of the department of innovation and technology shall be allocated, as of the end of the fiscal year in which such surplus arose, to an IT strategic plan special revenue fund. Allowed expenditures of the IT strategic plan special revenue fund shall be limited to expenditures, excluding those related to permanent city staff, necessary for the implementation of the city's information technology strategic plan, subject to appropriation by the city commission. 
Department names may change from time to time. This section shall be applicable to those departments regardless of its designation in a given fiscal year. 
(5)  Reserve policies. The following three reserve policies categories are established for the general operating fund of the city: 
a.  Current fiscal year contingency. A "contingency" reserve level of $5,000,000.00 shall be budgeted annually. Such contingency reserve shall be available for use, with city commission approval, during the fiscal year, to fund unanticipated budget issues which arise or potential expenditure overruns which cannot be offset through other sources or actions. The unused portion of the budgeted contingency reserve in any fiscal year shall be reflected as unassigned fund balance reserves until such time as the city has funded 50 percent of the liabilities of the long-term liabilities (excluding bonds, loans, and capital lease payables) as reflected in the city's CAFR). Amounts not needed to satisfy the 50 percent requirement shall be considered general fund unassigned fund balance reserve and be treated in accordance with subsection (5)b. 
b.  General fund unassigned fund balance reserves. The city shall retain unassigned fund balance reserves equal to a threshold ten percent of the prior three years average of general revenues (excluding transfers). Amounts designated as "contingency" reserve in subsection 5a. shall be included in the calculation of meeting the ten percent of the prior three years average of general revenues for the unassigned fund balance category. Such reserves may only be used for offsetting an unexpected mid-year revenue shortfall or for funding an emergency such as a natural or man-made disaster, which threatens the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents, businesses or visitors. Any time these reserve funds fall below the ten percent threshold, the city commission shall adopt a plan to achieve the threshold within two fiscal years and the city manager shall present an oral report at the second commission meeting of every month, except during the month of September, regarding: i) the status of the current fiscal year budget, and ii) the proposed budget for the subsequent fiscal year. Such oral report shall appear on the city commission agenda as a discussion item under the agenda category titled "Budget." Amounts in excess of the ten percent threshold may be used for capital improvements, unanticipated expenditures necessary to assure compliance with legal commitments, and for expenditures that will result in the reduction of recurring costs or the increase in recurring revenues of the city. 
c.  General fund designated fund balance reserves. The city shall retain designated fund balance reserves equal to ten percent of the prior three years average of general revenues (excluding transfers). The designated fund balance reserves shall be classified as either restricted, committed, or assigned and such designation shall be based on standards and guidance established, and amended from time to time, by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Such reserves shall be used for funding long-term liabilities and commitments of the city such as: 
1.  Compensated absences and other employee benefit liabilities, including liabilities related to post-retirement benefits; 
2.  Self-insurance plan deficits (including workers compensation, liability claims and health insurance); 
3.  Anticipated adjustments in pension plan payments resulting from market losses in plan assets and other unanticipated payments necessary to maintain compliance with contractual obligations. 
Payment for compensated absences and other employee benefit liabilities and self-insurance plan deficits may be drawn from this reserve during the fiscal year and shall be replenished each year until 50 percent of such the liabilities are funded. Other designated reserves may be drawn upon without the need for replenishment. 
(6)  Proprietary funds. The city shall establish proprietary funds only if the costs to provide the service are fully funded from the charges for the service. 
(7)  Multi-year financial plan. The city commission shall annually adopt a five-year financial plan by September 30 of each year, reflecting as the base year, the current year's budget. For fiscal year 2004 the multi-year financial plan will be adopted no later than 30 days after the completion of labor negotiations. Such plan will include cost estimates of all current city operations and pension obligations, anticipated increases in operations, debt service payments, reserves to maintain the city's officially adopted levels and estimated recurring and non-recurring revenues. This plan will be prepared by fund and reflect forecasted surpluses or deficits and potential budget balancing initiatives, where appropriate. 
(8)  Multi-year capital improvement plan. The city commission shall annually adopt a capital improvements plan ("CIP") simultaneously with the adoption of the city's final budget pursuant to F.S. § 200.065. The CIP shall address cost estimates for all necessary infrastructure improvements needed to support city services, including information technology, with an adequate repair and replacement ("R&R") component. Funded, partially funded and unfunded projects shall be clearly delineated. The CIP shall be detailed for the current fiscal year and for five additional years and, if practicable, additional required improvements aggregated for two additional five-year periods. To the extent feasible, department heads shall be required to submit independent needs assessments for their departments for use in preparing the CIP. The CIP will be detailed by fund, include recommended project prioritization rankings, identified revenue sources, planned financing options and unfunded projects. The CIP shall include estimates of the operational impacts produced for the operation of the capital improvements upon their completion. The CIP shall include a component reflecting all on-going approved capital projects of the city, the date funded, amount budgeted, amount spent since the start date, remaining budget, fiscal impact of known changes to financial assumptions underlying the project, estimated expenditures by fiscal year for the project and estimated completion date. 
Approved projects, with circumstances that arise which change the funding requirements of the project, shall be addressed in the CIP annually. 
(9)  Debt management. The city shall manage its debt in a manner consistent with the following principles: 
a.  Capital projects financed through the issuance of bonded debt shall be financed for a period not to exceed the estimated useful life of the project. 
b.  The net direct general obligation debt shall not exceed five percent and the net direct and overlapping general obligation debt shall not exceed ten percent of the taxable assessed valuation of property in the city. 
c.  The weighted average general obligation bond maturity shall be maintained at 15 years or less. 
d.  Special obligation debt service shall not exceed 20 percent of non-ad valorem general fund revenue. 
e.  Revenue based debt shall only be issued if the revenue so pledged will fully fund the debt service after operational costs plus a margin based on the volatility of the revenues pledged. 
(10)  Financial oversight and reporting. The city shall provide for the on-going generation and utilization of financial reports on all funds comparing budgeted revenue and expenditure information to actual on a monthly and year-to-date basis. The finance department shall be responsible for issuing the monthly reports to departments, the mayor and city commission, and provide any information regarding any potentially adverse trends or conditions. These reports should be issued within 30 days after the close of each month. 
The external auditor shall prepare the city's CAFR by March 31 of each year. The single audit and management letter of the city shall be prepared by the external auditor by April 30 of each year. The external auditor shall present the findings and recommendations of the audit, single audit and management letter, to the mayor and city commission at a scheduled commission meeting prior to July 30 of each year. 
Financial reports, offering statements and other financial related documents issued to the public, shall provide full and complete disclosure of all material financial matters. 
(11)  Basic financial policies. The city shall endeavor to maintain formal policies, which reflect "best practices" in the areas of: 
a.  Debt. Such policy shall address affordability, capacity, debt issuance and management. 
b.  Cash management and investments. Such policy shall require 24-month gross and net cash-flow projections by fund and address adequacy, risk, liquidity and asset allocation issues. 
c.  Budget development and adjustments. Such policy shall establish proper budgetary preparation procedures and guidelines, calendar of events, planning models by fund, budget adjustment procedures, establishment of rates and fees, indirect costs/interest income and the estimating conference process. The proposed budget should be scheduled to allow sufficient review by the mayor and city commission while allowing for sufficient citizen input. 
The city budget document reflecting all final actions as adopted by the city commission on or before September 30 of each year, shall be printed and made available within 60 days of such adoption. 
d.  Revenue collection. Such policy shall provide for maximum collection and enforcement of existing revenues, monitoring procedures, the adequacy level of subsidy for user fees, and write-offs of uncollectible accounts. 
e.  Purchasing policy. Such policy shall establish departmental policies and procedures and provide appropriate checks and balances to ensure the city departments adhere to the city's purchasing policies. 
(12)  Evaluation committees. 
a.  Solicitations. An evaluation committee, consisting of a majority of citizen and/or business appointees from outside city employment, shall be created, to the extent feasible, to review city solicitations ("requests for proposals," "requests for qualifications," etc.). The recommendation(s) of the evaluation committee shall be provided to the mayor and city commission on all such solicitations prior to presentation to the city commission for official action. 
b.  Collective bargaining agreements. The city finance committee, established pursuant to city commission resolutions 98-631 and 98-767, and the budget director shall review and provide recommendations to the city manager regarding all memorandums of understanding (M.O.U.s) entered into between the city and any collective bargaining unit that amend, alter, or modify any existing collective bargaining agreement and that may have a fiscal impact of $500,000.00 or more, and all collective bargaining agreements. The finance committee shall provide its recommendations regarding such M.O.U.s and collective bargaining agreements to the city manager not less than 14 days prior to consideration by the city commission of any said M.O.U. or collective bargaining agreement for ratification. In the event that the finance committee is unable to meet within the timeframes provided herein, then the city manager shall proceed to the city commission for ratification. 
(13)  Full cost of service. The city shall define its core services and develop financial systems that will determine on an annual basis the full cost of delivering those services. This information shall be presented as part of the annual budget and financial plan. 
(Ord. No. 11890, § 4, 2-10-00; Ord. No. 12113, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 12276, § 2, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 12353, § 2, 4-10-03; Ord. No. 12427, § 2, 10-23-03; Ord. No. 12518, § 2, 3-25-04; Ord. No. 12727, § 2, 9-22-05; Ord. No. 13107, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13212, § 2, 10-14-10; Ord. No. 13303, § 2, 1-12-12; Ord. No. 13767, § 2, 5-10-18; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 18-543—18-555. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - LIVING WAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE CONTRACTS AND CITY EMPLOYEES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 12787 states that this article shall be effective October 1, 2006. 
Editor's note— Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 12787, Ord. No. 12623, § 2, adopted December 9, 2004, repealed article X, divisions 1—4, in its entirety, which pertained to the economic development financing authority and derived from Ord. No. 12062, § 3, adopted May 10, 2001. 
 
Sec. 18-556. - Definitions. 
City means the government of the City of Miami or any authorized agents, any board, agency, commission, department, or other entity thereof, or any successor thereto. 
Contract means any contract to provide services to the city in which the total value of the contract exceeds $100,000.00 per year. 
Contractor means any "for profit" individual, business entity, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, or similar business entity which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The contractor is paid in whole or part from one or more of the city's general funds, capital project funds, special revenue funds, or any other funds, including, but not limited to, grants, donations, and the like, whether by competitive bid process, requests for proposals, or some other form of competitive solicitation, negotiation, or agreement, or any other decision to enter into a contract; and 
(2)  The contractor is engaged in the business of or part of a contract to provide services for the benefit of the city. This section shall apply to employees of the contractor who spend the majority of their time on covered City of Miami service contracts. If the contract is for both goods and services it shall only apply to the services portion of such contract. This section shall not apply to contracts which are primarily for the sale or leasing of goods. Goods are defined in section 18-73 of the City Code. 
Covered employee means anyone employed by the city working more than 35 hours per week or any service contractor employee, working full or part-time, with or without benefits, that is involved in providing services under the service contractor's contract with the city. 
Covered employer means the city and any and all service contractors and subcontractors of a service contractor. 
Living wage means a wage that is as defined in section 18-557 of this Code. The living wage may be adjusted once annually by an amount equivalent to the cost of living adjustment for Miami-Dade County as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Language so stating will be included in all request for proposals, or other competitive solicitation documents, issued by the city for the procurement of services (unless the living wage provisions are excluded as provided in section 18-557 herein). 
New service contracts means those having contracts competitively solicited and awarded on or after January 1, 2017. 
Service contract means a contract to provide services to the city excluding, however, professional services as defined by the "Consultants Competitive Negotiation Act" set forth in F.S. § 287.055, and section 18-87 of the City Code and/or the other exclusions provided by section 18-557 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 12787, § 2, 4-6-06; Ord. No. 13648, § 2, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 18-557. - Living wage. 
(a)  Living wage paid. 
(1)  New service contractors. All new service contracts shall pay to all its employees who provide covered services a living wage of no less than $15.00 per hour without health benefits; or a wage of no less than $13.19 an hour with health benefits as defined in this section unless otherwise excluded pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Existing service contracts. Service contracts awarded and effective or competitively solicited prior to January 1, 2017, shall not be subject to the payment of the living wage set forth in this section and shall continue to be governed by the terms and conditions of the respective solicitation and resulting contractual documents, when applicable. 
(3)  The living wage provisions shall apply to all contracts covered by this section unless specifically excluded by one or more subsections below: 
a.  The living wage provision is disallowed by a federal or state law or regulation, grant requirements, or by a contract the city is accessing by "piggybacking", and which contract does not include a living wage provision; 
b.  Funding sources for the contract disallow the living wage provision or provide contradictory funding requirements, or are contained in a contract awarded or solicited prior to the effective date of January 1, 2017, and which contract includes renewals or extensions; 
c.  Professional service contracts awarded under the "Consultants Competitive Negotiation Act", F.S. § 287.055, for the professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, landscape architecture, registered surveying, and/or mapping; 
d.  The living wage provision is waived by the city commission by resolution, prior to issuance of the competitive solicitation document, upon written recommendation of the city manager or authorized designee, when the city commission finds it is in the best interest(s) of the city to approve such waiver, in which case the living wage provision shall not apply in the competitive solicitation document; or 
e.  All responsible wage construction contracts covered by section 18-120 of this Code. 
(4)  City employees. For covered employees of the city, the city will begin to pay the living wage on a phase-in basis over a nine-year period beginning with the 2006-2007 city budget year to be implemented in the 2014-2015 fiscal year. The city manager, in his/her sole discretion, without further city commission approval, shall have the option to consider whether it is in the city's best interest to complete the phase-in payment of living wage to city employees on a four-year period. Thereafter, the living wage to be paid by the city shall be subject to negotiations within the collective bargaining structure. 
(b)  Health benefits; eligibility period. For a covered employer to comply with this article by choosing to pay the lower wage scale available when a covered employer also provides a standard health benefit plan, such health benefit plan shall consist of a payment of at least $1.81 per hour toward the provision of health benefits for covered employees and their dependents and shall be approved by the city. 
If the health benefit plan of the covered employer requires an initial period of employment for a new employee to be eligible for health benefits (the "eligibility period"), a covered employer may qualify to pay the $13.19 per hour wage scale for a term not to exceed the new employee's eligibility period, provided the new employee will be paid health benefits upon completion of the eligibility period, which period shall not exceed 90 days. 
(c)  Certification required before payment. Any and all service contracts subject to this article shall be void, and no funds may be released, unless prior to entering any such contract with the city, the service contractor certifies to the city that it will pay each of its covered employees no less than the living wage. A copy of this certificate must be made available to the public upon request. The certificate, at a minimum, must include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the employer, a contact person, and the specific project for which the service contract is sought; 
(2)  The amount of the service contract and the city department the contract will serve. 
(3)  A brief description of the project or service provided; 
(4)  A statement of the wage levels for all covered employees; and 
(5)  A commitment to pay all covered employees the living wage. 
(d)  Observation of other laws. Every covered employee shall be paid without subsequent deduction or rebate on any account (except as such payroll deductions as are directed or permitted by law or by a collective bargaining agreement). The service contractor shall pay covered employees wage rates in accordance with federal and all other applicable laws such as overtime and similar wage laws. 
(e)  Posting. A copy of the living wage rate shall be kept posted by the service contractor subject to this article, at the site of the work in a prominent place where it can easily be seen and read by the covered employees and shall be supplied to such employees within a reasonable time after a request to do so. Additionally, service contractors subject to this article, shall furnish a copy of the requirements of this article to any entity submitting a bid for a subcontract on any service contract subject to this article. 
Posting requirements will not be required where the service contractor subject to this article, prints the following statements on the front of the covered employee's first paycheck and every six months thereafter. "You are required by the City of Miami Living Wage Ordinance to be paid a living wage. If you do not believe you are being paid at the living wage rate, contact your employer, an attorney, or the City of Miami." All notices will be printed in English, Spanish and Creole. 
(f)  Collective bargaining. Nothing in this article shall be read to require or authorize any service contractor subject to this article, to reduce wages set by a collective bargaining agreement or as required under any prevailing wage law. 
(Ord. No. 12787, § 2, 4-6-06; Ord. No. 13110, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13405, § 2, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 13648, § 2, 11-17-16; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 18-558. - Implementation. 
(a)  Maintenance of payroll records. Each service contractor to which living wage requirements apply, as described in this article, shall maintain payroll record for all covered employees and basic records relating thereto and shall preserve them for a period of three years from the date of termination or expiration of the service contract. The records shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of each covered employee; 
(2)  The job title and classification; 
(3)  The number of hours worked each day; 
(4)  The gross wages earned and deductions made; 
(5)  Annual wages paid; 
(6)  A copy of the social security returns and evidence of payment thereof; 
(7)  A record of fringe benefit payments including contributions to approved plans; and 
(8)  Any other data or information the city shall require from time to time. 
(b)  Reporting payroll. Every six months, the service contractor to which living wage requirements apply, as described in this article, shall file with the city's procurement director a listing of all covered employees together with a certification of compliance with this article. Upon request from the city, the service contractor shall produce for inspection and copying its payroll records for any or all of its covered employees for any period covered by the service contract. The city may examine payroll records as needed to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12787, § 2, 4-6-06; Ord. No. 13110, § 2, 10-22-09)  
Sec. 18-559. - Compliance and enforcement. 
(a)  Service contractor to cooperate. The service contractor shall permit city employees, agents, or representatives to observe work being performed at, in or on the project or matter for which the service contractor has a contract. The city representatives may examine the books and records of the service contractor relating to the employment and payroll of covered employees and may survey covered employees to determine if the service contractor is in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Complaint procedures and sanctions. An employee who believes that he/she is a covered employee of a service contractor and that the service contractor is or was not complying with the requirements of this article has a right to file a complaint with the procurement director of the city. Such complaints may be made at any time and shall be investigated within a reasonable period of time by the city. Written and oral statements by any such employee shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed without the written consent of the employee to the extent allowed by the Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Private right of action against service contractor. Any covered employee or former covered employee of a service contractor may, instead of utilizing the city administrative procedure set forth in this article, but not in addition to such procedure, bring an action by filing suit against the service contractor in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article and may be awarded back pay, benefits, attorney's fees, and costs. The applicable statute of limitations for such a claim will be two years as provided in F.S. § 95.11(4)(c) as may be amended from time to time for an action for payment of wages. The court may also impose sanctions on the service contractor, including those persons or entities aiding or abetting the service contractor, to include wage restitution to the affected covered employee and damages payable to the covered employee in the sum of up to $500.00 for each week the service contractor is found to have violated this article. 
(d)  Sanctions against service contractors. For violations of this article, the city shall sanction a service contractor by requiring the service contractor to pay wage restitution at its expense for each affected employee. The city may also sanction the service contractor in at least one of the following additional ways: 
(1)  The city may impose damages in the sum of $500.00 for each week for each covered employee found to have not been paid in accordance with this article; 
(2)  The city may suspend or terminate payment under the service contract or terminate the contract with the service contractor; and 
(3)  The city may declare the service contractor ineligible for future service contracts for three years or until all penalties and restitution have been paid in full, whichever is longer. In addition, any employer shall be ineligible for a service contract where principal officers of such employer were principal officers of a service contractor who has been declared ineligible under this article. 
(4)  If the contract has been awarded under the city procurement ordinance, the city may debar or suspend the contractor as provided therein. 
(e)  Public record of sanctions. All such sanctions recommended or imposed shall be a matter of public record. 
(f)  Sanctions for aiding and abetting. The sanctions contained in this article shall also apply to any party or parties aiding and abetting in any violation of this article. 
(g)  Retaliation and discrimination barred. A service contractor shall not discharge, reduce the compensation, or otherwise discriminate against any covered employee for making a complaint to the city, or otherwise asserting his or her rights under this article, participating in any of its proceedings or using any civil remedies to enforce his or her rights under this article. Allegations of retaliation or discrimination, if found true in a city administrative proceeding or by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall result in an order of restitution and reinstatement of a discharged covered employee with back pay to the date of the violation or such other relief as deemed appropriate. 
(h)  Remedies herein non-exclusive. No remedy set forth in this article is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce the rights under this article or in a court of law. This article shall not be construed to limit an employee's right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination. 
(Ord. No. 12787, § 2, 4-6-06; Ord. No. 13648, § 2, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 18-560. - Employers receiving direct tax abatement or subsidy. 
The city reserves the right to impose the living wage requirements of this article on or after January 1, 2017 on any employer as a condition of that employer receiving a direct tax abatement or subsidy from the city. 
(Ord. No. 13648, § 2, 11-17-16)  
Secs. 18-561—18-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - LEASES OF CITY-OWNED SUBMERGED LANDS 
 
Sec. 18-600. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide the methods for the city to directly negotiate and enter into leases or management agreements for city-owned submerged lands with entities having a possessory or ownership interest in the abutting riparian uplands. These methods and procedures will also ensure that any such leases or management agreements result in a return to the city of at least fair market value and will also be in compliance with article XII below regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-601. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Activity or activities means any use of city-owned submerged lands which requires proprietary authorization from the city. Such activities specifically include, but are not limited to, construction of docks, piers, marinas, boat ramps, board walks, baywalks, riverwalks, and mooring pilings, This definition shall also include activities as defined in the applicable section of the Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 18-21, entitled "Sovereign Submerged Lands Management," as the term may have been interpreted or modified by administrative or other case law. 
Preempted area means an area of city-owned submerged lands from which any traditional public uses will be excluded by an activity, such as the area occupied by docks, piers, marinas, and other structures; the area between a dock and the shoreline where access is not allowed, between docks, or areas where mooring routinely occurs that are no longer reasonably accessible to the general public; permanent mooring areas not associated with docks; and swimming areas enclosed by nets, buoys, or similar marking systems. 
Upland owner means the holder of a possessory or ownership interest in the riparian uplands abutting city-owned submerged lands and the holder of riparian rights necessary to conduct the proposed activities in a preempted area. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-602. - Scope of article. 
(a)  The city may enter into a lease or management agreement with an upland owner to conduct an activity in a preempted area pursuant to methods established in this article and in compliance with article XII below regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. There shall be no further proprietary authorization required by the city for the particularly city commission approved upland owner to conduct an activity in a preempted area as long as such activity in a preempted area continues to comply with article XII below, regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property, and the approved upland owner remains the same. 
(b)  The methods established in this article are intended to be an alternative procedure to those set forth in article V of this chapter, entitled "Sale or Lease of City's Real Property," for those cases in which an upland owner seeks to conduct an activity on city-owned submerged lands. For all other cases, the procedures and provisions set forth in article V of this chapter, and elsewhere in the Code and Charter of the city, shall continue to apply. 
(c)  The methods established in this article shall not supersede any local, state, or federal regulations or laws relating to construction or navigation within state or federal waters, nor shall this article be interpreted in any way to alter, amend, or supersede any local, state, or federal permitting requirements. The provisions of this article shall be used solely for proprietary authorization on city-owned submerged lands, and will be cumulative along with those regulatory or proprietary requirements established by local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-603. - Application for lease or management agreement. 
The city shall require all upland owners to submit an application for a lease or management agreement on city-owned submerged lands, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant and applicant's authorized agent, if applicable; 
(2)  Description of the proposed activities; 
(3)  At least two independent appraisals and/or brokers' opinions of value and reliance letters of the fair market value for conducting the activities in the preempted area performed by a certified general appraiser approved by the city; 
(4)  Satisfactory evidence that applicant is an upland owner; such evidence may be in the form of a deed or title insurance policy; 
(5)  Two prints of a legal description and survey of the proposed preempted area where the activities will be conducted. The survey shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a person properly licensed by the State Florida Board of Professional Land Surveyors, with the following requirements: 
a.  Utilizing an appropriate scale on 8½ x 11" size paper (unless a larger size is necessary to provide sufficient clarity and detail); 
b.  Showing the location of ordinary or mean high water; 
c.  Showing the location of the shoreline vegetation, if existing; 
d.  Showing the location of proposed structures and any existing structures; 
e.  Showing the applicant's upland parcel property lines; 
f.  Including a legal description of the preempted area to be leased; 
g.  Showing the bulkhead line. 
(6)  Current local zoning and a statement on the status of any local, state, federal permitting, licensing, or other approvals necessary for the activities; 
(7)  An explanation of the city's ownership interest in the submerged lands proposed to accommodate the activities, including the deed or other conveyance instrument which vests title in such submerged lands to the city. 
(8)  Payment of a $500.00 non-refundable processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-604. - Application materials. 
The application materials, including the survey, the appraisals, brokers' opinion of values and reliance letters, and title insurance policy, must be current to within six months of the date that the application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-605. - Required provisions. 
All leases or management agreements with upland owners on city-owned submerged lands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The effective date of the lease or management agreement shall be the latter of the dates of execution by the city or the upland owner, or the date on which construction of the activities is authorized to commence by the appropriate federal, state, and/or local regulatory agencies. 
Payments for a lease or management agreement shall be assessed beginning on the effective date. New construction, new activities, or new preemption cannot begin until the effective date. The first payment for new or modified leases or management agreements shall be made within 30 days of the effective date. 
(2)  The term for any instrument for use of the submerged lands used by the abutting upland property owner shall be determined by the city. The lease or management agreement may include provisions for annual payment adjustments. If included, such adjustments shall correspond with the greater of the percentage change in the consumer price index, or a percentage negotiated by both parties and shall be adjusted on an annual basis. 
(3)  Leases and management agreements may be renewable, modifiable, and amended, subject to approval by the city manager, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. In accordance with article XII, assignments shall require city commission approval should the upland owner change; however referendum requirements are not applicable. Any upland owner seeking to renew, modify, or assign a lease or management agreement must follow the procedures for applications as set forth in this article. No application to renew, modify, or assign a lease or management agreement shall be approved unless any existing non-compliance with a material term or condition of the existing lease or management agreement is corrected. 
(4)  At least annually, the lessee or user shall submit an annual report to the city. The annual report shall describe the status of the activities on the preempted area and shall certify compliance with the terms and conditions of the lease or management agreement and of the requirements of this article and article XII regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. 
(5)  At least once every five years, sites subject to a lease or management agreement shall be inspected by the city to determine compliance with the terms and conditions of the lease or management agreement and of this article and article XII regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. Noncompliance with any material term or condition, or evidence of trespass, damage, or depredation to city-owned submerged lands or the products thereof caused by the facility or use, may be grounds for cancellation of the lease or management agreement. 
(6)  Upon expiration or cancellation of a lease or management agreement, the city may require lessee or user to remove all structures and equipment from the preempted area at the expense of the lessee or user. The city must deliver notice to remove all structures and equipment within 180 days after such expiration or cancellation, and the notice shall set forth a reasonable time period within which removal should be complete; provided however that any such time period shall be sufficient to account for federal, state, and/or local permitting requirements which may be necessary to authorize removal of the structures and equipment. If the lessee or user fails to remove the structures and equipment thereon, the city shall, at its option, and after ten days from receipt of written notice by certified mail to lessee or user, have the structures and equipment removed at the expense of the lessee or user. 
(7)  The lessee or user shall provide insurance for the activities in the manner and at the level prescribed by the city's director of risk management. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-606. - Criteria for approval. 
The city manager shall have the authority to conduct negotiations with and enter into leases or management agreements with upland owners who submit an application pursuant to the terms of this article and pursuant to the terms of article XII regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. The city manager shall present the terms and conditions of such leases or management agreements to city commission for approval and the authority to execute such leases or management agreements in the name of the city. No leases or management agreements shall be approved unless the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The lease or management agreement provides a sufficient explanation of the activities permitted and includes a legal description and sketch of the preempted area where the activities will be conducted; and 
(2)  The terms of the lease or management agreement result in a return to the city of at least fair market value, pursuant to at least two independent appraisals and/or brokers' opinions of value and reliance letters of the fair market value for conducting the activities in the preempted area performed by a certified general appraiser approved by the city; and 
(3)  The lease or management agreement complies with all of the required provisions stated in this article and in article XII regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Secs. 18-607—18-625. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TIME LIMITATIONS REGARDING DEVELOPMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS TO CITY-OWNED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 18-626. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide protections for the timely use and development of improvements to city-owned property. 
Any lease for the development of improvements on city-owned property which has been approved by voter referendum shall require additional voter referendum approval for a development on city-owned property where the developer has not obtained the necessary building permits within four years of the effective date of the lease. Such section shall not be applicable when the delay in the performance of any obligation is as a result of force majeure, or litigation that questions the validity of the vote, or the city commission action to place the question for referendum; then the performance of such obligation shall be extended by the length of the delay. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Sec. 18-627. - Leases and management agreements. 
Pursuant to article XI above, leases and management agreements with the upland owner for activities in pre-empted city-owned submerged lands shall not require the necessity of a referendum but shall be subject to all the requirements of this article regarding time limitations for the development of improvements on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 13540, § 2, 9-10-15)  
Chapter 19 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Department of fire-rescue, § 2-231 et seq.; fire prevention bureau, § 2-235; alarm systems, ch. 3; duty of firefighters to report dangerous buildings or structures, § 10-2; fires in parks regulated, § 38-53; flame-producing equipment within city marinas, § 50-239; refueling vessels at city marinas, § 50-241. 
County Code references— Use and storage of explosives and blasting agents at blasting sites, ch. 13; county fire code, § 14-40 et seq.; construction of county fire code, § 14-41; countywide fire and rescue services district established, § 18-24 et seq. 
State Law reference— Explosives, F.S. ch. 552; fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633; sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Building permits and plans examination. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for building construction and alterations, the director of the department of fire-rescue shall designate one or more plans examiners for the purpose of reviewing all building plans submitted in accordance with the currently adopted and approved building code. Members of the department of fire-rescue's plans examination section shall identify requirements for fire suppression and life safety systems, vertical separations, means of egress, flame spread and combustibility of materials, and exit lighting. Single-family residences and duplexes are exempt from this requirement, unless the owner or builder requests a department of fire-rescue evaluation. 
(1)  The department of fire-rescue's plans examiners shall identify requirements such as vertical separation and means of egress regarding fire safety and fire protection. 
(2)  The department of fire-rescue's plans examiners shall identify requirements for life safety systems such as smoke detectors, voice communication systems and emergency lighting and shall designate placement of required exits and directional lights. The electrical plans examiner and the electrical inspection division of the planning, building and zoning department shall be responsible for proper evaluation, and application of these requirements. 
(3)  The department of fire-rescue's plans examiners shall identify requirements for fire suppression systems, such as sprinkler and standpipe installations, and designate placement of required department of fire-rescue connections and hose cabinets. The plumbing plans examiner and the plumbing inspection division of the planning, building and zoning department shall be responsible for proper evaluation and application of these requirements. 
(4)  The department of fire-rescue's plans examiners shall identify requirements for life safety systems, such as smoke control, ventilation and emergency elevators. The mechanical plans examiner and the mechanical inspection division of the planning, building and zoning department shall be responsible for proper evaluation and application of these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-1)  
Sec. 19-2. - Charges for permitting, inspections and testing of fire suppression detection and systems, charges for reinspection tests. 
(a)  All new buildings and all existing buildings being altered to increase the area or height (with the exception of residential buildings which contain one or two units) which have available fire hydrants shall be in compliance with chapter 2, article XIVA, "Water Supply for Fire Suppression," of the Metropolitan Dade County Code. The inspection fee for a fire flow test shall be $250.00. 
(b)  The fee for standpipe pressure tests, as required by the Florida Building Code, shall be $250.00. 
(c)  All new and existing buildings having fire alarm or sprinkler systems installed as required by the Florida Building Code or the Florida Fire Code shall be inspected and tested by the department of fire-rescue. The fee for these tests shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sprinklers rough including underground, flush, pressure test, location 0 to 20 heads ..... $210.00 
Rough inspection 21 to 49 heads an additional ..... 210.00 
Rough inspection over 49 heads, per head ..... 0.40 
Fire suppression system test and inspection/recertification: 
Acceptance test up to 20 heads ..... 175.00 
Acceptance test 21 to 49 heads an additional ..... 250.00 
Acceptance test over 49 heads, per additional heads ..... 0.40 
Fire alarm acceptance test and inspection/recertification: 
One to six devices ..... 150.00 
Seven to 100 devices an additional ..... 250.00 
Each device over 100 ..... 1.40 
(2)  Reinspection for alarm acceptance ..... $105.00 
(3)  Third or more reinspections, each ..... $138.00 
(d)  When a reinspection is required due to system failure the fees shall be as follow: 
First reinspection ..... $70.00 
Second reinspection ..... 80.00 
Third or more reinspections ..... 138.00 
(e)  In the event of a vehicle fire, a fee of $158.00 shall be assessed to any non-city resident to whom said vehicle is registered. 
(f)  Permit application fee (non-refundable) ..... $104.00 
(g)  Fire flow, pump and generator test departmental section involved in test ..... $250.00 
(h)  Fee for each inspection for tests conducted after normal working hours (example: smoke-removal system test): 
(1)  Up to four hours minimum for each test ..... $416.00 
(2)  After four hours (each inspector), per hour ..... 104.00 
(i)  Fire protection: 
(1)  Jockey pump ..... $32.00 
(2)  Water supply to fire sprinkler system ..... 32.00 
(3)  Fire pump or domestic pump (new or replacement) ..... 37.00 
(4)  Each standpipe ..... 32.00 
(5)  Each hose rack or fire department outlet ..... 11.00 
(6)  Each Siamese or roof manifold ..... 26.00 
(7)  Each sprinkler head ..... 1.50 
(8)  Each fire flow test ..... 42.00 
(9)  Each fire hydrant (Miami standard only) ..... 42.00 
(10)  Minimum fire sprinkler permit fee ..... 63.00 
(11)  Backflow preventer (fireline) ..... 63.00 
(j)  Fire suppression system: 
(1)  CO 2 , halon and dry powder systems and other piped fire extinguishing systems, including reinstallation, modification, or alternation, (full installation including discharge test): 
Up to 20 heads ..... $175.00 
21 to 49 heads ..... 250.00 
50 heads and above, per head ..... 0.40 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-2; Ord. No. 11434, § 2, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 12056, § 2, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-2.1. - Fire safety permit required; issuance; fees; annual renewal; revocation and penalties; use of fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall operate, utilize or occupy any facility, instrumentality or real property, or any part thereof, or cause, allow, let, or permit to be operated, utilized, or occupied any facility, instrumentality or real property, or any part thereof, or undertake any activity or cause to be undertaken any activity which requires a fire safety permit without obtaining such a valid fire safety permit. Fire safety permits shall be kept at the building or on the premises, and shall be subject to inspection by any representative of the department of fire-rescue. Fire safety permits shall not be transferable, and any change in use, or occupancy of the facility, instrumentality or real property, or any part thereof or premises shall require the issuance of a new fire safety permit. All applications for fire safety permits shall set forth in detail the full name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the department of fire-rescue, and the required fee. All applications for fire safety permits will be reviewed by the fire marshal's office. If an application for a fire safety permit is rejected, the applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection. Fire safety permits shall be issued by the fire marshal's office, and shall bear the name and signature of the fire marshal or his/her designated representative. Fire safety permits shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Address of the building or premises and/or part thereof for which the fire safety permit is issued and name, address, and telephone number of the permittee. 
(2)  Address or location and telephone number where the operation or activity requiring the issuance of a fire safety permit is to be conducted and name, address, and telephone number of the permittee. 
(3)  Fire safety permit number and date of issuance. 
(4)  Period of validity of the fire safety permit. 
(5)  Such special conditions as are necessary to protect life and property. 
(b)  Fire safety permits issued for occupancy of buildings or premises or part thereof. 
(1)  Persons holding certificates of use. Within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance the city shall mail an invoice requiring the payment of the fire safety permit fee, in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in this subsection, to all persons holding a certificate of use issued by the city's building and zoning department. Upon payment of the required fee the department of fire-rescue shall issue the fire safety permit. 
(2)  Persons applying for certificates of use. All persons applying for a certificate of use shall concurrently with such application make an application for a fire safety permit to the department of fire-rescue. The fire safety permit shall not be issued until the building, or premises, or part thereof have been inspected and the use thereof is found to comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, county fire prevention ordinances and this chapter. 
The fees for the issuance of the fire safety permit for occupancy of buildings, or premises or part thereof, and the issuance of the annual renewal certificate, are herein fixed as follows: 
(1)  Place of assembly (including but not limited to theaters, restaurants, bars, lounges, stores, terraces, viewing towers, etc.). 
Occupant load 
50 to 99 ..... $95.00 
100 to 300 ..... 125.00 
301 to 1000 ..... 158.00 
1001 to 10,000 ..... 315.00 
Over 10,000 ..... 442.00 
(2)  Residential (apartments and condominiums): 
Buildings less than 75 feet (3—50 dwelling units): $79.00. 
Buildings less than 75 feet (more than 50 dwelling units): $131.00 plus $1.30 per unit over 50 units, maximum fee $525.00. 
Buildings 75 feet and over but less than 275 feet: $131.00 plus $1.30 per unit maximum fee $525.00. 
Buildings 275 feet and over: $131.00 plus $1.30 per unit over 50, maximum fee $525.00. 
(3)  Hotel, motel, rooming house, etc.: 
Buildings less than 75 feet (3—50 rental sleeping units): $125.00. 
Buildings less than 75 feet (more than 50 rental sleeping units): $125.00 plus $1.25 per unit above 50. 
Buildings 75 feet and over but less than 275 feet: $125.00 plus $1.25 per unit above 50. 
Buildings 275 feet and over: $125.00 plus $1.25 per unit above 50. 
(4)  Retail sales: 
All square footage ..... $150.00 
(5)  Wholesale and storage use: 
Not exceeding 3,000 square feet ..... $53.00 
3001 to 5000 sq/ft ..... 79.00 
5001 to 10,000 sq/ft ..... 105.00 
10,001 to 25,000 sq/ft ..... 158.00 
25,001 to 50,000 sq/ft ..... 210.00 
50,001 to 100,000 sq/ft ..... 263.00 
Over 100,000 sq/ft ..... 315.00 
Common areas ..... 68.00 
(6)  Office buildings: 
Not exceeding 3,000 square feet (under 75 feet) ..... $53.00 
3,001 to 5,000 sq/ft ..... 65.00 
5,001 to 10,000 sq/ft ..... 105.00 
10,001 to 50,000 sq/ft ..... 131.00 
50,001 to 100,000 sq/ft ..... 184.00 
100,001 to 150,000 sq/ft ..... 231.00 
150,001 to 200, 000 sq/ft ..... 289.00 
Over 200,000 sq/ft ..... 341.00 
Common areas up to two floors ..... 50.00 
Each additional floor ..... 25.00 
(7)  Manufacturing: 
0 to 1,000 sq/ft ..... $65.00 
1,001 to 5,000 sq/ft ..... 95.00 
5001 to 10,000 sq/ft ..... 131.00 
10,001 to 50,000 sq/ft ..... 200.00 
50,001 to 200,000 sq/ft ..... 263.00 
Over 200,000 sq/ft ..... 331.00 
(8)  Parking structures. 
0 to 3,000 sq/ft ..... $53.00 
3001 to 5000 sq/ft ..... 79.00 
5001 to 10,000 sq/ft ..... 105.00 
10,001 to 25,000 sq/ft ..... 158.00 
25,001 to 50,000 sq/ft ..... 210.00 
50,001 to 100,000 sq/ft ..... 263.00 
Over 100,000 sq/ft ..... 315.00 
Common areas ..... 68.00 
(9)  Amusement parks, dog tracks, and front ons, including all retail outlets located at the principal building structure: 
50 to 99 persons ..... $105.00 
100 to 300 persons ..... 125.00 
301 to 1,000 persons ..... 158.00 
1,001 to 10,000 persons ..... 315.00 
Over 10,000 persons ..... 442.00 
(10)  Arenas, bowling lanes, dance halls, banquet facilities ..... $210.00 
(11)  Hospitals and nursing homes: 
Hospitals not exceeding 100 beds: $500.00, each additional bed $1.25, maximum total $1,000.00. 
Nursing homes not exceeding 100 beds: $210.00, each additional bed $1.30, maximum total $ 924.00 
(12)  Community-based residential facilities (ALF): 
1 to 16 beds ..... $105.00 
Over 16 beds ..... 131.00 
Each additional client over 16 ..... 1.30 
(13)  Private schools (grades pre-k-12 or any combination thereof), day care centers, and nursery schools: $68.00, plus $1.30 per student, maximum total $698.00. 
(14)  Marinas: 
25 or less boatslips ..... $125.00 
Additional per slip over 25 ..... 1.25 
(15)  Hi-rise buildings (shell): 
Buildings 75 feet and over but less than 275 feet ..... $105.00 
Buildings 275 feet and over ..... 315.00 
(16)  Miscellaneous. All uses not previously covered by this section shall be assessed the fee provided under "retail sales." 
(17)  Welding or cutting (exception: job sites) ..... $158.00 
(18)  All other uses not listed ..... $250.00 
(c)  Fire safety permits issued for activities as set forth in this subsection (c). Application for a fire safety permit shall be made to the department of fire-rescue by all persons who are not required to hold a certificate of use who are utilizing, or occupying any facility, instrumentality or real property or any part thereof, or undertaking any activity or causing to be undertaken any activity which requires a fire safety permit as provided below. All applications for fire safety permits shall set forth in detail the full name and address of the applicant and such other information as may be required by the department of fire-rescue and the required fee. The fees for the issuance of the fire safety permit for the operations and activities set forth below, and the issuance of the annual renewal certificate, if applicable, are herein fixed as follows: 
(1)  Turbine fire wells ..... $250.00 
(2)  Hydrant use test, construction meters. Pest control, lawn spraying, etc. (fees are annual per meter) ..... $175.00 
(3)  Tents (circus, carnival, etc.) having an area in excess of 1,200 square feet, each use ..... $65.00 
50 to 300 persons ..... 95.00 
301 to 1,000 persons ..... 125.00 
All other uses over 400 sq/ft or any size tent using hazardous materials processes or open flames ..... 65.00 
(4)  Sparkler sales. Sale of sparklers requires submittal of inventory and site plan (fees are annual) ..... $125.00 
(5)  Open burning permits ..... $95.00 
(6)  Liquefied petroleum gas. Each installation of liquefied petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of interconnected containers of over 2,000 gallons outside of a building (fees are annual) ..... $158.00 
(7)  Tank removal fee ..... $105.00 
(8)  Drilling of groundwater monitor or compliance wells at all existing or abandoned underground flammable liquid storage sales ..... $105.00 
(d)  Annual renewal. All buildings and premises or part thereof shall be inspected from time to time to insure compliance with the provisions of all applicable fire codes, county fire prevention ordinances, regulations, and this chapter. Invoices for the issuance of the annual fire safety permit renewal certificate will be billed during the year. Upon payment of the fee, the annual fire safety permit renewal certificates will be issued by the department of fire-rescue. The owner of the building or the premises or part thereof, and/or the permit holder shall be notified of any deficiencies noted, and appropriate reinspection may be made to determine whether or not the deficiencies have been corrected. When a reinspection is required due to continuing life safety violations after the second inspection by the department of fire-rescue, there shall be charged a reinspection fee of $53.00. 
(e)  Revocation, penalties. The fire marshal may revoke the fire safety permit, if upon inspection, any violation of any applicable fire code, county fire prevention ordinances, or this chapter is found, and not corrected within a reasonable amount of time. Revocation shall be effective when the owner of the building or premises or part thereof, and/or the permit holder is duly notified by the fire marshal. Any person who uses any building or premises or part thereof, or who allows any building or premises or part thereof to be utilized after the fire safety permit has been revoked shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties in accordance with the provisions of sections 19-16 through 19-20 of this chapter and sections 2-239 and 2-409 of article X of this code. 
(f)  Use of fire safety permit fee funds. The fire safety permit fees payable hereunder shall be deposited in a separate city fund to be used exclusively by the department of fire-rescue to pay for the costs of the following: 
(1)  Investigation, preparation, and prosecution of civil and criminal actions, pursuant to this chapter, county ordinances or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, county fire prevention ordinances, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal, as all of same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Monitoring, permitting, and inspection of facilities, instrumentalities, and real property to determine and seek to insure compliance with this chapter, county fire prevention ordinances, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal, as all of the same may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Responding to and attempting to resolve citizen complaints against violations or possible violations of this chapter, county fire prevention ordinances, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal, as all of the same may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Fire safety and prevention planning, protection, and programming. 
(Ord. No. 11434, § 3, 1-16-97; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-3. - Places of assembly; permit required; fees. 
(a)  No place of assembly, as defined below, shall be maintained, operated or used as such without a permit, except that no permit shall be required for any place of assembly used solely as a place of religious worship. A valid certificate of use and local business tax receipt will constitute an adequate permit hereunder. 
Place of assembly means a room or space used for assembly or educational occupancy for 100 or more occupants or which has a floor area of 1,500 square feet or more used for such purposes. Such room or space shall include any similar occupied connecting room or space in the same story, or in a story or stories above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms or spaces. 
(b)  No place of assembly which has received approval and local business tax receipts to operate for one purpose shall change the use of the occupancy for any other assembly purpose without first obtaining a permit from the department of fire-rescue for such use. The cost of the permit shall be $104.00. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-3; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-4. - Obstructions to means of egress. 
(a)  No person shall, at any time, place an encumbrance or obstruction of any kind in front of or upon any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a means of escape from a fire. 
(b)  In other than dwellings, no person shall place, store or keep, or permit to be placed, stored or kept, on or under or at the bottom of any exit stairway, inside or outside, exit hallway, elevator or other means of egress any materials, the presence or the burning of which would obstruct or render a hazard to egress of persons from the building. 
(c)  No aisle, passageway or stairway in any mercantile occupancy shall be obstructed with tables, showcases or other obstruction during the hours such occupancy is open to the public. 
(d)  All doors in or leading to required exitways shall be kept unlocked at all times when the building or floor area served thereby is occupied. It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the building or floor, at the time the building is occupied, to make actual inspection to verify the fact that such doors are unlocked. 
(e)  Where sliding or overhead doors are allowed as fire exits a legible sign stating "this is a fire exit door and shall remain open at all times this building is occupied," shall be posted on such doors. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-4)  
Sec. 19-5. - Flammable and combustible liquids; permits; fees; inspections. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Combustible liquid means any liquid having a flashpoint at or above 140 degrees Fahrenheit and below 200 degrees Fahrenheit, and shall be known as class III liquids. 
Flammable liquid means any liquid having a flashpoint below 140 degrees Fahrenheit and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square inch (absolute) at 100 degrees Fahrenheit. Flammable liquids shall be divided into two classes of liquids as follows: 
(1)  Class I liquids shall include those having flashpoints below 100 degrees Fahrenheit and may be subdivided as follows: 
a.  Class IA shall include those having flashpoints below 73 degrees Fahrenheit and having a boiling point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Class IB shall include those having flashpoints below 73 degrees Fahrenheit and having a boiling point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
c.  Class IC shall include those having flashpoints at or above 73 degrees Fahrenheit and below 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Class II liquids shall include those having flashpoints at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit and below 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
When artificially heated to temperatures equal to or higher than their flashpoints, class II and III liquids shall be subject to the applicable provisions for class I and II liquids. The provisions of this section shall also be applied to high flashpoint liquids when heated to temperatures equal to or higher than their flashpoints even though these same liquids would be outside the scope of this section when they are not heated. 
Liquid, when not otherwise identified, means both flammable and combustible liquid. 
(b)  Permit required. A permit shall be obtained before any of the following acts can be conducted within the city: 
(1)  Storage, handling or use of class IA and IB liquids in excess of one gallon in a dwelling or other place of human habitation, or in excess of six gallons in any other building or other occupancy, or in excess of ten gallons outside of any building; except that no permit shall be required for the following: 
a.  Storage or use of flammable or combustible liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant. 
b.  Storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days. 
(2)  Storage, handling or use of class II or III liquids in excess of 25 gallons in a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building. 
(3)  Manufacturing, processing, blending or refining of flammable or combustible liquids. 
(4)  Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in stationary tanks. 
(c)  Permit fee. The permit fee shall be $ 104.00 per tank for all tanks of 60 gallons capacity installed aboveground or belowground up to $1,000 dollars of estimated cost of the work. 
For each additional $1,000 dollars of estimated cost or fractional part thereof: $2.00. 
(d)  Inspections. An inspection of all installations made under the permit provision shall be made within 30 days of issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify the fire prevention bureau when ready for inspection. Failure of the permit holder to request such inspection within 30 days shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. 
(e)  Dispensing devices. A permit shall be required for any dispensing device remote from the tank supplying it; a pump directly over the tank will not require a separate permit. The permit fee and inspection procedure for dispensing devices shall be the same as for a tank. A new and separate permit shall be required for any additions, alterations, revamping, replacement or any other work which entails the breaking of the integrity of the system; this includes the removal of dispensing devices at the time of closing out the system. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-5; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-6. - Explosives. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Blaster: A person employed or designated by a user to detonate or otherwise effect the explosion of an explosive or who is in immediate personal charge and supervision of one or more other persons engaged in such activity. 
Dealer: A person engaged in the wholesale or retail business of buying and selling explosives, provided that should a manufacturer-distributor make sales to users, such manufacturer shall not be required to obtain an additional permit as a dealer. 
Explosive: Any mixture, compound or material capable of producing an explosion, including, but not limited to, dynamite, nitroglycerine trinitrotoluene, ammonium nitrate, blasting caps and detonators, but not including cartridges for firearms, and not including fireworks as defined in F.S. ch. 791. 
Manufacturer-distributor: A person engaged in the manufacture, production and distribution of explosives to others for resale or use. 
User: The person who, as an ultimate consumer of an explosive, purchases same from a dealer or manufacturer-distributor, or acquires the possession of any explosive by any other means. 
(b)  Registration; site inspection. No person shall detonate or otherwise effect an explosion within the city without first having registered with the department of fire-rescue, qualifying for, and having a separate site inspection and approval for each proposed blasting location within the city. The director of the department of fire-rescue or designated agent thereof shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to a proposed blasting operation so that a representative can effect an on-the-site inspection. 
(c)  Permit required. For each proposed blasting that takes place at a single location, a permit shall be required from the department of fire-rescue when [sic] "manufacturer-distributors," "dealers," "users" and "blasters" within the city. Such permit forms shall be furnished by the department. 
(d)  Permit fees. The cost of the permit fee for explosive demolition of any structure shall be $347.00 and shall be paid at least 30 days in advance of any such proposed blasting at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-6; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09)  
Sec. 19-7. - Manufacture, sale, time of display and discharge of fireworks. 
(a)  Manufacture prohibited. The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city. 
(b)  Permits required for supervised public displays. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, use or explode fireworks within the city, provided that the director of the department of fire-rescue may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by municipalities, organizations or groups of individuals. Such permits may be granted upon: 
(1)  Application to the director of the department of fire-rescue to be held as provided herein; and 
(2)  The filing of a bond by the applicant as provided herein. 
Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator licensed or certified as to competency by an acceptable reference and shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the director of the department of fire-rescue after proper inspection, not to be hazardous to property or as not to endanger any persons. The director of the department of fire-rescue is authorized to refuse to issue any permit when he/she finds the public safety would be endangered. The cost of the permit fee shall be $390.00. Shooter certification requires an applicant to apply in person to determine compliance with state regulations. Annual certifications: $125.00. 
Sale of sparkler requires submittal of a completed application package including site plan (30-day permit): $125.00. 
(c)  Permit application, issuance. 
(1)  Application for permits shall be made, in writing, at least ten (10) days in advance of the display. The director of the department of fire-rescue may shorten the ten day period, if approval can be processed in a shorter period of time. After such privilege has been granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be assigned or transferred, but a permit may be revoked for committing any prohibited act(s) or for other just cause. 
(2)  Permits sought hereunder for pyrotechnic displays (fireworks) shall not be granted for displays to take place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. On all other days of the week permits shall not be granted between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. The duration of displays shall not exceed 30 minutes from start to completion. There shall not be more than one display per event. 
(3)  The restrictions contained in paragraph (c)(2) of this section shall not be applicable six days each year, including January 1, January 15, July 4 and December 31. 
(4)  The city commission may relax the restrictions contained in paragraph (c)(2) of this section or declare them inapplicable on special occasions by resolution. The city commission may prohibit the display of fireworks at certain locations to improve quality of life for residents by resolution. 
(d)  Sale, possession, use, distribution of fireworks. The sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes shall be conducted so as to be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes has been conducted in accordance with the applicable standard, NFPA no. 1123, as amended, and F.S. ch. 791, as amended, shall be evidence that such sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes provide reasonable safety guidelines to adequately protect persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-7; Ord. No. 12105, § 2, 9-13-01; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-8. - Bond and responsibility for fireworks display required. 
(a)  The city commission or city manager may require a bond from the licensee in a sum not less than $1,000.00 conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person or any agent or employee thereof in such amount, character and form as the city commission or city manager determines to be necessary for the protection of the public. If the city commission or the city manager also require that a policy of liability insurance be obtained before such permit is issued, the city shall be named as the insured in the policy. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-8)  
Sec. 19-9. - Special off-duty fire-rescue services. 
(a)  The director of the department of fire-rescue, and the fire marshal, or their designees, shall cause the requests for off-duty fire-rescue personnel to provide services to persons or businesses requesting the same to be evacuated on the basis of the reasonableness thereof, included in such evaluation, factors of existing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, personnel scheduling availability, risk of harm to personnel and department efficiency. 
(b)  As a fee payable to the city to offset the costs of administering the herein off-duty fire-rescue services program, the director of the department of fire-rescue shall cause to be collected and shall establish procedures for the collection by the city of a sum of $65.77 per hour for a firefighter, $77.29 per hour for a fire lieutenant, $84.25 per hour for a fire captain and $92.67 per hour for a chief fire officer, for one location. Multiple fire-rescue personnel, days or locations shall be assessed on a per person, per job, per day basis for contractual employment of off-duty fire-rescue personnel by private persons or firms. This fee shall be in addition to the hourly compensation rate payable by such private persons or firms to the individual fire-rescue representative. The monies received hereunder by the city shall be placed in the general fund except that $2.40 of each fee collected shall be placed in the city self-insurance and insurance trust fund. 
(c)  The city expressly recognizes its ongoing responsibility to its employees by providing self-insurance coverage, subject to the maximum amounts provided in F.S. § 768.28, for tort liability and worker's compensation claims arising out of and in the course and scope of assigned off-duty fire-rescue personnel performing fire safety duties during the period of such assignment. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit the tort liability or subrogation rights of parties for or on behalf of whom off-duty fire-rescue services are rendered or upon whose property these services are performed. Furthermore, nothing contained herein shall be deemed as a waiver by the city of any defense or denial of coverage permitted by law. Liability for all civil actions and judgments (excluding individual punitive damages) arising out of claims resulting from the performance of duties unrelated to fire safety during the period of such assigned off-duty fire-rescue services, shall be borne by the party requesting such off-duty fire-rescue services. The party for or on whose behalf such duties unrelated to fire safety have been rendered shall hold the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless for any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, suits, damages, losses and expenses, judgments, and attorney's fees and costs expended in defense of same. 
(d)  Parties receiving off-duty fire-rescue services shall not offer, nor shall off-duty fire-rescue personnel accept, any compensation for such off-duty fire-rescue services or other services above that specified by the director of the department of fire-rescue. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-9; Ord. No. 13108, § 4, 10-8-09)  
Sec. 19-10. - Unlawful to tamper with official seal, utility service, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to remove or tamper with any seal, warning tag or lock placed on any article, appliance, vehicle, meter, tank, or building by the department of fire-rescue without first obtaining permission to do so from the authority having jurisdiction to remove same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or change the position of any utility valve, switch, wiring, piping meter or connection, or alter any utility service in any way unless approval is granted by a duly authorized person having jurisdiction to install said valve, switch, wiring, meter, connection or service or from the director of the department of fire-rescue, or duly authorized representative thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-10)  
Sec. 19-11. - False emergency calls; delay in reporting fires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person without reasonable cause to summon by outcry, ringing of bell, or otherwise make or circulate, or cause to be made or circulated, a false alarm of fire, or to summon a fire-rescue emergency medical unit, when such person knows or has reason to know that services of the department of fire-rescue or the fire-rescue emergency medical unit are not needed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful of any person to knowingly aid or abet the commission of any act resulting in the services of the department of fire-rescue or fire-rescue emergency medical unit being summoned when their services are not required. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to delay reporting immediately any fire discovered to the department of fire-rescue or the police department so that firefighting and rescue apparatus may be dispatched. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-11)  
Sec. 19-12. - Investigation of fire. 
The fire prevention bureau shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city which is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire, and the director of the department of fire-rescue shall be immediately notified of the facts; he/she shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the designated official authorities in the collection of evidence or in the presentation of testimony in the prosecution of the case should the same be requested by such authorities. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-12)  
Sec. 19-13. - Use of photographs, etc., for proof of violations. 
When the director of the department of fire-rescue, or duly authorized representative thereof, has cause to believe that any requirement of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the City Code and/or Florida Building Code is being violated, he/she is hereby authorized to gather any evidence or take photographs necessary to secure proof that a violation of such fire code exists. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-13; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-14. - Fire records, reports and photographs. 
(a)  The director of the department of fire-rescue shall keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance and, if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the department of fire-rescue officers and inspectors, and the record shall be kept on file in the office of the fire prevention bureau. 
(b)  Fire reports and rescue reports that are public records may be purchased from the department of fire-rescue in accordance with the schedule established by F.S. § 119.07 as follows: Charges for one-sided copies shall be $0.15 per page and $0.20 per page for a two-sided copy, maximum size approximately 8½ inches by 14 inches. This does not prohibit the exchange of reports and information between governmental investigative agencies. 
(c)  Fire photographs that are public records may be purchased from the department of fire-rescue for $12.00 per print for black-and-white prints, and $15.00 per print for color prints. This does not prohibit the exchange of photographs between governmental investigative agencies. 
(d)  Any public record such as incident reports or photographs may be copied onto a DVD or CD provided by the city for a fee of $10.00 per DVD/CD. The department of fire-rescue does not provide DVDs for this purpose to the public. This does not prohibit the exchange of reports and information between governmental investigative agencies. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 11007, § 1, 10-8-92; Code 1980, § 19-14; Ord. No. 12805, § 2, 5-11-06)  
Sec. 19-15. - Guidelines containing administrative orders and procedures. 
From time to time, and when deemed appropriate, the director of the department of fire-rescue and/or the chief of fire prevention may prepare a set of advisory guidelines containing administrative orders and procedures pertaining to specific occupancies or operations under the provisions of this chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Such guidelines, when drafted, shall be a matter of public record and kept on file in the office of the fire prevention bureau. The intent of the guidelines is to clarify the requirements of this chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code and to maintain a consistent enforcement and public education program. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-15; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-16. - Strict liability. 
Whenever a violation of this chapter or of the Florida Fire Prevention Code occurs or exists, any person, individually or otherwise, who has a legal, beneficial or equitable interest in the facility or instrumentality causing or contributing to the violation or who has a legal, beneficial or equitable interest in the real property upon which such violations exist shall be jointly and severally strictly liable for the violation. Liability shall be construed as imposing joint and several strict liability upon all persons, individually or otherwise, who, although no longer having any such legal, beneficial or equitable interest in said facility or instrumentality or real property, did have such an interest at any time during which such violation existed or occurred or continued to exist or occur. This provision shall be liberally construed and shall be retroactively applied to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to accomplish the purposes of the chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-16; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-17. - Enforced removal of violative conditions. 
The application of any penalty for the violation of this chapter shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the condition(s) giving rise to the violation. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-17)  
Sec. 19-18. - Remedies cumulative and independent. 
All the judicial and administrative remedies in this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, municipal ordinances, state laws, and rules and regulations, as all of same may be amended from time to time, are independent and cumulative. Violations may also be enforced through chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-18; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-19. - Nonliability for damages. 
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to conduct such authorized inspection or reinspection or by reason of the issuance of the permit as herein provided or by reason of the approval of any equipment as authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-19)  
Sec. 19-20. - Criminal penalty. 
If any person shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with or violates any provisions of this chapter or of the Florida Fire Prevention Code or any lawful order of the city's chief fire code enforcement official or designee thereof or any lawful order rendered pursuant to the Florida Fire Prevention Code or any condition, limitation or restriction which is part of a permit issued or rendered under and pursuant to this chapter of the City Code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, then such person, upon conviction in county court of such offense, shall be punished pursuant to section 1-13, in the discretion of the court. Each day of each continued violation shall be considered as a separate offense and fines may accrue cumulatively. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-20; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-21. - Attorney's fees. 
Upon the rendition of a judgment or decree by any court of competent jurisdiction in this state, against any person which results in favor of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, in proceedings seeking to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the trial court shall adjudge or decree against the person and in favor of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, a reasonable sum as costs and fees or compensation for the attorney representing the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, who prosecuted the suit in which the recovery was had. Where so awarded, compensation or fees of the attorney shall be included in the judgment or decree rendered in the case. This provision shall apply to all pending or prospective civil actions, legal or equitable, filed by the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code. In the event of an appeal from a judgment rendered in proceedings seeking to enforce any provisions of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code and where the city's chief fire code enforcement official prevails, the appellate court shall award the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, a reasonable sum as costs and fees or compensation for the attorney representing the question in the appeal. Cessation, correction or remediation of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code prior to a rendition of judgment or of a temporary or final decree, or prior to execution of a negotiated settlement, but after an action is filed by the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or his/her designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, shall be deemed the functional equivalent of an admission of guilt or verdict in favor of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, for which attorneys' fees may be awarded by the trial court as set forth hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-21; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 19-22. - Enforcement, procedure; remedies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or to permit, allow, let or suffer any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and/or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; any condition, limitation or restriction which is part of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of the same may be amended from time to time; lawful orders of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, and consent agreements. In addition to any other judicial or administrative remedies provided by this chapter or by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, shall have the following judicial remedies: 
(1)  To institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek temporary or permanent, prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief to enforce compliance with or prohibit the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; any lawful order of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, any condition, limitation, or restriction which is part of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; or any consent agreement. 
(2)  To institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to impose and recover a civil penalty in an amount of not more than $25,000.00 for each violation of: any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; any lawful order of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof; any condition, limitation, or restriction which is part of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; or any consent agreement. 
(3)  To institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek restitution and other equitable relief to recover any sums expended and costs incurred for: 
a.  Tracing, investigating, preventing, controlling, abating or remedying violations of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; or any lawful order of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, or any condition, limitation, or restriction which is a part of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time; or any consent agreement. 
b.  Restoration of the air, water, property, animal life, aquatic life and plant life within the city to their former condition due to any violation of this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code or any lawful order of the city's chief fire enforcement official, or designee thereof, or any condition, limitation or restriction which is part of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code as all of same may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Each day during any portion of which such violation occurs or continues to occur constitutes a separate violation. The right of trial by jury shall be available in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-22; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-23. - Civil penalty and restitution fund. 
(a)  The sums recovered by the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, pursuant to any section of this chapter or the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be deposited in a separate city fund as provided herein. 
(b)  The aforesaid separate city fund shall only be used to pay for the following: 
(1)  Tracing, investigating, controlling, abating and remedying violations of this chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Restoration of the air, water, property, animal life, aquatic life and plant life within the city to their former condition. 
(3)  Fire safety prevention and education, planning, protection and programming. 
(4)  Responding to and attempting to resolve citizen complaints against violations or possible violations of this chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time. 
(5)  Investigation, preparation, and prosecution of civil and criminal actions, pursuant to this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, and Florida Statutes, seeking to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as all of same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  No part of such separate city fund shall be used for purposes other than the aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-23; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-24. - Search warrants. 
The city's fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, having fire safety responsibilities, is hereby authorized and empowered to seek out search warrants reasonable and necessary to carry out the respective responsibilities, powers and duties set forth in this chapter and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, in accordance with the requirements of the Constitutions of the State of Florida and the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-24; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10) 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq.  
Sec. 19-25. - Inspections; inspection warrants. 
(a)  Any duly authorized representative of the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, may, at any reasonable time, enter, monitor, sample, test and inspect, as often as may be necessary, any public or private, residential or nonresidential, owner-occupied or nonowner-occupied building for the purpose of: 
(1)  Ascertaining and/or causing to be corrected any conditions which may contribute to a fire or any conditions which may endanger life and property due to fire; 
(2)  Enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal; and 
(3)  Investigating the cause, origin, circumstances of every fire occurring which is suspicious in nature or which involves the loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been damaged. 
(b)  No person shall refuse reasonable entry or access to a duly authorized representative of the fire prevention bureau who requests entry for any of the purposes set forth in subsection (a), above, and who presents appropriate credentials identifying himself/herself as such representative. 
(c)  No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such inspection, entry, monitoring, testing or sampling. 
(d)  An inspection, entry, monitoring, testing and sampling, pursuant to this section may be conducted only after the following: 
(1)  Consent for the entry, inspection, testing, monitoring and sampling is received from the owner or person in charge of the property, place, dwelling, item, structure or premises. 
(2)  An inspection warrant as provided in this section or by law is obtained. 
(e)  An inspection warrant as authorized by this chapter may be issued by a judge of any county court or circuit court of this state which has jurisdiction of the property, place, dwelling, item, structure or premises to be searched. 
(f)  Upon proper presentation by affidavit, an inspection warrant may be secured/issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or for the following causes shown: 
(1)  When it is reasonable to believe that the property or item(s) to be inspected may be connected with or contain evidence of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, and the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal; or 
(2)  When the inspection sought is an integral part of a scheme of systematic routine or area inspections or investigations based upon reasonable legislative or administrative standards and neutral criteria. 
(g)  Prior to determining grounds for an inspection, the judge shall examine under oath or affirmation the applicant and any other witness(es) and shall satisfy himself or herself of the existence of cause as set forth in subsection (f) above, before granting such application. 
(h)  If the judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection warrant exists, he or she may issue authorization for the inspection in writing, describing with particularity the property, place, dwelling, item, structure or premises to be inspected and designating on the warrant the purpose and limitations of the inspection. 
(i)  An inspection warrant shall be effective for the time specified therein, but not for a period of more than 14 days unless it is extended or renewed by the judge who signed and issued the original warrant, upon satisfying himself or herself that such extension or renewal is in the public interest. Such inspection warrant must be executed and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within the time specified in the warrant or within the extended or renewed time. After the expiration of such time, the warrant, unless executed or extended, is void. 
(j)  An inspection pursuant to an inspection warrant shall not be made by means of forcible entry, except that the judge may expressly authorize a forcible entry when facts are shown which are sufficient to create a reasonable suspicion of a violation which, if such violation existed or continued to exist, would be an immediate threat to life, health or safety, or when facts are shown establishing that reasonable attempts to serve a previous warrant have been unsuccessful. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-25; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 19-26. - Orders. 
(a)  When evidence has been received establishing that a violation of this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or any rule and regulation of the state fire marshal, has occurred or may reasonably be expected to occur, the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, may issue, in his/her discretion, a notice to correct the violation or a citation to cease the violation and cause the same to be served upon the violator by personal service or certified mail to the violator's last known address or post office box or by posting a copy in a conspicuous place at the premises of the violation. Once posting has occurred, failure to claim the certified mail shall be at no consequence, and service shall be deemed to be complete and proper. Such notice or citation shall briefly set forth the general nature of the violation and specify a reasonable time within which the violation shall be rectified or stopped. Reasonable time herein means the shortest practicable time to rectify or stop the violation. Such notice or citation may require the violator to restrict, cease or suspend use or operation of the facility or premises. Any orders hereunder may be enforced as provided in section 19-22 of this chapter. This provision shall not be construed to require the issuance or service of a notice of violation or citation to cease or other order prior to initiating proceedings against a violator pursuant to section 19-22 of this chapter. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, a violator shall mean the owner, lessee and any other person responsible for the condition of the premises. In the case of a corporation it shall also mean the resident agent, any director or officer. In the case of a partnership it shall also mean any partner. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-26; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 19-27. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  When a violation of this chapter, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or any rule or regulation of the state fire marshal, has occurred or continues to exist or when there is a reasonable likelihood of imminent endangerment to life, health or property because of a threatened violation of any of the foregoing provisions, the city's chief fire code enforcement official, or designee thereof, in his/her discretion, may do any of the following: 
(1)  Take any action necessary to prevent such a violation; 
(2)  Trace, investigate, control, abate and remedy such a violation; and 
(3)  Restore the air, waters, property, animal life, aquatic life and plant life within the city to their former condition. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to provide a defense to or otherwise relieve or limit the liability or responsibility of any person who violated or is violating the particular provisions of law or ordinance aforesaid. Any sums expended by the city in an effort to effect a remedy may be recovered as provided by section 19-22. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-27; Ord. No. 13201, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 19-28. - Liens. 
Owners of real property shall be liable for the sums expended by the city pursuant to section 19-23 of this chapter when the violation has occurred or continued to exist or appeared imminent upon the real property aforesaid, regardless of fault and regardless of knowledge of the aforesaid violation. All sums expended by the city pursuant to sections 19-22 and 19-23 of this chapter shall constitute and are hereby imposed as special assessment liens against the real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and in dignity with the lien of county and city ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. All such sums shall become immediately due and owing to the city upon expenditure by the city and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 60 days after the due date. All such delinquent sums shall bear a penalty of 15 percent per annum. Unpaid and delinquent sums, together with all penalties imposed thereon, shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved for the period of five years from the due date thereof. The special assessment liens may be enforced by the city by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85, or, in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted by the city pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 173, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method provided by law. All sums recovered by the city pursuant to this provision shall be deposited by the city into the fund from which said sums were expended. 
(Ord. No. 10824, § 2, 1-10-91; Code 1980, § 19-28)  
Chapter 19.5 - FIRE RESCUE ASSESSMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references—Fire protection, ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19.5-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual rate resolution means the resolution described in section 19.5-28, establishing the rate at which a fire rescue assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a fire rescue assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
Assessed property means all parcels of land included on the assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the fire rescue services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment resolution or the preliminary rate resolution. 
Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to a fire rescue assessment approved by a final assessment resolution pursuant to section 19.5-26 or an annual rate resolution pursuant to section 19.5-28. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind. This term shall include mobile homes or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. 
Certificate of occupancy means the written certification issued by the city that a building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. For the purposes of this chapter, a set up permit or its equivalent issued for a mobile home shall be considered a certificate of occupancy. 
City means the City of Miami, Florida. 
City commission means the governing body of City of Miami, Florida. 
City manager means the head of the administrative branch of the city as defined in the City Charter, or his/her designee. 
Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 19.5-26 which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of fire rescue assessments. 
Fire rescue assessed cost means the amount determined by the city commission to be assessed in any fiscal year to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(1)  The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(2)  The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(3)  The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(4)  The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(5)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(6)  The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(7)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(8)  The cost of salaries, workers, compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(9)  The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(10)  The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; 
(11)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(12)  The costs of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the city to provide fire rescue services; 
(13)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the fire rescue assessments, including any service charges of the tax collector, or property appraiser and amounts necessary to offset discounts received for early payment of fire rescue assessments pursuant to the uniform assessment collection act or for early payment of fire rescue assessments collected pursuant to section 19.5-52; 
(14)  All other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the city commission by subsequent resolution; 
(15)  A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible fire rescue assessments; and 
(16)  Reimbursement to the city or any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the city or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of fire rescue assessed cost. 
Fire rescue assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the city against assessed property to fund the fire rescue assessed cost imposed to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of property identified in the initial assessment resolution or the preliminary rate resolution. 
Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1 of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
Government property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district or a municipal corporation. 
Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 19.5-22 which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the fire rescue assessed cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a fire rescue assessment. 
Ordinance means this fire rescue assessment chapter. 
Owner shall mean the person reflected as the owner of assessed property on the tax roll. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
Preliminary rate resolution means the resolution described in section 19.5-28 initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll and directing the reimposition of fire rescue assessments pursuant to an annual rate resolution. 
Property appraiser means the property appraiser of the county. 
Tax collector means the Department of Finance and Administrative Services as described in article IV of the Dade County Charter. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform assessment collection act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 19.5-2. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this chapter; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives (January 13, 1998). Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-3. - Findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the city commission has all powers of local self-government to perform municipal functions, render municipal services except when prohibited by law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of legislation in the form of city ordinances. 
(2)  The city commission may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city commission may legislate on any subject matter on which the state legislature may act, except those subjects described in F.S. § 166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d). The subject matter of F.S. § 166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d) are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to fire rescue services, facilities or programs of the city. 
(3)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
a.  Provide procedures and standards for the imposition of city-wide fire rescue assessments under the general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; 
b.  Authorize a procedure for the funding of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the city; and 
c.  Legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property from the provision of combined fire control and emergency medical services by the city under its consolidated fire rescue program. 
(4)  The annual fire rescue assessments to be imposed pursuant to this chapter shall constitute non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(5)  The fire rescue assessment imposed pursuant to this chapter is imposed by the city commission, not the county board of county commissioners, property appraiser or tax collector. Any activity of the property appraiser or tax collector under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-4. - Legislative determinations of special benefit. 
It is hereby ascertained and declared that the fire rescue services, facilities, and programs of the city provide a special benefit to property within the city that is improved by the existence or construction of a dwelling unit or building based upon the following legislative determinations: 
(1)  Fire rescue services, which include the combined fire control and emergency medical services of the city under its existing consolidated fire rescue program, possess a logical relationship to the use and enjoyment of improved property by: 
a.  Protecting the value of the improvements and structures through the provision of available fire rescue services; 
b.  Protecting the life and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of improvements and structures within improved parcels; 
c.  Lowering the cost of fire or other insurance by the presence of a professional and comprehensive fire rescue program within the city; and 
d.  Containing the spread of fire incidents occurring on vacant property with the potential to spread and endanger the structures and occupants of improved property. 
(2)  The combined fire control and emergency medical services of the city under its existing consolidated fire rescue program enhance and strengthens the relationship of such services to the use and enjoyment of buildings within improved parcels of property within the city. 
(3)  The combined fire control and emergency medical services of the city under its existing consolidated fire rescue program enhance the value of business and commercial property that is improved by the existence or construction of a building which enhanced value can be anticipated to be reflected in the rental charge or value of such business or commercial property. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter and the city's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-6. - Alternative method. 
(a)  This chapter shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of: 
(1)  Any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or convenient by the city; 
(2)  Any notice required by this chapter; or 
(3)  Any notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Secs. 19.5-7—19.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANNUAL ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 19.5-21. - General authority. 
(a)  The city commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual fire rescue assessment to fund all or any portion of the fire rescue assessed cost upon benefitted property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs. All fire rescue assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  The amount of the fire rescue assessment imposed in a fiscal year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the fire rescue assessed cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by fire rescue services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require the imposition of fire rescue assessments against government property. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-22. - Initial proceedings. 
The initial proceeding for the imposition of a fire rescue assessment shall be the adoption of an initial assessment resolution by the city commission which: 
(1)  Contains a brief and general description of the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Estimates the fire rescue assessed cost to be assessed; 
(3)  Describes the method of apportioning the fire rescue assessed cost and the computation of the fire rescue assessment for specific properties; 
(4)  Provides a summary description of the parcels of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) located within the city that receive a special benefit from the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs or describing a specific geographic area in which such service, facility, or program will be provided; 
(5)  Establishes an assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(6)  Directs the city manager to: 
a.  Prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by section 19.5-23; 
b.  Publish the notice required by section 19.5-24; and 
c.  Mail the notice required by section 19.5-25 using information then available from the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-23. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a)  The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of all assessed property conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3)  The amount of the fire rescue assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of assessed property. 
(b)  The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the fire rescue assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-24. - Notice by publication. 
Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the city manager shall publish, or direct the publication of, once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice stating that at a meeting of the city commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the city commission will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  A geographic depiction of the property subject to the fire rescue assessment; 
(2)  A brief and general description of the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(3)  The rate of assessment; 
(4)  The procedure for objecting provided in section 19.5-26; 
(5)  The method by which the fire rescue assessment will be collected; and 
(6)  A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city manager and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-25. - Notice by mail. 
(a)  If the city decides to collect the fire rescue assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes in the manner provided in the uniform assessment collection act, the city manager shall additionally provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed fire rescue assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property (except government property) subject to the fire rescue assessment. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  The purpose of the fire rescue assessment; 
(2)  The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property; 
(3)  The unit of measurement applied to determine the fire rescue assessment; 
(4)  The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(5)  The total revenue to be collected by the city from the fire rescue assessment; 
(6)  A statement that failure to pay the fire rescue assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(7)  A statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city commission within 20 days of the notice; and 
(8)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
Such mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The city manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire rescue assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No individually mailed notice to affected owners, in addition to the published notice in section 19.5-24, shall be required in the event the city employs an alternative method of collection and chooses not to collect the fire rescue assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-26. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city commission, the city commission shall receive any written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city commission adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(1)  Confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if deemed appropriate the rate of any, as may be by the city commission; 
(2)  Establish assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(4)  Determine the method of collection. 
The final assessment resolution, or any subsequent annual rate resolution, may modify, ratify or confirm the initial assessment resolution, or any subsequent preliminary rate resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution by the city commission shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the fire rescue assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. All objections to the final assessment resolution shall be made in writing, and filed with the city manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which fire rescue assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-27. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
The fire rescue assessments for the initial fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the initial rate of assessment, the initial assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the fire rescue assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the final assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 19.5-52 is used to collect the fire rescue assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-28. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(a)  The city commission shall adopt an annual rate resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which a fire rescue assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(b)  The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the city commission which: 
(1)  Contains a brief and general description of the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Estimates the fire rescue assessed cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establishes the assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(4)  Authorizes the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(5)  Directs the city manager to update the assessment roll, and provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (f), below, so require; and 
(6)  Directs and authorizes any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the city. 
(c)  The annual rate resolution shall establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year, and approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the city commission deems just and right. The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial assessment resolution together with modifications, if any, and as confirmed in the final assessment resolution or as provided in the preliminary rate resolution. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the manner provided in either or both sections 19.5-24 or 19.5-25. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from establishing by resolution a maximum rate of assessment provided that notice of such maximum assessment rate is provided pursuant to sections 19.5-24 and 19.5-25. 
(f)  In the event (1) the proposed fire rescue assessment for any fiscal year exceeds the maximum rate of assessment adopted by the city commission and included in notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19.5-24 and 19.5-25, (2) the method of apportionment is changed or the purpose for which the fire rescue assessment is imposed is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19.5-24 and 19.5-25, (3) assessed property is reclassified in a manner which results in an increased fire rescue assessment from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19.5-24 and 19.5-25, or (4) an assessment roll contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, notice shall be provided to affected owners in substantial conformance with the notice requirements set forth in sections 19.5-24 and 19.5-25 and inform the owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire rescue assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this chapter. 
(g)  As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the fire rescue assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any fire rescue assessment not challenged within the required 20 day period for those fire rescue assessments imposed against assessed property by the inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(h)  The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 19.5-52 is used to collect the fire rescue assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. If the fire rescue assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-29. - Lien. 
Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all fire rescue assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such liens shall be superior in dignity to all other period liens, mortgages, titles, and claims until paid. The lien for a fire rescue assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a fire rescue assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a fire rescue assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a fire rescue assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 19.5-52 shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-30. - Revisions. 
If any fire rescue assessment made under the provisions of this chapter is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city commission is satisfied that any such fire rescue assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city commission has omitted any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the city commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new fire rescue assessment against any property benefitted by the fire rescue assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this chapter and in case such second fire rescue assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city commission may obtain and impose other fire rescue assessments until a valid fire rescue assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-31. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any fire rescue assessment under the provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any fire rescue assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such fire rescue assessment was duly levied, that the fire rescue assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such fire rescue assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this chapter; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to a fire rescue assessment imposed pursuant to this chapter must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-32. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, city manager, city commission, or their deputies, employees, agents or designees shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire rescue assessment imposed by the city commission under the provision of this chapter. 
(b)  When it shall appear that any fire rescue assessment should have been imposed under this chapter against a parcel of property specially benefitted by the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved, by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the city commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of the omitted parcel in substantially the manner and form provided in section 19.5-25, impose the applicable fire rescue assessment for the fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable fire rescue assessment due for the prior two fiscal years. Such fire rescue assessment shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in article III, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(c)  Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to a fire rescue assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the fire rescue assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the fire rescue assessment imposed under the provisions of this chapter. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the city manager and not the property appraiser or tax collector. Any property owner unsatisfied with the decision of the city manager may seek review by a hearing officer in the manner provided in section 19.5-54. 
(d)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-33. - Interim assessments. 
(a)  An interim fire rescue assessment shall be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after adoption of the annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim fire rescue assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate resolution for the fiscal year in which the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim fire rescue assessment shall also include an estimate of the subsequent fiscal year's fire rescue assessment. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full payment of the interim fire rescue assessment is received by the city. Issuance of the certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the interim fire rescue assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the purpose of this provision, such interim fire rescue assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Any property owner unsatisfied with the imposition of an interim fire rescue assessment may seek review by a hearing officer in the manner provided in section 19.5-54. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Secs. 19.5-34—19.5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND USE 
 
Sec. 19.5-51. - Method of collection. 
(a)  Unless otherwise directed by the city commission, the fire rescue assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this chapter may be combined with any other hearing or notice, required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(b)  The amount of a fire rescue assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefitted property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program, provided: 
(1)  The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; 
(2)  Notice is provided to the owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; and 
(3)  Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such fire rescue assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-52. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of utilizing the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City may elect to collect the Fire Rescue Assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section: 
(1)  The city shall provide fire rescue assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property, other than government property, at any time prior to or during the fiscal year for which such fire rescue assessments are imposed. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
a.  A brief explanation of the fire rescue assessment; 
b.  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire rescue assessment; 
c.  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
d.  The total amount of the fire rescue assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
e.  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
f.  The date on which the fire rescue assessment is due; and 
g.  A statement that the fire rescue assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(2)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the fire rescue assessments shall be recorded in the official records of the county. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent fire rescue assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A fire rescue assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her fire rescue assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city or its agent will either: 
a.  Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent fire rescue assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property; or 
b.  Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent fire rescue assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(4)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The city or its agent may join in one foreclosure action the collection of fire rescue assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(5)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent fire rescue assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that: 
a.  Notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this chapter; and 
b.  Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent fire rescue assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the city's use of an alternative method of collection, the city manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to him/her or county officials in section 19.5-32. 
(7)  Any city commission action required in the collection of fire rescue assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 19.5-53. - Government property. 
(a)  If fire rescue assessments are imposed against government property, the city shall provide fire rescue assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the fire rescue assessment; 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire rescue assessment; 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's fire rescue assessment for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; and 
(6)  The date on which the fire rescue assessment is due. 
(b)  Fire rescue assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as all other fire rescue assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c)  A fire rescue assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its fire rescue assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  As an alternative to the foregoing, a fire rescue assessment imposed against government property may be collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such government property in periodic installments with a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of nonpayment. The city commission may contract for such billing services with any utility, whether or not such utility is owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97)  
Sec. 19.5-54. - Appeals. 
(a)  A hearing officer shall be appointed by the city manager to hear appeals from affected property owners concerning: 
(1)  The classification, size, or use of the owner's parcel or any other factual matter related to the application of the method of apportionment employed in imposing the fire rescue assessment; 
(2)  The imposition of an interim assessment; or 
(3)  The correction of an error or omission. 
(b)  The aggrieved property owner shall file a written notice of appeal with the city manager's office within 20 days following the effective date of the assessment or action by the city manager under sections 19.5-32 or 19.5-33. The filing of an appeal at any point in time shall not stay the collection of the fire rescue assessment. 
(c)  An appeal to the hearing officer shall be made within 20 days after the effective date of the fire rescue assessment or action by the city manager under sections 19.5-32 or 19.5-33 by filing a notice of appeal or letter of appeal with the city manager stating therein the basis for such appeal. 
(d)  No hearing shall be heard by the hearing officer unless the respective appeals have been filed within the time and at the place provided in this chapter. 
(e)  All decisions of the hearing officer made under this section shall be deemed final. 
(f)  All such requests for review by the city under this chapter shall be subject to the disclosure requirements set forth in section 2-618 of this Code. 
(g)  The city manager shall give the appealing party at least ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing. The notice shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. No public or published notice is required. 
(h)  The aggrieved property owner shall, at his/her own cost, provide supplemental information in advance to the city manager including, but not limited to, relevant data, consulting or expert reports or opinions, or other information to be used or relied upon at the hearing. Failure to timely provide such information shall preclude the use and consideration of same at the hearing and may result in the denial of the appeal. 
(i)  At the time and place set for the hearing the hearing officer shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Parties may present evidence to support their position; however, no economic or technical reports, studies, appraisals or other information, expertise or opinions shall be considered by the hearing officer unless the same shall have been disclosed to the city and filed with the city manager at least ten days prior to that hearing. All exhibits presented to the hearing officer shall become part of the record and shall remain so until the determination of the hearing officer or the expiration of any administrative or judicial appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 11584, § 1, 12-30-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Chapter 20 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Buildings, ch. 10; environmental preservation, ch. 17; stormwater utility fees and fund, § 18-291 et seq.; landfills and waterfront improvements, ch. 29; subdivision regulations, ch. 55; planning and zoning, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Accessory use or structure. A use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and, unless otherwise specifically provided, located on the same premises. "On the same premises" shall be construed as meaning on the same lot or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. Where a building is attached to the principal building, it shall be considered part thereof, and not an accessory structure. 
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH or VO zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the City of Miami, Florida, with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within the county subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). 
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. 
Basement. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Belowgrade facilities. Off-street parking facilities constructed underground and other similar types of belowgrade areas within a building which are not habitable areas and contain neither electrical nor mechanical equipment. 
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system or any other building to which they might be carried by floodwaters. 
Building. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Building site. The ground area of a property occupied by buildings and other enclosed structures. 
Coastal high hazard area. The area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on the City of Miami FIRM as zone V1—30, VE or V. 
Crown of road (centerline). A line running parallel with the highway right-of-way which is half the distance between the extreme edges of the official right-of-way width as shown on a map approved by the department of resilience and public works. 
Dade County flood criteria maps. The official maps of Dade County showing the required minimum finished grade elevation of the ground surface within a development site as adopted by the board of county commissioners and recorded in plat book 120 at pages 13-1, 13-2, 13-3, 13-4, and 13-5 of the public records of Dade County, as the same may be amended, from time to time. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building. A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation, perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 18, 1974. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before June 18, 1974, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by Dade County. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Finished grade as applied to development site. The established final elevation after filling or grading of the ground surface at a certain point within a development site. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  Abnormally high tidal water or rising coastal waters resulting from severe storms, hurricanes. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source. 
(3)  The overflow of streams, rivers, or other inland water. 
Flood hazard boundary area. An area within an official map of the community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Floodproofing. Structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments (other than elevating) to nonresidential structures and utilities which reduce or eliminate flood damage to water supply and sanitary sewage facilities, structures and contents of buildings. Floodproofing may be permitted in large residential structures such as condominiums provided it is limited to electrical and utility rooms only. Floodproofing includes, by way of illustration, not limitation, the following measures: 
(1)  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
(2)  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters, or similar methods of construction to protect against winds, wave action, or floodwaters. 
(3)  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
(4)  Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls. 
(5)  Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation. 
(6)  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
(7)  Construction of water supply and wastewater treatment and disposal systems to prevent the entrance or infiltration of floodwaters. 
(8)  Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures. 
(9)  Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or flooding debris. 
(10)  Installation of valves or controls of sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drain to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures. Gravity draining of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices. 
(11)  Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to flooding and to provide protection from inundation by the regulatory flood. 
(12)  Location of any structure, storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids or other toxic materials which could be hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare in a manner which will assure that the facilities are situated at elevations above the height associated with the regulatory protection elevation or are adequately floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest finished grade elevation of the ground surface next to the proposed walls of a structure. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) this term shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Mangrove stand. An assemblage of mangrove trees which are mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia germinans); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Laguncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erectus). 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." However, park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer shall be regulated as manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Minimum finished grade. The elevations established in the Dade County flood criteria maps at a specific development site or the crown of an existing adjacent road, whichever is higher. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). (As corrected in 1929.) A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction. Any structure for which the "start of new construction" commenced on or after June 18, 1974. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after June 18, 1974. 
Physical start. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Residential or residence. Any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, piece of land or building used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be so used. 
Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in rides or mounds landward of the beach. 
Start of new construction. (For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348).) The date the building permit was issued provided that physical start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the building permit date. 
Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds, over a two-year period, a cumulative total of 50 percent of the market value of the structure. However, the accumulation period for a substantial improvement within any coastal building zone, as defined in F.S. § 161.54(12), shall be five years. The market value of the structure shall be (1) the assessed value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. In cases where the assessed value of a structure is questioned by the permit applicant, an adjustment may be made; however, the burden of proof is upon the applicant who may submit an independent appraisal by a qualified appraiser in support thereof. For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," listed on the National Register of Historic Places or state inventory of historic places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. The repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 1, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-1; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 20-2. - Intent of chapter. 
The areas of the City of Miami, Florida, are subject to flooding resulting in danger to life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Congress established the National Flood Insurance Program with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The National Flood Insurance Program is a federal program enabling property owners to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This chapter is adopted to ensure that the residents of the City of Miami qualify for the sale of federally assisted flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program and to comply with federally imposed requirements for participation in said program. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 2, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-2)  
Sec. 20-3. - Development in either special flood hazard areas, or nonspecial flood hazard areas. 
For all development within special flood hazard areas and nonspecial flood hazard areas, the building official or his/her designee shall: 
(1)  Require permits for all proposed construction, development or other improvements within said areas; and 
(2)  Review permit applications for construction, development or other improvements within said areas to determine that the proposed activities use construction materials and utility equipment which are resistant to flood damage; and 
(3)  Review permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements within said areas to assure that the proposed construction: 
a.  Is protected against flood damage; 
b.  Is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
c.  Uses construction materials and utility equipment which are resistant to flood damage, and also uses construction methods and practices which will minimize flood damage; and 
d.  Provides in the plans part of the permit application the appropriate floodplain information including Dade County flood criteria, crown of road information, federal flood zone and base flood elevation. 
e.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities are designed and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation. 
(4)  Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that: 
a.  All such proposals minimize flood damage; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce the exposure to flood hazards; and 
(5)  Require new and replacement water supply systems and treatment plants and sanitary sewage plants and systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and plants into floodwaters, and require on-site wastewater disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(6)  Require a lowest floor elevation certificate or floodproofing certification, after the lowest floor is completed or in instances where the structure is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the city a certification of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(7)  Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments include within such proposals base flood elevation data according to the City of Miami's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) information, and existing grade and crown of adjacent road elevation information according to Dade County flood criteria information. 
(8)  Obtain, review and utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state, or other sources. 
(9)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 404 USC 1334. 
(10)  In coastal high hazard areas, review plans for adequacy of breakaway walls in accordance with section 20-5(e), (f) and (g) herein. 
(11)  For the purpose of this section, "base elevation" shall be defined as the elevation established by the Miami-Dade County flood criteria map, or the elevation of the crown of road or street abutting such building site, whichever is higher. In cases where the base elevation fronting the land vary greater than one foot along the frontage of the lot(s), then an alternative engineered solution for flood protection may be presented to the building official or his/her designee in consultation with the director of resilience and public works. 
Review proposed development to ensure that no use shall be made for other than crop, grove, nursery and grazing purposes, or similar uses, and no building of any type shall be constructed, erected or moved on any land below the base elevation. And before any such land shall be used, except as above authorized, it shall be filled as required by the building official or his/her designee in consultation with the director of resilience and public works. 
a.  For uses other than residential requiring a floor, the floor elevation shall be a minimum of four inches above the base elevation. For all residential use, the floor elevation shall be a minimum of eight inches above the base elevation. 
b.  In all cases and for all uses and whether the property is located in a special flood hazard area, or in a nonspecial flood hazard area, the floor elevation obtained as above described shall be compared against the base flood elevation shown in the city's FIRM and the higher of the two shall be used for design and construction. 
c.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to off-street parking facilities constructed underground and other similar types of belowgrade areas within a building which are not lowest floor and contain neither electrical nor mechanical equipment. All such facilities constructed belowgrade shall be designed and constructed and contain essential equipment, if necessary, to prevent infiltration and accumulation of water or to provide for immediate and continuous elimination of water. A Florida-registered engineer or architect shall submit data and a floodproofing certificate to assure that the design complies with all guidelines of section 20-5(b) herein. 
d.  If in the review of a permit application it is determined that in the application of the provisions of subsection (11) of this section the building applicant would be required to provide flood protection in excess of the requirements of this chapter, then it shall be the responsibility and authority of the building official or his/her designee to review such plans and may grant a waiver of the requirements of subsection (11) of this section to provide flood protection which is no less than the flood protection required by this chapter based upon good engineering practice. Said decision shall be subject to appeal in accordance with section 20-12(j) of this chapter. 
(12)  Maintain, for public inspection, in the planning, building and zoning office all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(13)  Notify adjacent communities and the department of community affairs prior to the alteration or relocation of a waterway. 
(14)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 3, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-3; Ord. No. 12802, § 1, 5-11-06; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 20-4. - Development within special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  No new construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home shall be permitted in special flood hazard areas, and no permit referred to in section 20-3 of this chapter shall be issued therefor, unless said new construction or substantial improvement has the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the level of the base flood (100-year flood). Electrical, plumbing and other attendant utilities are prohibited below the base flood elevation. 
(b)  No new construction or substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall be permitted in special flood hazard areas, and no building permit referred to in section 20-3 of this chapter shall be issued therefor, unless said new construction or substantial improvement has the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the level of the base flood (100-year flood), or if the lowest permitted floor level of such nonresidential structure (including basement) is below the base flood level then such nonresidential structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be floodproofed up to one foot above the level of the base flood; provided that the lowest flood level of such nonresidential structure (including basement) shall be not more than ten feet below the base flood level. Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depth, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood, and a record of such certificates indicating the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structure is floodproofed shall be maintained with the building official or his/her designee. 
(c)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
(d)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height abovegrade; and 
(3)  The manufactured home shall be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved shall meet the standards of subsections (d)(1) and (3) herein. 
(e)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites shall meet the requirements of section 20-5(k) herein. 
(f)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundations and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space except allowable uses, i.e., parking, limited storage and building access and shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces in exterior walls. Designs for complying with *this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade; 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
(4)  Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation; 
(5)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
(6)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms or air conditioned. 
(g)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Prohibit encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (f)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section of this chapter. 
(3)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsections (c) and (d) and the elevation standards of subsection (a) of this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 4, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-4; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-5. - Development within coastal high hazard areas. 
(a)  Existing uses located on land in a coastal high hazard area which is below the elevation of the base flood shall not be expanded and no building permit referred to in section 20-3 of this chapter may be issued therefor unless the provisions of subsection (b) hereof are complied with. 
(b)  No new construction or substantial improvement shall be undertaken and no permit referred to in section 20-3 of this chapter may be issued therefor upon any lands within coastal high hazard areas which are below the level of the base flood unless said new construction or substantial improvement: 
(1)  Is located landward of the reach of the mean high tide; 
(2)  Is securely anchored on pilings or columns and elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than the base flood elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water; and 
(3)  All pile and column foundations and structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. 
(c)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping or aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The building official or his/her designee shall approve design plans for landscaping or aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
(1)  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency toward excessive natural compaction; 
(2)  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
(3)  Slope of fill will not cause wave runup or ramping. 
(d)  No manmade alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which will increase potential flood damage shall be permitted. 
(e)  Latticework or decorative screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided it is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be used and provided the following design specification is met: 
Material shall consist of lattice, mesh screening or concrete block. For the purposes of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
(2)  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. 
(f)  If aesthetic lattice work screening or concrete block is utilized, such enclosed space shall not be designed for human habitation (breakaway walls), but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Areas enclosed by unreinforced concrete block (breakaway walls) exceeding 299 square feet in size will be considered the lowest floor for flood insurance purposes and therefore higher insurance premiums will result. 
(g)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures that will have latticework or decorative screening or breakaway walls shall be submitted to the building official or his/her designee for approval. 
(h)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with latticework, decorative screening, or concrete in accordance with the definition of breakaway walls. 
(i)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in section 20-4. 
(j)  No manufactured homes, except in existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions and provided all anchoring and elevation standards of subsections (b)(2) and (i) herein are met, shall be placed within this zone. 
(k)  All recreational vehicles placed within this area must either: 
(1)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; 
(2)  The recreational vehicle shall meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (b)(2) of this section and section 20-4; or 
(3)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 5, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-5; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-6. - Accessory buildings. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to exclude accessory buildings from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 6, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-6)  
Sec. 20-7. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study, dated November 4, 1987, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. 
(b)  Those maps referred to in section 20-1 of this chapter, as amended effective November 4, 1987, together with all explanatory matter therein are hereby adopted by reference and are declared to be a part of this chapter, and shall be kept on file, available to the public, in the offices of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 7, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-7)  
Sec. 20-8. - Enforcement. 
The building official or his/her designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the City of Miami, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 8, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-8; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-9. - Rules for interpreting area boundaries. 
The boundaries of the flood hazard areas shown on the official flood insurance rate maps may be determined by scaling distances. Required interpretations of those maps for precise locations of said boundaries shall be made by the building official. Said interpretations shall be subject to review in accordance with the provisions of section 20-12(j) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 9, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-9)  
Sec. 20-10. - Effect of provisions on ordinances, building code, other regulations. 
This chapter shall supersede any conflicting city ordinance, building code, or any other regulation to the extent that this chapter imposes more stringent requirements for the use or development of any lands or structures within SFH or CHH areas. It is not intended to repeal, modify, or change any ordinance, building code or other regulation except as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 10, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-10)  
Sec. 20-11. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the city in order to effectuate the purposes herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 11, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-11)  
Sec. 20-12. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority of the building official or his/her designee. The building official or his/her designee shall have the authority and duty to consider and act upon applications for a variance from these regulations for properties located within the corporate limits of the City of Miami, Florida. The building official or his/her designee is hereby advised that in granting any variances hereunder, said official shall consider the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program as specified in 44 CFR 60 et seq. Furthermore, the building official or his/her designee shall consider the fact that an annual report on variances granted shall be submitted to the National Flood Insurance Administration, which report is the basis for continued availability of flood insurance to the inhabitants of the City of Miami, and therefore variances shall be granted with extreme caution. 
(b)  The building official or his/her designee may grant variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions hereof will result in exceptional hardship, and so the spirit of the regulations shall be observed and substantial justice done; provided, that the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and that the same is the minimum variance that will permit the reasonable use of the premises. Upon receipt of all necessary information including a staff report, the building official or his/her designee shall review the information and render his/her decision, either approving, modifying or denying the request. A copy of said decision shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. All approvals or modifications shall not be effective until ten days after the building official's or his/her designee's decision is published in a newspaper of general circulation. A courtesy notice containing the decision of the official or his/her designee may be mailed to adjacent and abutting property owners of record, their tenants or their agents, that are duly noted on the application. The failure to mail or receive such courtesy notice shall not affect any action or proceedings taken hereunder. 
(c)  Variances may be issued by the building official or his/her designee for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsection (g)(1) herein, provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation. 
(d)  In passing upon all such applications except those pursuant to subsection (c) herein, the building official or his/her designee shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity of the facility to be located on the waterfront; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this chapter, the building official or his/her designee may attach such conditions, limitations, and restrictions to any variance as the building official or his/her designee deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, a variance shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  Criteria for variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary in order not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(h)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying (i) that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as big as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
(i)  The building official or his/her designee shall maintain the records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(j)  Review and appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official or his/her designee may appeal to a review committee which shall be comprised of the director of resilience and public works or his/her designee, the city manager or his/her designee and the director of the department of planning, building and zoning by filing, within 15 days after the date of the decision complained of, a written notice of appeal which shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for appeal. The review committee shall set such appeal for hearing at the earliest possible date, and cause notice thereof to be served upon the appellant and the building official. The appellant shall have the right to present his/her position to the review committee which shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal. The review committee, acting by majority vote, and pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection (g), shall either affirm the building official's refusal to grant a variance or reverse the refusal and grant the variance. The decision of the review committee, which shall be rendered within 15 days after conclusion of the hearing, shall constitute final administrative review. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the review committee on an appeal shall be entitled to judicial review in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 12, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-12; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 20-13. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required herein is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific studies. Larger floods may occur. This chapter shall not be deemed to imply that the areas inside or outside designated flood hazard areas will be entirely free from flooding or flood damages, and shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 13, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-13)  
Sec. 20-14. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any requirements hereunder (including violations of conditions, restrictions, or limitations established in connection with any variances) shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-13. Each day such violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the building official or his/her designee may secure enforcement hereof by any legal action necessary, such as application to any court for injunctive relief, revocation of any permit issued hereunder or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 15, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-14; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-15. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective on January 10, 1993. However, 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those buildings for which a permit has been issued and is in effect or for which proper and complete application and plans have been submitted for building permits on or before the effective date of this chapter, provided that the construction under the permit shall be commenced and progressively carried to a conclusion within the time limitation for permits established in section 304.3 of the South Florida Building Code. Furthermore, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to buildings for which: 
a.  Plans and specifications as required by section 302.2, South Florida Building Code, were in actual preparation prior to December 20, 1992; 
b.  Said plans and specifications were substantially completed by December 31, 1992; 
c.  Applications for building permits accompanied by said plans and specifications, as completed, were submitted for building permits prior to January 10, 1993; and 
d.  Construction under said building permits is commenced and progressively carried to a conclusion within the time limitations for permits established in section 304.3 of the South Florida Building Code. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, the burden shall be on the applicant to submit to the building official or his/her designee competent, substantial evidence establishing compliance with these provisions. Such evidence may include affidavits sworn to under oath by registered professional Florida architects or engineers; dated worksheets of such architects or engineers; invoices; contracts and other tangible documentary evidence establishing compliance herewith. The term "substantially completed" shall mean that the plans and specifications referred to hereinabove are 50 percent or more completed as of December 20, 1992. 
(3)  Determinations by the building official or his/her designee, pursuant to this section, may be appealed to the flood damage prevention review committee in accordance with section 20-12 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11029, § 16, 12-10-92; Code 1980, § 19.5-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-16. - Schedule of fees. 
(a)  Application for waiver from Ordinance No. 11029: 
(1)  Residential ..... $ 210.00 
Each additional structure ..... 26.25 
(2)  Commercial ..... 394.00 
Each additional structure ..... 26.25 
(b)  Application filing fee for variance from Ordinance No. 11029: 
(1)  Single-family residential (per house) ..... $ 420.00 
(2)  Commercial, industrial or other (per building) ..... 840.00 
(c)  Appeal to decision of the building official or his/her designee: 
(1)  Residential (per house) ..... $ 473.00 
(2)  Commercial (per building) ..... 840.00 
(d)  Application fees for variances (after the fact). Application fees for variances (after the fact) shall be assessed at double the amount indicated above. 
(Ord. No. 11077, § 4, 7-22-93; Code 1980, § 19.5-16; Ord. No. 13142, § 9, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 20-17. - Fill prohibition for areas not covered by structures. 
With the exception of any legally permitted building or accessory structure, no other portion of a lot, as defined by the Miami 21 Code, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, that is below the crown of road or Miami-Dade County flood criteria maps, whichever is lower, may be elevated or filled so as to obliterate the natural contour of the lot. This section shall not apply to any work necessary to provide reasonable vehicular access to the lot or for any filling required immediately adjacent and in connection with construction or reconstruction of a seawall. 
(Ord. No. 13574, § 1, 11-19-15)  
Chapter 22 - GARBAGE AND OTHER SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to collect and dispose of garbage, etc., § 3(o); nuisances generally, § 3(p). 
City Code cross references— General services administration department, § 2-326 et seq.; throwing or depositing substances, etc., within city stadiums, parks and adjacent grounds, § 38-17; disposal of trash in city parks, § 38-63; control of marine pollution, § 50-96 et seq.; disposal of garbage, waste and refuse into marinas or yacht basins, § 50-237. 
State Law reference— State sanitary code, F.S. § 403.413. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Additional leased garbage container(s). The words "additional leased garbage container(s)" shall mean one or more additional garbage container(s) leased by an assessed property owner pursuant to sections 22-2 and 22-12 of the City Code. 
Annual franchise fee. The words "annual franchise fee" shall mean the yearly fee charged by the City of Miami ("city") to each franchisee who operates within the city limits and collects garbage and trash. See subsection 22-50(b) of the City Code. 
Annual specialized waste handling fee. The words "annual specialized waste handling fee" shall mean the yearly fee charged by the city to each franchisee which operates within the city limits and collects trash, excluding garbage. See subsection 22-50(c) of the City Code. 
Biological waste. The words "biological waste" shall mean solid waste that causes or has the capability of causing disease or infection and includes, but is not limited to, biomedical waste, diseased or dead animals, and other wastes capable of transmitting pathogens to humans or animals. The term does not include human remains that are disposed of by persons licensed under F.S. ch. 470. 
Biological waste collector. The words "biological waste collector" shall mean any private solid waste contractor who collects, transports or disposes of biological waste. 
Biomedical waste. The words "biomedical waste" shall mean any solid waste or liquid waste which may present a threat of infection to humans. The term includes, but is not limited to, nonliquid human tissue and body parts; laboratory and veterinary waste which contain human-disease-causing agents; discarded disposable sharps; human blood, and human blood products and body fluids; and other materials which in the opinion of the department of health and rehabilitative services of the state represent a significant risk of infection to persons outside the generating facility. 
Biomedical waste collector. The words "biomedical waste collector" shall mean any private solid waste contractor who collects, transports or disposes of biomedical waste. 
Bulky waste. The words "bulky waste" shall mean, but not be limited to, large items of household refuse such as appliances, furniture, accumulations from major tree cutbacks (exceeding ten inches in diameter and four feet in length and weighing more than 50 pounds), large crates and like articles which shall be placed out for city collection by residential unit owners paying for city service on a weekly basis. 
Certified recovered materials dealer. The words "certified recovered materials dealer" shall mean a dealer certified under F.S. § 403.7046, who handles, purchases, receives, recovers, sells or is an end user of recovered materials as defined herein. 
Collection area. The words "collection area" shall mean the entire boundary of the city at all times. 
Commercial business. The words "commercial business" shall mean and include all retail, professional, wholesale, and industrial facilities and any other commercial enterprises, for profit or not for profit, offering goods or services to the public. 
Commercial hauler. The words "commercial hauler" shall mean a licensed city franchisee that operates within the city limits and provides certain services to multi-family and commercial businesses including but not limited to garbage, trash, recycling, roll-off, and specialized waste handling service. 
Commercial landscaper. The words "commercial landscaper" shall mean an individual or organization registered with the city (see section 22-10 of the City Code) to provide grounds and landscaping services to residences and/or commercial properties within the city for grounds up-keep and maintenance. 
Commercial property. The words "commercial property" shall mean any hotel, motel, roominghouse, tourist court, trailer park, bungalow court, apartment building with rental apartments, cooperative apartments, and/or multiple-story condominium buildings and any other business or establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit as defined in this section. 
Commercial solid waste. The words "commercial solid waste" shall mean every waste accumulation, including but not limited to, dust, paper, paper cartons, cardboard cartons, excelsior, rags, garbage, plastics, metal containers, recyclable material, garden and yard clippings and cuttings, bulky waste and other waste which is usually attendant to the operations of commercial businesses or multifamily residences. 
Commercial solid waste and recycling advisory committee. The words "commercial solid waste and recycling advisory committee" shall be defined as an elected/appointed/selected body created for the purpose of providing advice and recommendations on commercial solid waste issues within the city in conjunction and cooperation with the department of solid waste. 
Commercial solid waste service. The words "commercial solid waste service" shall mean the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, recycling, solid and processable waste for all business, commercial, industrial, religious, health, educational, governmental and quasi-governmental establishments, including the collection and disposal of construction and demolition debris. 
Condominiums. The words "condominiums" or "condominium buildings" shall be deemed to mean any building or structure that evidences that form of ownership of real property which is created pursuant to the State of Florida Condominium Act, which is comprised of units that may be owned by one or more persons, and in which there is appurtenant to each unit an undivided share in common elements, except for properties excluded by City Resolution No. 11807, adopted on June 22, 1999. Any condominiums with three or more dwelling units therein shall be classified as commercial establishments for purposes of this chapter. 
Construction and demolition debris. The words "construction and demolition debris" shall mean materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter which normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project, including such debris from construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste, including material from a construction or demolition site which is not from the actual construction or destruction of a structure, will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. The term also includes: 
(1)  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from a construction project; 
(2)  Except as provided in F.S. § 403.707(12)(j), unpainted, non-treated wood scraps from facilities manufacturing materials used for construction of structures or their components and unpainted; non-treated wood pallets provided the wood scraps and pallets are separated from other solid waste where generated and the generator of such wood scraps or pallets implements reasonable practices of the generating industry to minimize the commingling of wood scraps or pallets with other solid waste; and 
(3)  De minimis amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or destruction projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry. 
Construction and demolition debris collector. The words "construction and demolition debris collector" shall mean any commercial solid waste franchisee who collects, transports or disposes of construction and demolition debris and shall be subject to a registration fee as provided for F.S. § 403.7046. 
Construction dumpster or roll-off. The words "construction dumpster or roll-off" shall mean an approved open metal container without wheels, with capacity up to 40 cubic yards, used at construction sites for the purpose of removing construction and demolition debris, which includes rock, metal and other materials which are heavy in weight or substantial in size, used in connection with a construction and/or demolition project. 
Container-on-wheels. The words "container-on-wheels" shall refer to the 96-gallon containers issued to residences by the city for automated garbage collection and are required to be used, once issued. 
Containerized waste. The words "containerized waste" shall mean and include refuse, not to include garbage as defined herein, which is placed in containers, plastic bags, and/or bulk containers not exceeding three feet in length or weighing more than 50 pounds. 
Curbside. The word "curbside" shall mean the area between the sidewalk and the street edge or, in areas without sidewalks, the area between the edge of the traveled portion of any public or private street and the property line. 
Department. The word "department" shall mean the city department of solid waste. 
Director. The word "director" shall mean the director of the department of solid waste. 
Dumping. The word "dumping" shall mean to throw, discard, place, deposit or bury any litter and/or refuse except where permitted. 
Dumpster. The word "dumpster" shall mean an approved metal container on wheels with a tightfitting solid top and a minimum capacity of one cubic yard or 202 gallons. 
Enforcement officer. The words "enforcement officer" shall mean designated agents of the city manager, acting by and through him/her, including but not limited to, sanitation inspectors, code enforcement inspectors, police officers, NET Administrators and NET inspectors. 
Fiscal year. The words "fiscal year" shall mean the 12-month period beginning October 1. 
Franchisee. The word "franchisee" shall mean a private commercial solid waste/firm that is granted a nonexclusive franchise by the city, to remove and dispose of solid waste from commercial properties, which is required to pay a percentage of its gross monthly earnings to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Franchise agreement. The words "franchise agreement" shall mean a non-exclusive agreement between the city and a qualified firm to provide commercial solid waste services, as defined in this chapter, within the city. 
Franchise fees. The words "franchise fees" shall mean the monthly percentage of gross receipts remitted to the city by each franchisee. See section 22-56 and section 22-50 of the City Code, as amended. 
Garbage. The word "garbage" shall mean every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of edibles, and any other matter, of any nature whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects. 
Garbage container. The words "garbage container" shall mean a galvanized metal, durable plastic or other suitable material container of the type commonly sold as a garbage container, including wheeled containers, of a capacity not less than 20 gallons and not to exceed 96 gallons, sufficiently strong to be emptied conveniently, or a bail by which it may be lifted, and a tightfitting metal or plastic top with handle, and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. The container must not have any inside structures such as inside bands and reinforcing angles or anything within the container to prevent the free discharge of the contents. The container shall be free of jagged or sharp edges. 
Gross receipts. The words "gross receipts" shall mean all monies, whether paid by cash, check, debit, credit, or any other legal form of payment, resulting from all transactions and activities in the franchisee's regular course of business and trade including administrative fees, garbage, industrial, solid waste, used cooking oil waste, environmental charges and fees, containerized waste services, fuel surcharge, construction and demolition debris, roofing materials, trash, litter, maintenance, compactors, refuse and/or rubbish collection removal and disposal services rendered, hand bag collection, recycling (excluding recovered materials at commercial establishments as defined by F.S. § 403.703), or from any other source related directly or indirectly from waste collection services, including, but not limited to, all income derived from the use of dump trucks, grappling trucks, roll-off trucks, trailers, roll-offs, boxed in, framed, fenced in, or otherwise designated storage areas, etc., containers, bagsters, chutes, and any other vehicles and equipment used for collection and disposal of any debris by the franchisee, exclusive of Franchise Fees herein and taxes as provided by law, whether wholly or partially collected within the city, less bad debts. Gross receipts shall not include income derived from the transportation, storage, treatment, collection, and removal of biomedical, biological, or hazardous waste as herein defined. 
Hazardous waste. The words "hazardous waste" shall mean solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed. 
Hazardous waste collector. The words "hazardous waste collector" shall mean any private solid waste contractor who collects, transports or disposes of hazardous waste and shall be subject to a registration fee as provided for in F.S. § 403.7046. 
Health and safety concern. The words "health and safety concern", for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any inefficient and improper method of managing solid waste collection which creates a hazard to the public health, causes pollution of air and water resources, constitutes a waste of natural resources, has an adverse effect on land values and creates public nuisances. 
Industrial wastes. The words "industrial wastes" shall mean the waste products of canneries, slaughterhouses or packing plants; condemned food products; wastes and debris from brick, concrete block, roofing shingle or tile plants; debris and wastes accumulated from land clearing, excavating, building, rebuilding and altering of buildings, structures, roads, streets, sidewalks, or parkways; and any waste materials which, because of their volume or nature, do not lend themselves to collection and incineration commingled with ordinary garbage and trash, or which, because of their nature or surrounding circumstances, should be, for reasons of safety or health disposed of more often than the city collection service schedule provided for in this chapter. 
Industrial waste collector. The words "industrial waste collector" shall mean any private solid waste contractor who collects, transports or disposes of industrial waste and shall be subject to a registration fee as provided for in F.S. § 403.7046. 
In-kind services. The words "in-kind services" shall mean those services for which no fees or charges are assessed, including service to city facilities and neighborhood cleanups as defined by the director. 
Landscape firm. The words "landscape firm" shall mean landscape architects, landscape contractors, landscape maintenance firms and all others doing work similar to that performed by landscape architects, landscape contractors and landscape maintenance firms doing business within the city. 
Large residential trash. The words "large residential trash" shall mean yard and garden trash weighing more than 50 pounds, bulky and noncombustible materials which cannot be containerized and weigh over 50 pounds, and other non-hazardous, non-construction, non-demolition, non-biomedical or non-industrial material too large to be bagged, bundled or containerized and weighing over 50 pounds. Large trash shall be placed out along with bulky waste for once per week collection. 
Litter. The word "litter" shall mean any garbage, rubbish, can, bottle, box, container, tobacco product, tire, appliance, mechanical equipment or part, building or construction material, tool, machinery, wood, motor vehicle or motor vehicle part, vessel, aircraft, farm machinery or equipment, trash, refuse and paper. 
Local government registration fee. The words "local government registration fee" shall mean the annual, October 1st through September 30th, charge assessed by the city to recovered materials dealers and other businesses deemed as being required to register with the City as a service provider in the designated category, commensurate with and no greater than the cost incurred to establish and operate a registration and reporting process limited to the regulations, reporting format and reporting frequency pursuant to F.S. § 403.7046, with regard to recovered materials, and other businesses of a designated category, their collection and disposal of same from commercial properties within the city. 
Minidump. The word "minidump" shall mean a disposal site, maintained by the department, where householders of the city may deposit trash and small trash. 
Modified recycling program. The words "modified recycling program" shall mean an operation approved by the department which provides for the recycling of recyclable material by a method varying from the requirements of section 22-19 or section 22-20 of the City Code. 
Mow. The word "mow" shall mean to cut down grass or similar growth with a mechanical device such as lawn mower. 
Multifamily residence. The words "multifamily residence" shall mean and include any building or structure containing four or more contiguous living units and intended exclusively for residential purposes. 
NET. The word "NET" shall mean the Neighborhood Enhancement Team. 
Neighborhood cleanups. The words "neighborhood cleanups" shall mean periodic intensive removal of litter, debris and other solid waste material from a designated area of the city, initiated or approved by the city, its NET offices and/or recognized community based organizations or associations including special event activities citywide. 
Noncombustible refuse. The words "noncombustible refuse" shall mean refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperatures (800 degrees to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit) such as metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, auto bodies or parts, and other similar material or refuse not usual to housekeeping or to the operation of stores or offices. 
Nonexclusive franchise. The words "nonexclusive franchise" shall mean a non-exclusive right and privilege granted to a qualified firm to contract to provide solid waste, construction and demolition material, and recyclable collection and disposal services to commercial and non-residential properties, as defined in this chapter, in, upon, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, easements and other public places of the city. 
Organic waste. The words "organic waste" shall mean a type of waste material which can be broken down into its base compounds by micro-organisms and other living things, regardless of what those compounds may be, and can be commonly found in municipal solid waste such as green waste, food waste, paper waste, and biodegradable plastics. The words "organic waste" specifically do not include waste as defined by the recoverable materials definition and the associated exemption under F.S. § 403.7046. 
Permit per account fee. The words "permit per account fee" shall mean the charge assessed by the city to a franchisee, for every account with whom it acquires or maintains an agreement during the fiscal year for purposes of providing commercial solid waste services. 
Plastic bag. The words "plastic bag" shall mean a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of one and one-half mils and not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity with a securing twist tie. 
Portable container. The words "portable container" shall mean dumpster, roll-away or other similar container designed for mechanized collection. 
Posting. The word "posting" shall mean to display by putting up on property in a public place of view. 
Produce market. The words "produce market" shall mean the area in which produce vendors congregate and sell their products bounded by NW 10th Avenue to the east, NW 22nd Avenue to the west, NW 23rd Street to the north, and NW 20th Street to the south. 
Public nuisance. The words "public nuisance," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean a container or roll-off/container which appears to be utilized for commercial solid waste collection with or without a city franchise agreement and poses a threat to the health and safety of the community. 
Recovered materials. The words "recovered materials" shall mean metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile, or rubber materials that have known recycling potential, can be feasibly recycled, and have been diverted and source separated or have been removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does not include materials destined for any use that constitutes disposal. Recovered materials as described above are not solid waste. 
Recyclable material. The words "recyclable material" shall mean those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste. 
Recycling. The word "recycling" shall mean any process by which solid waste, or materials which would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
State Law reference— F.S. Ch. 403, Environmental Control Part IV—Resource Recovery and Management, as may be amended from time to time. 
Refuse. The word "refuse" shall mean any garbage, garden trash, industrial waste, noncombustible refuse, rubbish, waste, bulk waste, containerized waste and/or solid waste. 
Residential unit. The words "residential unit" shall mean any structure used or constructed or modified or adopted for use as a single-family dwelling, duplex, cluster housing, townhouse or multiple-family apartment building or other similar structure containing three or fewer residential units, and which is located on a single lot, parcel or tract of land. Each dwelling unit of a duplex, cluster housing, townhouse, or multiple-family building or other similar structure shall be deemed a separate residence. 
Roll-off/container. The words "roll-off/container" shall mean a metal container, compacted or open, with or without wheels, designed and used by nonexclusive commercial solid waste haulers and/or other companies for the collection and disposal of construction debris, demolition debris and/or large quantities of trash and/or bulky waste, but not garbage or commercial refuse. 
Roominghouses/boardinghouses. The word "roominghouse" shall mean any legal nonconforming residential building used, or intended to be used, as a place where sleeping or housekeeping accommodations are furnished or provided for pay to transient or permanent guests or tenants which does not maintain a public dining room or cafe in the same building or in any building in connection therewith. The word "boardinghouse" shall mean an establishment where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation for five or more persons, and where most of the food is placed upon the table family style without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu. Boardinghouses may also provide lodging for compensation. The proprietor of a roominghouse or boardinghouse may receive or reject whom he/she wishes and usually makes special oral or written contracts with each of his/her lodgers concerning compensation and length of stay. 
Rubbish. The word "rubbish" shall mean refuse accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, and also any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water breeding insects; rubbish shall not include noncombustible refuse, as defined above. 
Safety inspection fee. The words "safety inspection fee" shall mean a regulatory fee pursuant to F.S. § 166.221, imposed by the solid waste director upon a franchisee for inspection of substandard, unsafe, or inoperable vehicles and/or equipment. 
Screening. The word "screening" shall mean a landscaped area with shrubs three feet in height at time of planting to form a continuous, unbroken solid buffer, or a five-foot-high fence or C.B.S. wall finished and painted on both sides to provide a visual barrier. 
Service unit. The words "service unit" shall mean four sleeping rooms or a fraction thereof, where no cooking privileges are provided, located in any commercial establishment. 
Small trash. The words "small trash" shall mean bundled and clean yard and garden trash, including shrubbery, vines, and branches capable of being gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed three feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds; all accumulations of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and leaf rakings, free of dirt, rock, large branches and bulky or noncombustible materials which can be containerized and not weigh over 50 pounds, per container; and accumulations of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes and shrubbery which are up to three inches in diameter and do not exceed four feet in length, do not weigh over 50 pounds, are too large to be containerized, but require and can be bundled and tied, and other non-hazardous, non-construction, non-demolition, non-biomedical material small enough to be bagged, bundled, or containerized or does not exceed three feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds. Small trash shall be placed out along with garbage for twice per week collection. 
Solid waste. The words "solid waste" shall mean garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural or governmental operations. 
Solid waste disposal and resource recovery facility. The words "solid waste disposal and resource recovery facility" shall mean any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction plant, transfer station or other facility, the purpose of which is resource recovery or the disposal, recycling, processing, transfer or storage of solid waste. 
Source separated. The words "source separated" shall mean the recovered materials are separated from solid waste where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. The term does not require that various types of recovered materials be separated from each other and recognizes de minimis solid waste, in accordance with industry standards and practices, may be included in the recovered materials. Materials are not considered source separated when two or more types of recovered materials are deposited in combination with each other in a commercial collection container located where the materials are generated and such materials contain more than ten percent solid waste by volume or weight. For purposes of this subsection, the term "various types of recovered materials" means metals, paper, glass, plastic, textiles, and rubber. 
Special events. The words "special events" shall mean events as delineated in subsection 22-171(a)(7) of the City Code and any other designated event designated as a special event by the city commission, city manager and/or designee. 
Special non-residential trash collection. The words "special non-residential trash collection" shall mean yard and garden trash weighing more than 50 pounds, too large to be containerized for commercial collection, clean and free of dirt, rocks, trash and any other debris. It includes accumulations from major tree cutbacks (exceeding ten inches in diameter and four feet in length and weighing more than 50 pounds). Collection by the city must be approved and scheduled by department prior to set out or fines will be incurred. 
Special residential collection. The words "special residential collection" shall mean a collection of non-hazardous, non-industrial, waste beyond the normal city garbage, trash, and recycling, including bulky waste and large trash, for which residents or property owners will be charged the cost of collection, disposal and the appropriate administrative fees. Such collection excludes asbestos, whole or used tires, oil, lead-acid batteries, mercury lights, combustible, hazardous, biomedical and biological waste. 
Specialized waste handler. The words "specialized waste handler" shall mean those companies whose primary business is limited to collecting and disposing of solid waste that requires special handling and management, including, but not limited to white goods, waste tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries, construction and demolition debris, ash residue and biomedical and biological waste. 
Specialized waste. The words "specialized waste" shall mean solid waste that requires special handling and management, including, but not limited to white goods, waste tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries, construction and demolition debris, ash residue, biomedical and biological waste. 
Specialized waste handling nonexclusive fee. The words "specialized waste handling nonexclusive fee" shall mean the annual fee paid to the city for the right to conduct specialized waste handling services in the city. 
Swale area. The words "swale area" shall mean the paved or unpaved area between the edge of the sidewalk or property line and the edge of the street. 
Temporary roll-off/container permit fee. The words "temporary roll-off/container permit fee" shall mean the charge paid every 90 days the account remains active, per account to the city for each large container and/or roll-off utilized by franchisees to provide contracted removal and disposal of waste from commercial constructions and demolition, renovation and other similar accounts which are of a temporary nature. 
Trash. The word "trash" shall mean garden, tree and shrubbery trash that is too large to be bagged, bundled or containerized, wooden or paper boxes or containers, and other accumulations of a nature other than garbage and bulky waste as defined herein which cannot be bagged, bundled or containerized for weekly collection. 
Waste-to-energy facility. The words "waste-to-energy facility" shall mean a facility which uses conversion technology such as thermal, biological or biochemical processes to breakdown raw feedstock to produce a beneficial by-product and/or digestate. In general, the primary objective of the conversion technologies is to convert waste into useful energy products that can include synthetic or synthesis gas (syngas), biogas, petroleum, commodity chemicals, or compost in order to support waste diversion from landfills and to reduce carbon emissions. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10232, § 1, 3-13-87; Ord. No. 10371, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10887, § 1, 6-20-91; Ord. No. 11184, § 2, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-1; Ord. No. 11352, § 2, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11444, § 1, 2-20-97; Ord. No. 11703, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13316, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-2. - Collection services, container usage, condition and requirements for placement location; city and commercial solid waste services. 
(a)  Garbage from single and multifamily residences of three units or less shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city twice a week. Hours and days on which containers are to be collected shall be as prescribed by the director. All small trash, containerized waste, and garbage to be removed by the city shall be placed at curbside in front of the property for removal by the city as scheduled by the director, in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian passage or impede collection by city forces. The director may make exceptions to these rules to accommodate disabled and elderly persons. Each residence in the city shall be provided with one city issued garbage container per each residential unit to accommodate all garbage, small trash or rubbish to be removed by the city. Garbage and small trash will be placed only in the container provided by the city for this purpose. Containerized garbage shall be placed at curbside no later than 6:00 a.m. the morning of scheduled collection and no sooner than the night before and containers shall be picked up at the end of the collection day. Single and multifamily residences receiving solid waste services by the city may elect to lease additional city issued garbage containers for an annual fee equivalent to 20 percent of the annual solid waste assessment fee set forth by resolution of the city commission. The leased garbage containers will be assessed on the property owner's tax bill on an annual basis, except as provided for in subsection 22-12(b)(2) of the City Code. Should the request for an additional garbage container occur after the annual assessment has been issued, payment must be made by check on a prorated basis. The lease shall be for a one-year period and cannot be prorated. 
(b)  Every commercial property shall utilize the waste collection services of a franchisee authorized to perform such services by the city commission. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the commercial establishment to properly dispose of all trash, waste and garbage generated by such commercial property. Each commercial property in the city shall have a sufficient number of scheduled collections, garbage containers, plastic bags or portable containers to accommodate all garbage, bundled garden trash or rubbish to be removed by the franchisees. Franchisees shall be required to remove all refuse placed or spilled within a ten-foot radius of the container being serviced. 
Any franchisee providing waste collection services who will be discontinuing its collection service to a commercial property shall give the department of code enforcement and NET service center, for the area where service will be discontinued, at least seven business days' prior notice of its intention to discontinue such service. The franchisee shall additionally mail to the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the commercial property a notice that it is discontinuing waste collection services for that commercial property. Duplicate copies of this notice shall be simultaneously mailed by the franchisee to the department and the NET service center for the area where such service will be discontinued. A commercial property which does not have current waste collection services being furnished shall be subject to having an administrative service fee imposed pursuant to section 22-93. 
All food service properties producing raw or processed organic waste matter as a major portion of their waste stream shall provide for the removal of such material a minimum of three times per week. 
(c)  The garbage or trash container site for commercial properties shall: 
(1)  Be situated in an easily accessible location for collectors; 
(2)  Be a platform constructed of concrete above ground level in the case of a commercial property, and shall be large enough to accommodate an appropriately sized dumpster for the facility being serviced; 
(3)  Be constructed in such a manner as to discourage or eliminate the possibility of rodents breeding under the platform; and 
(4)  Be screened from any street, alley, sidewalk or adjacent property. Such screening shall be maintained in perpetuity by the property owner. Screening shall be constructed of chain link fencing with slats (cyclone fencing) or wood picket fencing. 
Sunken containers are hereby declared to be hazardous to the health, welfare and safety of the residents of and visitors to the city and to the city's waste collection personnel. Accordingly, such containers shall immediately be replaced with approved containers and the holes where they were previously sunk shall be filled with clean, solid fill. 
Franchisees will be responsible for servicing of containers until such time as they have been removed. Commercial multifamily properties without service will be subject to administrative and service fees imposed pursuant to section 22-93 herein, should the city be required to provide service the property owner will be invoiced for service as required and at the cost associated with the unit structure provided in (b) of this section. 
(d)  All new commercial properties and/or structures, as defined in this chapter, shall provide a garbage and/or trash room as required and provided for in Ordinance No. 11000, the zoning ordinance of the city. Any existing structure, legally established but currently nonconforming with regard to Ordinance No. 11000, upon expansion of the existing structure by 25 percent or more of its existing floor area, or its repair or renovation at cost exceeding 50 percent of its current value as established in the assessment made by the Miami-Dade County property appraiser, shall be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter; any series of repairs and/or renovations during any five-year period shall require the property to conform to the requirements of this chapter. Additionally, a change in the use of any legally established, but nonconforming structure shall require such structure's compliance with the requirements of this chapter prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and/or occupancy by the building and zoning department. 
(e)  At no time shall any garbage containers, dumpsters or any containers, whether such containers are approved or not approved, be placed upon any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or in any public area or upon any property used by the public not owned or occupied by the person(s) placing such garbage containers, dumpsters or containers. 
(f)  The director or director's designee is hereby required and granted full power and authority to designate the location of containers and the number of containers to be kept at each location. Any waste containers which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter or which contain other defects likely to hamper the collection of or injure the person collecting the contents thereof are illegal. Such containers shall be promptly replaced by the owner or user of the container upon receipt of written notice of said defect. All containers shall contain identification of the private hauling company providing the service, and must be clean, kept closed, and free of graffiti. At no time will the department service any such illegal containers. Portable containers declared a public nuisance or to be unserviceable with no identifying marks visible to the code enforcement inspectors shall be removed at the discretion of the director. 
(g)  Newspapers and other salvageable materials defined as aluminum cans, glass bottles, metal and tin cans, shall be separated from all other solid waste material and may be placed in the container provided by the city for these materials or otherwise be recycled. 
(h)  Commercial containers located on public property shall be deemed abandoned and will be removed by the city at the owner's expense, pursuant to this chapter of the Code. Service is to be made from streets and driveways and trucks used for this purpose shall not be driven or parked on sidewalks at any time. 
(i)  Commercial property owners may request special collection of large yard and garden trash as defined herein by the department by calling for approval and scheduling, prior to setting out material. No approval by the department director or designee will be issued for said premise until the director has made a finding of compliance with the terms of this and all other chapters of this Code and other applicable regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10535, § 1, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 10654, § 1, 10-12-89; Ord. No. 11122, § 2, 2-17-94; Ord. No. 11184, § 3, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-2; Ord. No. 11352, § 2, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12400, § 2, 9-11-03; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-3. - Accumulation of waste; proof. 
The fact that any residential unit or any commercial property located in the city is occupied shall be proof that garbage or other refuse is being produced or accumulated upon such premises. However, a temporary residential vacancy, regardless of duration, shall not authorize a refund or excuse the nonpayment of any waste fee. Waste fees shall be chargeable on a pro rata basis on new residential units immediately following the building and zoning department's issuance of a temporary or final certificate of occupancy, or whenever the first waste is picked up from such unit by the city, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-3; Ord. No. 11703, § 3, 9-28-98)  
Sec. 22-4. - Plans for waste storage on certain premises to be approved before issuance of building permit; proof of commercial solid waste service before issuance of certificates of use or occupancy. 
Before building permits may be issued for construction of commercial property, as defined in this chapter, plans for storage of refuse must be approved by the director or his/her designee as to location, accessibility, and number or adequacy and the permittee has provided proof of a contract with an approved commercial solid waste franchisee for construction debris containers to store and remove debris. 
Failure to have or renew a certificate of use will be enforced pursuant to chapter 2, article X and nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing the City Code by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this Code. 
For any location with a previously issued certificate of use, which expires on an annual basis, the certificate of use holder must show evidence of a contract for commercial solid waste services with an approved commercial solid waste franchisee at the time of the annual renewal due date. Failure of the applicant to obtain a valid certificate of use will result in the following: 
After 45 calendar days after re-issuance of a certificate of use, a $262.50 penalty violation will be issued for non-compliance. 
After 90 calendar days after re-issuance of a certificate of use, a $525.50 penalty violation will be issued for non-compliance. 
After 120 calendar days after re-issuance of a certificate of use, a $1,050.00 penalty violation will be issued for non-compliance. 
Each additional 120 calendar days, a $1,050.00.00 penalty violation will be issued for non-compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12258, § 2, adopted July 25, 2002, amended § 22-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 22-4 pertained to plans for waste storage on certain premises to be approved before issuance of building permit and derived from The Code of 1980, § 22-4; Ord. No. 10128, § 1, adopted July 10, 1986, and Ord. No. 11703, § 4, adopted September 28, 1998.  
Sec. 22-5. - Duty to dispose of trash and prevent accumulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, occupant, lessee of, or other person responsible for any lot, parcel or tract of land on which residential units or commercial properties are located within the city to deposit, store, keep, or maintain, or permit to be deposited, stored, kept or maintained bulky or industrial waste, refuse attending the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and trees, except for the purpose of composting; rubbish including uncontainerized garbage, beer and soft drink containers, empty or broken bottles, and metal containers; and any other uncontainerized solid waste whatsoever upon such property, adjoining rights-of-way, easements or alleys, except as specifically authorized in this chapter. Property owners of unimproved property or owners, occupants, tenants and lessees of improved property shall be responsible for keeping the area around the dumpster(s) or container(s) in a clean and presentable condition as well as keeping the sidewalk, side parkway and swale area and other public rights-of-way clear of all trash and litter, and shall maintain their property in a clean, mowed, cut and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, grass strips, swale area or rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street. Every merchant, storekeeper or operator of a business in the city shall sweep or cause to be swept the sidewalks adjoining his/her respective place of business before 10:00 a.m. every morning, or as often as necessary to keep the area clean, on each day that such business shall be operated. Said sweepings shall be picked up and not swept in the gutter. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter: such failure may also serve as the basis for assessment of an administrative fee. 
(b)  Whenever it is evident that there is a violation of this section, the enforcement officer may do one or more of the following: 
Serve a notice of noncompliance, in a form prescribed by the director and approved by the city commission, upon the owner, manager, occupant, resident, lessee, franchisee or other responsible person by personal service, mail or by posting a copy in a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation exists. The enforcement officer may proceed with direct removal as outlined below. The enforcement officer may: 
(1)  Cause a code enforcement sanitation civil violation notice to be issued, in a form prescribed by the director and approved by the city manager, upon the owner, manager, occupant, resident, lessee, franchisee or other responsible person by personal service, certified mail, or by posting a copy in a conspicuous place on the premises where the noncompliance exists. If said noncompliance has been found to exist by the city manager, or the city manager's designee, such finding and determination shall result in an administrative service fee being assessed for such noncompliance in the amount set forth in section 22-93 hereof, with said fee being assessable for each day the noncompliance exists until the condition or conditions resulting in such noncompliance no longer exist. 
(2)  Direct the department to remove, remedy or eliminate the noncompliance and charge the property owner for a special collection service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-5; Ord. No. 11352, § 3, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11703, § 5, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 22-6. - Littering and dumping prohibited; dumping or burying waste without proper authorization; illegal dumping in area bulky waste transfer stations; engaging in business of solid waste collection without franchise; declared public nuisance; presumption. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city commission to prevent, in whatever way possible, the abuse of the environment of the city through acts of any persons that are generally classified under the headings of "dumping" and "littering," which acts severely burden the taxpayers of the city and adversely affect the attractiveness, public health, safety and welfare of the community for its residents and visitors. 
(b)  The city will provide sufficient litter containers to be placed in strategic locations throughout the city, with special consideration to be given to high density populations and heavily traveled areas, to be used for the deposit of litter by pedestrians only and not by abutting store owners or vendors. 
(c)  Prohibited act(s). The following shall be unlawful: 
(1)  Dumping litter and/or refuse in any manner or amount whatsoever in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, thoroughfare or any other public lands, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. The provisions of F.S. § 403.413, as amended, shall apply to all public rights-of-way within the city. 
(2)  Dumping litter and/or refuse in or on any freshwater lakes, canals, rivers or streams or tidal or coastal waters of the city. 
(3)  Dumping litter and/or refuse and burying waste in any manner or amount whatsoever on any private property, unless prior written consent of the owner has been given, and such disposal has been authorized via permit by the county health department, provided said litter and/or refuse will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws or regulations. 
(4)  Sweeping, blowing by mechanical means or dumping litter and/or refuse including stagnant water or dead animals into, upon or along the drain, gutter, alley, lane, sidewalk, street or vacant lot, or in any public or private premises within the municipal limits of the city. 
(5)  Causing, maintaining, permitting or allowing the accumulation of any litter or refuse on any construction or building site before, during or after completion of said construction or building. It shall be the duty of the owner, or the owner's agent, of the property in question to make adequate provisions for the disposing of debris and litter and to have on the construction or building site adequate facilities for the disposing of said litter and refuse and to make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof. Said arrangements and/or methods for disposing litter and debris shall be approved by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(6)  Disposing of the carcass of any dead animal, domestic or otherwise, by the throwing, discarding, placing or depositing of said carcass in or on any of the locations noted in subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(7)  Discarding of garbage, fruit, or other matter subject to putrefaction, rotting or decay at minidumps shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Minidumps are restricted to use by residents of the city for the deposit of bulky waste from residential properties. The method of transporting this waste shall be as prescribed in section 22-7 herein. 
(8)  Obstructing use of public facility, salvaging or vandalism by any person on the premises at which minidumps are located constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, lessee, employee, franchisee or other person from any commercial property to dump or cause to be dumped any material whatsoever from such commercial property at or upon any minidumps, public rights-of-way, city property or any unauthorized disposal location. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, franchisee, firm, corporation or other legal entity to collect, remove or transport any solid waste material for compensation from any location or premises within the city without first having been granted a nonexclusive franchise by the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to utilize the services of any commercial solid waste collector who does not have a valid city solid waste nonexclusive franchise. 
(g)  Declared public nuisance. In addition to, and not in limitation upon any enforcement action for violation of this section, it is the intent of the city commission to declare the dumping of litter and/or refuse in the city, as hereinbefore described and prohibited, a public nuisance and to subject violators of this section to the provisions of this chapter calling for removal of such a public nuisance through notice, hearing and a lien enforcement procedure if the city so chooses to remedy the prohibited condition. Any action taken pursuant to this section in enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be considered cumulative and in addition to penalties and other remedies provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(h)  Applicability of state and county laws. In addition to, and not in limitation of the provisions of this section, the provisions of F.S. § 403.413, also known as the "Florida Litter Law," and chapter 15 of the Code of Metropolitan Dade County, as amended from time to time, are hereby added to this Code of Ordinances and incorporated by reference herein. The city commission also respectfully suggests to any court finding persons guilty of violations of the "Florida Litter Law" that the provisions of F.S. ch. 948, "Probation," be utilized liberally in order to require such persons to expend appropriate amounts of time and effort gathering up litter and refuse at places within the city as may be designated by the court. 
(i)  Noncompliance with any section shall be punishable in a manner as provided in sections 22-6 and 22-93. Noncompliance may result in the city's taking such action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances, and a lien shall be imposed against the property for recovery of all costs involved. 
(j)  A civil fine of $500.00 per occurrence shall be imposed for littering and for illegal dumping by individuals and a fine of $1,050.00 per occurrence for littering and for illegal dumping when being done using a private vehicle. 
(k)  Pursuant to the provisions of § 403.413, Fla. Stat., the Florida Litter Law, the sanitation inspectors are designated as litter enforcement officers of the city, for the purposes of enforcing F.S. § 403.413, and section 22-6 herein. Such employees are designated and appointed as litter enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-6; Ord. No. 11703, § 6, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12835, § 2, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-7. - Method of transporting waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey, or cause to be hauled or conveyed, any solid waste including discarded building matter or discarded furniture upon or along public streets, roads or alleys except when the material transported is adequately secured in such manner as to prevent the material from falling or being blown from the transporting vehicles. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, waste or foreign matter of any kind. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation not holding a valid nonexclusive commercial solid waste franchise permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article II of this chapter to haul for hire any garbage or rubbish as defined herein within any area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-7; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02)  
Sec. 22-8. - Manner of handling garbage and trash; placing dangerous materials in waste containers prohibited. 
Proper handling shall mean the following: 
(1)  Garbage shall be drained of excess liquid and well-wrapped before being deposited in an approved container. 
(2)  All paper cartons and boxes shall be torn or broken down and flattened out by the depositor. 
(3)  All dangerous material such as broken glass, lightbulbs, razor blades, fluorescent tubes and all other hazardous material shall be considered as causing or likely to cause personal injury to collectors, and all such material shall be kept separate from other garbage and trash and deposited in a cardboard container and placed alongside the approved containers. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any regulation garbage or refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, hot ashes, tar, grease, chemicals, poisons or other hazardous, infectious, including animal or human waste matter (feces) or any other dangerous or highly corrosive material of any kind. The city will not be responsible for the collection or disposal of any such materials. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-8; Ord. No. 11703, § 7, 9-28-98)  
Sec. 22-9. - Responsibility of persons other than owners of premises for violations and for noncompliance. 
The owners or agents, management firms, managers, supervisors, janitors, rental agents, tenants or lessees of all residential homes, rental units and commercial properties shall be responsible under the law for complying with the provisions of this chapter. In every multiple dwelling occupied by three or more families, in which the owner does not reside, there shall be a responsible person designated in writing as such by the owner. These persons: the management firm, manager, supervisor, janitor, rental agent or the owner shall be severally and jointly responsible for seeing that the entire premises as well as the yards, sidewalks, grass strips, swale areas or rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street, and one-half of the alley or easement adjoining such dwelling are free from garbage, trash, litter, overgrowth, or any foreign material which constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-9; Ord. No. 11352, § 4, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11703, § 8, 9-28-98)  
Sec. 22-10. - Operation of business where wind regularly carries solid waste into street; fencing requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or occupant of any parcel of land to operate or permit the operation of any business upon such parcel of land when and where, by reason of the combined effect of the prevailing winds and the location, configuration, and size of the structures thereon, solid waste generated by the operation of the business or the customers or patrons thereof is regularly driven, carried, or conveyed by such winds in appreciable quantities into or upon any public street, unless and until such owner, occupant, or tenant shall have erected on each boundary of such parcel of land a proper fence to retain such material with only such openings for ingress and egress of a size and number as shall be necessary. It is specifically the responsibility of the owner, tenant, and occupant of any parcel of land to ensure that commercial landscapers and any other types of businesses and/or services that may generate solid waste of any form or description not be deposited in or upon the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-11. - Dumping on public right-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped or place or cause to be placed any refuse or rubbish of any kind whatsoever including tires, construction and demolition debris, biological or biomedical waste and hazardous material along the rights-of-way of the public streets, highways and roads of the city, regardless of whether such dumping is from a dolly, wagon, wheelbarrow, noncommercial flatbed, truck, van, car or any commercial vehicle. All such debris generated shall be removed by the premises owner at the property owner's sole expense and are specifically excluded from the regular bulky trash service provided by the department of solid waste. 
(b)  The provisions of F.S. § 403.413 shall apply to all public rights-of-way within the city. 
(c)  The following civil fines shall be imposed for violations of this section: 
(1)  By any person, $500.00 fine. 
(2)  From any commercial vehicle, $1,050.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-11; Ord. No. 11703, § 9, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 12835, § 2, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-12. - Waste fees. 
(a)  An annual waste fee, per residential unit, is hereby assessed upon all city serviced residential units as defined in section 22-1 and as set forth by resolution of the city commission. These fees shall apply to all single and multifamily residences of three units or less within the city and shall serve to defray the cost of waste collection and disposal. Effective October 1, 1999, the city may utilize the uniform method of collection pursuant to F.S. ch. 197, whereby residential unit owners shall pay for residential solid waste collection services on the tax bill, in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 197, as amended. If the city elects not to use the tax bill collection method then one-half of said annual fee amount shall be due and collectible on January 1 and on July 1 of each calendar year, beginning January, 1999. 
(b)  (1)  All fees billed shall be due and collectible upon receipt. The fact that any residential unit or any commercial establishment located in the city is occupied shall be prima facie evidence that garbage and other refuse is being accumulated or produced upon such premises; and temporary vacancy shall not authorize a refund or excuse the nonpayment of the applicable fee. In the event the city elects to use the tax bill collection method and upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all solid waste assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such liens shall be superior in dignity to all other period liens, mortgages, titles, and claims until paid. The lien for a solid waste assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a solid waste assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a solid waste assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. 
(2)  Separate billing for additional leased garbage container(s) for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017. For the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017, the owner of an assessed property which leases one or more additional leased garbage containers from the city for solid waste shall be charged the additional fee(s) per each additional leased garbage container as set forth in sections 22-2 and 22-12, which fee(s) shall be charged separately and billed separately to the owner by the city's department of solid waste; for the fiscal year(s) beginning October 1, 2018 and thereafter, the fee(s) charged for any additional leased garbage container(s) shall be charged and collected for each one year period by using the tax bill collection method as set forth in sections 22-2 and 22-12 of the City Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any Code provision to the contrary, commencing effective October 1, 1987, said date reflecting the date when the city was fully performing the services set forth below, an annual fee, termed supplemental waste fee, is hereby assessed against all provision of public right-of-way cleaning services by the city in accordance with the following schedule of services set forth below. "Daily" as used in this subsection means weekdays, Monday through Friday. 
(1)  Removal of illegally dumped materials or debris. 
(2)  Main thoroughfares and designated residential corridors in the city will be swept on a on a scheduled or as needed basis, as determined by the director of the department. 
(3)  Litter containers will be serviced, repaired or replaced and cleaned on a scheduled or as needed basis, as determined by the director of the department. 
(4)  Sidewalks in the city will be cleaned as needed. 
(5)  Approved special non-residential trash collection services will be collected by the city if cleaned, bundled and/or bagged and placed at curbside in front of the property that generated it on the scheduled residential trash collection day. 
(d)  The following annual fees are hereby assessed against all commercial establishments except residential condominium units and residential condominium associations as defined in F.S. § 718.103 (1997), and except cooperatives and cooperative associations as defined in F.S. § 719.103. For purposes of this section, residential condominiums and cooperative units shall not be considered commercial establishments. These fees are in addition to all existing fees contained in this chapter for the above cleaning services and are to be billed annually in advance in accordance with the fee schedule as set forth below: 
Usage Code 	Description 	Units Up To 	Unit 	Base Rate 	Rate Per
Unit 
CU01 	Apartments, Rental Property 	2 	Units 	$0.00 	$0.00 
CU01 	Apartments, Rental Property 	12 	Units 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU01 	Apartments, Rental Property 	50 	Units 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU01 	Apartments, Rental Property 	999,999 	Units 	$152.00 	$5.00 
CU02 	Hotel, motel and rooming houses 	2 	Units 	$0.00 	$0.00 
CU02 	Hotel, motel and rooming houses 	12 	Units 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU02 	Hotel, motel and rooming houses 	50 	Units 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU02 	Hotel, motel and rooming houses 	999,999 	Units 	$152.00 	$5.00 
CU03 	Retail 	500 	Sq. ft. 	$76.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	2,500 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	15,000 	Sq. ft. 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	25,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$229.00 	$0.00 
CU03 	Retail 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	500 	Sq. ft. 	$76.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	2,500 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	15,000 	Sq. ft. 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	25,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$229.00 	$0.00 
CU04 	Wholesale and storage 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	500 	Sq. ft. 	$76.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	2,500 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	15,000 	Sq. ft. 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	25,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$229.00 	$0.00 
CU05 	Manufacturing 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	500 	Sq. ft. 	$76.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	2,500 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	15,000 	Sq. ft. 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	25,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$229.00 	$0.00 
CU06 	Office buildings 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU07 	Open Areas (Parking lots, garages, auto sales) 	20,000 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU07 	Open Areas (Parking lots, garages, auto sales) 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU07 	Open Areas (Parking lots, garages, auto sales) 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU08 	Amusement parks, dog tracks, frontons 	300 	Fixed fee 	$508.00 	$0.00 
CU09 	Arenas, dance halls, pool halls, bowling lanes 	20,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU09 	Arenas, dance halls, pool halls, bowling lanes 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU09 	Arenas, dance halls, pool halls, bowling lanes 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU10 	Theaters 	100 	Seats 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU10 	Theaters 	500 	Seats 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU10 	Theaters 	999,999 	Seats 	$212.00 	$5.00 
CU11 	Hospitals 	100 	Beds 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU11 	Hospitals 	999,999 	Beds 	$254.00 	$3.00 
CU12 	Private schools 	10,000 	Sq. ft. 	$144.00 	$0.00 
CU12 	Private schools 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU12 	Private schools 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU13 	A.C.L.F. non-profit 	85 	Fixed fee 	$144.00 	$0.00 
CU14 	A.C.L.F. profit 	125 	Fixed fee 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU15 	C.B.R.F. non-profit 	85 	Fixed fee 	$144.00 	$0.00 
CU16 	C.B.R.F. profit 	125 	Fixed fee 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU17 	S.A.F. non-profit 	85 	Fixed fee 	$144.00 	$0.00 
CU18 	S.A.F. profit 	125 	Fixed fee 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU19 	Day care centers and nursery schools (non-profit) 	85 	Fixed fee 	$144.00 	$0.00 
CU20 	Day care centers and nursery schools (profit) 	125 	Fixed fee 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	500 	Sq. ft. 	$85.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	2,500 	Sq. ft. 	$102.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	15,000 	Sq. ft. 	$152.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	25,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	50,000 	Sq. ft. 	$229.00 	$0.00 
CU22 	Miscellaneous 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU23 	Marinas 	3 	Boat slip 	$0.00 	$0.00 
CU23 	Marinas 	12 	Boat slip 	$93.00 	$0.00 
CU23 	Marinas 	50 	Boat slip 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU23 	Marinas 	999,999 	Boat slip 	$203.00 	$5.00 
CU24 	Restaurants, lounges, bars 	50 	Seats 	$135.00 	$0.00 
CU24 	Restaurants, lounges, bars 	100 	Seats 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU24 	Restaurants, lounges, bars 	200 	Seats 	$254.00 	$0.00 
CU24 	Restaurants, lounges, bars 	999,999 	Seats 	$254.00 	$3.00 
CU25 	Pawn shops 	1,000 	Sq. ft. 	$135.00 	$0.00 
CU25 	Pawn shops 	5,000 	Sq. ft. 	$203.00 	$0.00 
CU25 	Pawn shops 	999,999 	Sq. ft. 	$212.00 	$0.00 
CU26 	Convenience stores 	0 	Fixed fee 	$127.00 	$0.00 
CU27 	Dade County public schools 	0 	Fixed fee 	$127.00 	$0.00 
 
  
(Code 1967, § 20-13; Ord. No. 9065, § 1, 1-24-80; Ord. No. 9208, § 1, 11-26-80; Ord. No. 9529, § I(K), 12-9-82; Ord. No. 9862, § 1, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 9932, § 1, 11-8-84; Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10136, § 1, 7-24-86; Ord. No. 10214, § 1, 2-12-87; Ord. No. 10371, § 2, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10600, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 11184, § 4, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-12; Ord. No. 11233, § 1, 3-9-95; Ord. No. 11631, § 1, 3-31-98; Ord. No. 11632, § 2, 3-31-98; Ord. No. 11694, § 1, 8-14-98; Ord. No. 11701, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11703, § 10, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11771, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 11807, § 1, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 11845, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 11945, § 1, 7-27-00; Ord. No. 12114, § 1, 9-13-01; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12475, § 1, 1-22-04; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-13. - Emergency powers of the director. 
In the event of a state of emergency declared by the mayor, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, the director, with the concurrence of the city manager, shall have the authority to suspend, modify or expand services provided by the department, as enumerated herein, in such emergency circumstances as national disasters, civil disorders or other circumstances as directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-12.1; Ord. No. 11564, § 10, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 22-14. - City and commercial collection of solid waste. 
(a)  It is the function exclusively of the department to collect and dispose of all wastes in the city except as authorized by the director and/or by law. The director shall have the power to establish the type, frequency and amount of solid waste collection service needed and to be rendered to all areas of the city and to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
In the event that a location has constrained space and/or topographical limitations, the director shall have the discretion to waive the requirements for minimum size or frequency of collection and impose requirements and frequencies better suited for the location in question. Such a waiver must be accompanied by adding recycling requirements where necessary at the same location. 
(b)  The city commission may authorize the collection of solid waste by commercial solid waste collectors if it is a commercial account as defined in this chapter. If private collection is authorized, the contract with the commercial solid waste collector shall be non-exclusive and include, but not limited to, garbage, trash and bulky waste collection and the number of collection days per week. In addition, for multi-family dwellings the contract must specify a minimum of a two cubic yard (2 CY) container or containers of sufficient capacity so as to avoid overflowing conditions with a minimum twice per week collection; two true and accurate copies of said contract shall be furnished to the director or his/her designee. The container must be capable of holding a minimum of one week's collection of solid waste for the number of units or size and activity of business establishment being served. 
The following standards for dumpster size and frequency of collection will be enforced. (7-30 gallon containers = 1 cubic yard): 
# of Units 	Container 
Capacity 	Minimum 
Frequency 
1—4 	2 CY 	2 x week 
5—8 	3 CY or 
2 CY 	2 x week 
3 x week 
9—12 	4 CY 	2 x week 
13—16 	4 CY or 
3 CY 	3 x week 
5 x week 
17—32 	6 CY 	3 x week 
33—48 	8 CY 	3 x week 
Over 48 	8 CY 	5 x week 
 
Note: Frequency will increase depending on amount of garbage generated. All equipment utilized by a franchised private hauler shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter. All containers shall be screened from the direct view of the adjacent property owner. The department reserves exclusively the right to collect solid waste from any city governmental facility, or any facility constructed or erected on city-owned or leased property, regardless of location. 
(c)  The director and the director's designated representatives are assigned the responsibility for enforcement of solid waste collection procedures enumerated herein. The city manager or designee has the authority to require the increase of frequency and/or size of a solid waste bin/container at solid waste generating dining establishments/restaurants or produce dispensing places if he/she determines that such locations pose an imminent hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare including but not limited to the presence of insects, rodents, continuous overflowing trash, and/or other potential health risks. 
(d)  Newspapers or other salvageable solid waste materials defined as aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, metal and tin cans, and which shall be separated from all solid waste materials as provided for herein shall be placed at the curb in a container provided by the city on the regularly scheduled recycling collection day or otherwise recycled unless otherwise designated by the director. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation not licensed therefor, other than the owner, lessee, or occupant of that residential building, except city personnel to collect or otherwise remove any newspapers or other salvageable materials which have been specifically placed for collection in the recycling collection program. The penalty as contained in section 1-13 is hereby applicable to violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10440, § 1, 5-19-88; Ord. No. 10654, § 2, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 22-13; Ord. No. 11703, § 11, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12400, § 2, 9-11-03; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-15. - Educational trust fund established from recycling program for scholarships to children of certain city employees; conditions for implementation and scholarship committee. 
(a)  The moneys received by the city from the recycling of newspapers and other salvageable materials ("recycling program") shall be separately received, maintained and accounted for in an independent fund account to be held in the same manner as a trust account by the city for an educational fund hereby established upon the conditions as set forth in this section. The funds received, pursuant to the city's recycling program, shall be the subject of a separate appropriations ordinance to be adopted by the city commission and separately awarded and approved by the city manager through his/her designee. Upon the accumulation of $1,000,000.00 in funds received through this recycling program, all interest, as it accrues upon such principal amount, shall be utilized, subject to the sufficient accrual of interest, to pay for up to 15 scholarships, awarded annually, to educational institutions for the employees of the department to attend educational programs or F.A.C.E. Code Enforcement certification, or for commercial drivers license certification; in addition up to 15 scholarships shall be awarded annually to college level educational institutions for the children or legal dependents of the employees of the department, as determined by the designated scholarship committee to have met the established requirements for such scholarships; each scholarship award shall not exceed $3,000.00 annually per person, per award. In the event the interest accrued upon the $1,000,000.00 in this fund is insufficient to pay for the full amount of each scholarship, a lesser amount of scholarship will be awarded by the scholarship committee. 
(b)  The scholarship committee will be comprised of three members—one member from the department of human resources; one member from American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 871; and one member from the department of solid waste staff. The scholarship committee will create the criteria for qualification for the awards which shall be approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 10654, § 3, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 22-13.1; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13318, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13330, § 2, 7-26-12; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-16. - Special collections, fees, extra charges. 
(a)  Special collections by the department or waste services not expressly provided for in this chapter may be performed upon payment of reasonable fees and pursuant to such conditions as may be specified by the director, such fees to be reviewed annually by the city commission. Whenever noncompliance of this chapter occurs, which necessitates the department to remove, rectify or remedy said noncompliance, the fee for such services, as indicated in section 22-93, shall be assessed upon the person responsible for the conditions which give rise to and cause the noncompliance. 
(b)  Refusal or delay in rendering payment for any special collection performed as outlined in this chapter shall constitute the basis for adding such unpaid charges to the regular waste fee assessment accruing against the property where such special collections are made, and are hereby imposed as special assessment liens against the real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved, and when delinquent shall bear interest and may be enforced and collected together with reasonable attorney's fees for such collection pursuant to the provisions of section 22-89 herein, when applicable. 
(c)  Free service. There shall be no free service rendered by the department for the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste. 
(d)  Governmental agencies. For any premises owned, leased or occupied by the United States of America or any agency thereof, the State of Florida or any political subdivision thereof, including any body politic and corporate created under the laws of the United States of America or of the State of Florida, the city may enter into contracts, negotiated by the city manager and approved by the city commission, with any such body or agency for the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, prescribing rates and charges to be paid by such body or agency in lieu of the rates herein prescribed; provided, however, that the charges to be paid by such body or agency shall not be less than an amount which is fair and equitable taking into account the cost to the city of such collection, transportation and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-14)  
Sec. 22-17. - Private disposal of waste. 
Any person may be issued a permit by the Dade County health department to dispose of garbage or solid waste materials accumulated upon his or her own premises by burial, provided that such method meets all specifications of the director of the Dade County health department and evidence is presented of compliance with zoning regulations, but such permit and the disposal thereby authorized shall not relieve the owner or occupant of the premises from payment of regular waste fees. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-15)  
Sec. 22-18. - Responsibility for removal of certain waste; collection and disposal of furniture, appliances, etc. 
(a)  Industrial waste, hazardous waste, and noncombustible waste shall be disposed of in the manner and at such locations as are prescribed by the director of the county public works department. Removal of industrial waste, hazardous waste and noncombustible waste shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, operator or contractor creating or causing the accumulation of such material. Upon approval of the director, collection of the aforementioned waste may be undertaken by the department at the expense of the owner, occupant, operator or contractor, provided that such collection and disposal does not interfere with other waste collection operations. The department shall not be responsible for collection or hauling of discarded building material, dirt or rock, nor shall it be responsible for collection or hauling of trees, bushes or other vegetation cut on private property before a certificate of occupancy is issued, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Special residential collection material shall not be permitted at curbside until advance arrangements have been made with the department for its removal. The cost of any special collection will be provided by the department and any legal form of payment must be received prior to the collection and shall be charged to the property from which the additional collection is made. 
During the week of, and not prior to the evening before the scheduled special residential collection date, all large trash and/or bulky waste shall be placed on the parkway between the sidewalk and the street pavement or along the curbline when it is immediately adjacent to the sidewalk in front of the property from which the trash originates where it will be easily accessible to the trash collection trucks of the city, but not in the traveled way on the street, road or alley. The city manager or designee shall have the full authority to designate the location or time of placement of large and small trash, bulky waste, clean vegetative bulky waste and special residential collections other than as described in this section, whenever unusual circumstances arise or, in the director's discretion, it is believed that additional or alternate areas or times are necessary. 
Trash or bulky waste shall not be placed adjacent to or within five feet of buildings, fences, utility, telephone or electric poles, fire hydrants, or in any other area that would make it inaccessible to trash collection equipment. 
For the collection of clean vegetative materials only, property owners or occupants shall also be subject to the provisions of subsection 12-15(7) of the City Code. 
(c)  All property owners or occupants serviced by the city shall have two options for disposal of their small trash and tree shrubbery trash. Owners or occupants of property may either containerize garden trash or bundle tree and shrubbery trash for city collection along with garbage or the owner or occupants may transport such material to the solid waste minidump facility. Bulky material which is containerized or bundled shall be placed at curbside no sooner than the evening prior to the scheduled bulk trash pickup day. 
(d)  City pickup procedures for small trash are as follows: 
(1)  Small trash items as defined herein shall be placed curbside for the city to pick up on the regularly scheduled bulk trash pickup day. 
(2)  Small trash as defined herein shall be tied in bundles (where possible) with material strong enough to support the weight of the bundle, such bundle not to exceed 50 pounds and be placed curbside for the city to pick up on regularly scheduled bulk trash pickup day. 
(e)  City pickup procedure for bulky waste and special residential collections. Bulky waste as defined herein will be collected by the department only from city-serviced accounts scheduled on a weekly basis. Special residential collections will be scheduled on a mutually agreed date with the account and in accordance with subsection (f)(4) below. 
(f)  Use of minidumps by property owners, or occupants: 
(1)  Minidumps are restricted to use by property owners or occupants. 
(2)  Dumping at the city minidumps of any material other than garden trash, shrubbery trash, small trash and other materials are designated by the department director. 
(3)  Loitering, salvaging and vandalism by any person at minidumps is prohibited. 
(4)  Special handling trash is prohibited from being dumped at minidumps. Special handling trash generated by property owners or occupants will be scheduled for pickup by the department. Special handling trash generated by landscape firms shall not be disposed of by such firm at a minidump. 
(5)  Any single dumping of garden trash and tree and shrubbery trash at a minidump in excess of five cubic yards is prohibited. 
(6)  Decal permits will be issued free of charge on an annual basis. The decal permits shall be conspicuously affixed to all vehicles used by landscape firms in transporting trimmings and cuttings. Landscape firms shall register annually with the department for completion and updating of permit application which will require: number of city accounts, identification of accounts, vehicles being used, and applicable local business tax receipt. Permits shall be revocable by the director for violations of ordinances and policies. Penalties shall range from temporary to permanent suspension of the issued decal permit dependent on the nature and frequency of violations or as necessary pursuant to chapter 31 of the City Code, for operating in violation of the city's business tax receipt ordinance. 
(7)  Landscape firms and gardeners are required to dispose of all garden and related vegetative materials only generated by them while doing business in the city to an approved disposal or transfer site. Landscape firms and gardeners providing services at single family homes and dwellings of three units or fewer, shall only be allowed to leave clean vegetative waste on the public right-of-way adjacent to property in front of the residential property, excluding alleys that is generated by the property, while they perform work on behalf of the resident. This will be allowed in front of the residence for no more than two days for clean vegetative bulky waste prior to collection day. Large vegetative waste and tree stumps are excluded from the above. Vegetative waste that results from the trimming or cutting of trees resulting in larger than 100 cubic feet (or a maximum size for clean vegetative waste piles is approximately 5' x 5' x 4' (five feet long, five feet high and four feet deep)) in volume shall not be left on the public right-of-way or in front of the resident's property. The property owner or occupant shall have the responsibility to haul away and dispose of said vegetative waste in a legal manner. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place discarded household furniture or furnishings, stoves, refrigerators and like articles at any place visible from the street, on either publicly or privately owned property, at any time under any conditions other than as set forth above. 
(h)  Until further noticed the department will collect special non-residential trash as defined herein from commercial properties, as defined herein, that are under contract for regular garbage and trash collection services with a nonexclusive commercial solid waste hauler. 
(i)  For special events, event organizers shall be required to obtain a permit from the city and make available garbage and recycling collection containers to be used at the event. The amount of collection containers will be determined based upon the expected attendance to the event. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10371, § 3, 1-14-88; Code 1980, § 22-16; Ord. No. 11703, § 12, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-19. - Recycling programs required for multi-family residences of four units or more. 
(a)  From the effective date of Ord. No. 13194, a multi-family residence of four units or more shall provide for a recycling program which shall be serviced by a permitted franchisee as determined by the city commission or a Florida recovered materials dealer with the authorization of the director of solid waste, and shall include, at a minimum, the following five listed materials: 
Recyclable materials: multi-family 
(1)  Mixed-paper, cardboard. 
(2)  Glass (flint, emerald, amber). 
(3)  Aluminum cans. 
(4)  Steel cans. 
(5)  Plastics, coded 1—7, see section 22-20 of the City Code. 
(b)  The failure of a multi-family residential establishment to provide a recycling program pursuant to subsection (a) or a modified recycling program pursuant to section 22-21 shall constitute a violation of this section, for which the property owner(s) shall be liable, provided, however, that in the case of a condominium or cooperative apartment, having a condominium association or cooperative apartment association, said association, rather than individual unit owners, shall be liable for any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-20. - Recycling programs required for commercial property; joint and several liability. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of the commercial establishment to properly dispose of all recyclable material generated by such commercial property. From the effective date of Ord. No. 13194, every commercial property shall provide for a recycling program which shall be serviced by a franchisee, as determined by the city commission or a Florida state certified recovered materials dealer with the authorization of the director of solid waste, and shall include a minimum of three materials of its choice selected from the following list: 
Recyclable material: commercial property 
(1)  High grade office paper. 
(2)  Mixed paper. 
(3)  Corrugated cardboard. 
(4)  Glass (flint, emerald, amber). 
(5)  Aluminum (cans, scrap). 
(6)  Steel (cans, scrap). 
(7)  Other metals/scrap production materials. 
(8)  Plastics (PETE, HDPE-natural, HDPE-colored). 
(9)  Textiles. 
(10)  Wood. 
(b)  The failure of a commercial property to provide a recycling program pursuant to section 22-19 or a modified recycling program pursuant to section 22-21 shall constitute a violation of this section for which the property owner(s) shall be liable, and the commercial business owner(s) and operator(s) of this commercial property shall be jointly and severally liable. Any penalties imposed pursuant to this section may include an administrative fee imposed pursuant to section 22-93. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-21. - Modified recycling programs allowed. 
(a)  Recycling programs which incorporate modifications substitutions, or reductions to the requirements of section 22-19 and 22-20 may be submitted to the department for approval. Approval, rejection, or approval with conditions of the proposed modified recycling program shall be determined by the department. The department shall consider the following factors in evaluating the proposed modified recycling program: 
(1)  Whether the establishment operates a recycling program, and is self-hauling the materials to a recyclable vendor. 
(2)  Whether the establishment generates a lesser number of recyclable materials than the required minimum. 
(3)  Whether the establishment generates and recycles materials not listed in section 22-19 or section 22-20 above, as applicable. 
(4)  Whether the establishment is contracting with a franchisee for collection services, which provide for a post-collection separation of recyclable material, and which: 
a.  Generate recyclable materials which comply, in kind and quantity, with the recycling requirements provided for in section 22-19 or section 22-20 hereof, as applicable; and 
b.  Utilize a materials separation facility which is permitted in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(b)  Any person seeking approval of a modified recycling program shall submit an application in such a form as is prescribed by the department. All modified recycling programs shall be reviewed on a semiannual basis and applicants shall be required to confirm or revise the information contained in their applications at that time. 
An application for approval of a modified recycling program shall include but not be limited to, the following documentation, as appropriate to the specific application: 
(1)  Supporting documentation to evidence self-hauling, activities, which shall include proof of source-separation activities and copies of receipts from recyclable material purchasers. 
(2)  A waste composition study of the waste generated by the applicant, which shall cover a representative time period of not less than two weeks. 
(3)  A copy of the applicable contract with a post collection separation facility, specifying materials and volumes recycled which are attributable to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 22-22. - Landscaper permit required. 
In order to operate within the city limits, all commercial landscapers/gardeners must register with the city by October 1st of each year (or within 60 days of their inception) and are required to obtain a city landscaping permit and display a decal on their front windshield. In order to maintain their annual permit in good standing, commercial landscapers/gardeners are required to abide by the rules and regulations set forth in chapter 22 of the City Code regarding solid waste collection and disposal as outlined in sections 22-10, 22-11 and other sections of chapter 22 of the City Code. operating without the city landscaper permit will result in a fine of $262.50, per occurrence. No renewal landscape permit will be issued if there is an open violation or unpaid balance from a prior violation. 
(Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Secs. 22-23—22-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN COMMERCIAL WASTE COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 22-46. - Engaging in business of solid waste collection and disposal; issuance of franchise agreement to private solid waste collectors. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall remove or transport any solid waste material over the streets or public rights-of-way of the city or its real property for hire or salvage without first applying for and receiving a franchise from the department to carry on such a business. The franchise required by this section shall be in addition to any local business tax receipt and other license(s) which otherwise may be required by law, including F.S. § 403.4046. A franchise will not be granted to a commercial property for the sole purpose of hauling the solid waste material of its own tenants or occupants. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial solid waste collector/franchisee to provide service to any property within 100 feet of a residential district between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed the property of the holder thereof. 
(d)  The city reserves unto itself the power to revoke all franchises granted pursuant to this chapter, to change or limit the rights granted, or to otherwise modify the franchises, in its sole discretion, by ordinance duly enacted by it. Such action shall not be deemed a taking of a property, contract, or other right of any franchisee, it being the express intention of this chapter to reserve unto the city, the power, in its sole discretion, to alter the methods of solid waste collection employed in the city, and the manner in which to provide for solid waste services delivered within the city. 
(e)  The city commission is authorized, from time to time, to grant one or more franchise(s) granting the right and privilege to operate a commercial garbage and trash collection and disposal system in, upon, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, easements and other public places of the city for the purpose of collecting all solid waste from commercial and multifamily establishments as defined in this chapter. 
(f)  The franchise(s) shall be granted only after the applicant for the franchise has responded successfully to the request for qualifications and filed with the purchasing department, an application, and such other documentation as may reasonably by required to establish that the applicant meets all of the requirements delineated in this chapter. 
(g)  The franchise(s) shall initially be granted for a period of five years, with three one-year options to renew, upon approval of the application by the city commission. The option to renew any franchise(s) for the additional three one-year periods shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18; Ord. No. 11703, § 13, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12599, § 2, adopted October 14, 2004, changed the title of § 22-46 from "Engaging in business of solid waste collection and disposal; issuance of nonexclusive franchise agreement to private solid waste collectors" to "Engaging in business of solid waste collection and disposal; issuance of franchise agreement to private solid waste collectors."  
Sec. 22-47. - Application for franchise. 
Applications for a franchise shall be made to the purchasing department upon such form and in such manner as shall be prescribed by the director of purchasing to elicit the following information and to be accompanied by supporting documents and such other information as may be required by the purchasing department: 
(1)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the names and business addresses of the principal officers and stockholders and other persons having any financial or controlling interest in the partnership or corporation. Provided, however, that if the corporation is a publicly owned corporation having more than 25 shareholders, then only the names and business addresses of the local managing officers shall be required. 
(2)  Character of applicant. The applicant for a franchise under this section, if an individual, or in the case of a firm, corporation, partnership, association or organization, any person having any financial, controlling or managerial interest therein, shall be of good moral character. In making such determination the following information, which shall be submitted by applicant, shall be considered: 
a.  Penalty history. If the applicant is an individual, a record of all convictions and the reasons therefore shall be provided by the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, then the record of all convictions and the reasons therefore of the principal controlling officers of applicant shall be provided. Provided, however, that in the case of a publicly held corporation having 25 or more shareholders, then only the aforementioned information applicable to its local managing officers shall be required. 
b.  Fingerprints. The fingerprints of the persons mentioned in this subsection, a full set of which, for each of such persons shall accompany the application. Such service shall be obtained from a public agency. 
c.  Business history. Whether such applicant has operated a solid waste collection removal business in this or another state under a franchise, permit or license and if so, where and whether such franchise, permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended and the reasons therefore. 
d.  Existence of business entity. If the applicant is a corporation, applicant shall submit proof of incorporation in good standing in the state of incorporation and, if a foreign corporation, applicant shall provide information certifying that applicant is qualified to do business in the state. If applicant is operating under a fictitious name, applicant shall be required to submit information that such fictitious name is registered and held by applicant. 
(3)  Equipment and method of operation. The applicant for a franchise shall possess equipment capable of providing safe and efficient service. In making such a determination and approving the method of operation for each applicant, the department shall require the following information: 
a.  The type, number and complete description of all equipment to be used by the applicant for providing service pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  A statement that applicant will use only city- and/or county-approved disposal sites for disposing of all garbage, garden trash, industrial waste, and solid waste material which applicant collects and removes, except those sites which heretofore have been approved by the State of Florida department of environmental protection. 
c.  The names of customers and the addresses of each location served by the company. 
(4)  Insurance requirements. 
a.  The applicant for a franchise shall maintain insurance as specified herein and shall furnish a public liability policy to the department and also file with the department a certificate of insurance for the policy written in the applicant's name. The certificate shall provide that the policy contain an endorsement requiring that the department shall be furnished with ten days' notice by registered mail prior to cancellation or material changes in the policies. The applicant shall carry in the applicant's own name an automobile liability insurance policy covering the applicant's operations with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage liability. The city shall be listed as an additional insured for liability. 
b.  A performance bond or an acceptable alternative in an amount equal to the contractor's previous 12-month franchise fee(s) paid to the city or a minimum of $25,000.00, whichever is greater, as security for any fee(s) due to the city under the franchise agreement(s) with good and sufficient sureties conditioned upon the compliance of the terms of this chapter in such form as required by the city attorney. Said performance bond, or alternative acceptable by the department, shall not expire prior to six months from the commencement of the term of the franchise agreement and any extensions thereof. 
(5)  Liability of the city and the department. The above insurance requirements shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or the department or any official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for injury to any person or damage to any property by the insured, the insured's agents or employees. 
(6)  Limitation on hours of operation. Private waste collection operators franchised by the city shall service their accounts, located within 100 feet of residential districts only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except as determined and defined by the director. Commercial corridors as determined by the director. 
(7)  Application form. Each application for a franchise shall be made on a standard form promulgated by the director of purchasing and shall include an affirmation that the applicant will comply with this chapter in all respects. 
(8)  Review and issuance. The completed application shall be submitted to the purchasing department. Upon receipt of a completed application, the director of purchasing shall consult with the director of solid waste to jointly review said application and, if satisfactory in all respects, shall make recommendations to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10440, § 2, 5-19-88; Ord. No. 11184, § 5, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-18.1; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13316, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12599, § 2, adopted October 14, 2004, changed the title of § 22-46 from "Application for nonexclusive franchise" to "Application for franchise."  
Sec. 22-48. - Denial of application. 
Should the director of purchasing propose denying an application for a franchise, the applicant shall be notified of such denial by certified mail not later than 14 days prior to the director of purchasing making such recommendation to the city commission. The notice of denial shall contain a statement of the reasons why the application is being recommended for denial. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.2; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 22-49. - Appeal from the recommended denial of franchise; appeal from revocation of franchise. 
(a)  The recommended denial of a franchise by the director of purchasing may be appealed to the city commission. The notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the purchasing department no later than 14 days after the receipt of the certified letter advising applicant of the proposed denial. 
(b)  The director of purchasing shall schedule a public hearing for the appeal. Said hearing shall be held not less than 14 nor more than 60 days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The city commission shall either affirm the decision of the purchasing director or direct the purchasing director to issue the franchise. 
(c)  The revocation of a franchise by the director of solid waste may be appealed to the city manager or the city manager's designee. The notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the city manager with a copy addressed to the director of solid waste no later than 14 days after the receipt of the certified letter advising franchisee of the revocation. 
(d)  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall fix the date and time for hearing the appeal. Said hearing shall be held not less than 14 nor more than 60 days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The city manager or the city manager's designee shall either affirm the decision of the director of solid waste or direct the director of solid waste to reinstate the franchise. Should a revocation and/or reduction in the number of franchisees occur, the city commission may add additional qualified applicants to the approved franchisee list provided that said list does not exceed the number of previously approved franchisees. 
(Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13194, § 2, adopted September 27, 2010, amended section 22-49 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 22-49 pertained to appeal from the departmental denial of franchise; appeal from revocation of franchise, and derived from Ord. No. 10128, § 1, adopted July 10, 1986; the Code of 1980, § 22-18.3, and Ord. No. 11837, § 2, adopted September 28, 1999.  
Sec. 22-50. - Annual franchise fees; franchise fees. 
(a)  Commencing October 1 of every new fiscal year, each and every franchisee shall pay an annual permit per account fee of $75.00, payable in October and prorated as provided by the schedule below for the first year only, for each account that was acquired or maintained through the fiscal year for purposes of providing commercial solid waste services. 
Month of 	Applicable 
Fee 
October 	$75.00 
November 	68.75 
December 	62.50 
January 	56.25 
February 	50.00 
March 	43.75 
April 	37.50 
May 	31.25 
June 	25.00 
July 	18.75 
August 	12.50 
September 	6.25 
 
(b)  Beginning October 8, 2009, each and every franchisee shall pay an annual franchise fee by October 1 each year of the franchise term (and of any extension thereof) in the amount of $7,500.00, with such franchise fee being increased by $500.00 per year beginning October 1, 2010. Failure to remit the required annual franchise fee by the due date shall result in a one and one-half percent penalty per month on the balance due. 
(c)  Beginning October 8, 2009, each and every franchisee whose primary business is limited to solid waste that requires special handling and management shall pay an annual specialized waste handling permit fee by October 1 each year of the franchise term (and of any extension thereof) in the amount of $3,500.00 for the right to provide only specialized waste handling services within the city limits. If a franchisee is providing only specialized waste handling services within the city, then annual franchise fee will increase by $500.00 per year beginning October 1, 2010. Failure to remit the required annual franchise fee by the due date shall result in a one and one-half percent penalty per month on the balance due. 
(d)  Beginning October 1, 2015, each and every franchisee shall pay the city a $500.00 safety inspection fee if a franchisee's vehicle(s) or equipment is believed to be defective, inoperable, substandard, or potentially unsafe as determined by the director of solid waste. This is a regulatory fee as referenced in F.S. § 166.221. This fee is for the municipal inspection of the vehicles being used by franchisee within the city. The applicable vehicles are those operated by franchisee within the city boundaries. The vehicles will include, but are not limited to, roll-offs, grapple trucks, front and rear end loaders, vactor trucks, dump trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles used for business, collection and disposal of any debris by the franchisee. 
(e)  Certified recovered materials dealers excluded from local franchise requirements pursuant to F.S. § 403.7046 shall be required to submit an annual registration form and pay a $100.00 registration fee per year beginning October 1st, 2015, to the city for an annual period which will begin October 1st and end September 30th of the following year. (See certified recovered materials dealer registration form). 
(f)  The franchise fee may be amended or adjusted from time to time. Any monthly percentage of gross receipts payable, as amended, or adjusted, will automatically apply to the franchise agreement. The city and franchisee will promptly execute any addendum or amendment recognizing the franchisee's obligation to pay such adjusted or amended fee as of the effective date of such amendment. If the franchisee fails to pay the adjusted franchise fee, or fails to comply with any addendum or amendment to the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall be deemed in default of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10440, § 3, 5-19-88; Code 1980, § 22-18.4; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 12835, § 2, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 13108, § 5, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13316, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13316, § 2, adopted March 8, 2012, changed the title of section 22-50 from "Franchise fees; permit per account fee(s); annual franchise fee; annual specialized waste handling fee; annual safety inspection fee(s)" to "Franchise fees." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 22-51. - Recycling requirements for franchisees. 
Each and every franchisee shall submit the following to the solid waste director at the following intervals: 
(1)  Annually, an "annual recycling plan" that describes recycling activities and services available to commercial and residential establishments in the city that are offered by the franchisee. 
(2)  Annually, an "annual recycling report" that describes resources and money of the franchisee utilized in connection with the recycling program, a list of recycling accounts, and a list of accounts that do not avail themselves of the franchisee's recycling opportunities and reasons for same. 
(3)  Quarterly, a report describing recycling and diversion goals and recycling/diversion accomplishments. 
(4)  Annually, copies of literature provided to each customer in English, Spanish, and Creole describing the franchisee's recycling programs and services available. 
Any franchisee servicing an address that engages in the sale of produce located within the produce market shall, no later than October 1, 2016, offer an organic waste recycling program. Said program shall utilize composting and/or any other organic waste recycling program which diverts organic waste from a disposal site to a city waste-to-energy facility. 
All franchisees shall divert, at a minimum, a portion of organic waste collected to the city's waste-to-energy facility, should said facility become available in the future. The minimum required organic waste contribution to the city's waste-to-energy facility shall be set by the solid waste director as a percentage of the franchisee's total solid waste tonnage each year, effective October 1 of that year. Said percentage formula shall be uniform for all franchisees. 
(Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13531, § 2, adopted July 9, 2015, amended section 22-51 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 22-51 pertained to reimbursement for unused portion of permit and license, and derived from Ord. No. 10128, § 1, adopted July 10, 1986; Ord. No. 10440, § 5, adopted May 19, 1988; the Code of 1980, § 22-18.6; Ord. No. 11703, § 14, adopted September 28, 1998; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, adopted September 28, 1999, and Ord. No. 12885, § 1, adopted February 8, 2007.  
Sec. 22-52. - Identification of equipment. 
All equipment utilized to collect and transport solid waste in the city must be conspicuously marked on both sides of the automotive unit with the name of the hauler, tare weight, cubic yard capacity, and a decal issued by the city. Identification information must also be marked on all trailer and container units. All markings must be in letters and numerals at least two inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.8; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15)  
Sec. 22-53. - Information required of franchisees. 
(a)  At least annually or as determined by the director, each franchisee shall supply the following information on a form, format, and in the manner prescribed by the director: 
(1)  A listing, as of the reporting date, of the names and addresses of customers and the addresses and folio numbers of each location served. 
(2)  An accounts receivable aging report for each customer within the city. 
(3)  The number and capacity of each dumpster and compactor per account. 
(4)  The address serviced by each dumpster and compactor. 
(5)  The list of accounts within the city for which hand collection of bags/containers is provided. 
(6)  The listing of city accounts that were charged-off as bad debts. 
(7)  A list of vehicles and equipment to be used in the city. 
(b)  No property owner may share an account with another property owner. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.9; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-54. - Change in required information. 
Each franchisee shall file any change in its required information with the director in writing on a form prescribed by the director prior to becoming effective. 
(Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12258, § 2, adopted July 25, 2002, amended § 22-54 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 22-54 pertained to a change in rates and derived from the Code of 1980, § 22-18.10 and Ord. No. 10128, § 1, adopted July 10, 1986.  
Sec. 22-55. - Disposal required at city- and/or county-approved facilities. 
(a)  Any and all solid waste material collected by a franchisee within the city shall be disposed of only at the solid waste disposal facilities provided, operated and designated or approved by the department and/or the county public works department and at no other location or facility except those which have heretofore been approved by the State of Florida department of environmental protection. 
(b)  All franchisees shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all implementing resolutions of the city commission. The city shall use the reports required in this chapter and other information available to determine compliance of permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.11; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02)  
Sec. 22-56. - Franchise fee requirement; monthly franchise fee payment; approval by city commission as a prerequisite to issuance; financial statements, list of accounts; account permit fees; roll-off permit fees. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of removing or disposing of garbage, trash, or waste from any premises in the city or transport garbage, trash or waste through the public rights-of-way of the city without first having secured a franchise for such activities and paying all fees associated with the operation of the franchise as determined by the city. All persons shall be required to obtain a franchise from the city in order to engage in commercial solid waste collection and disposal from any streets, public rights-of-way or property in the city. These fees shall be in addition to the occupational permit tax ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Effective October 1, 1994, all city-franchised commercial solid waste haulers will be required to pay to the city a franchise fee of eight percent of the franchisee's monthly total gross receipts. Said franchise fee shall be increased to 12 percent effective October 1, 1995, and to 15 percent effective October 1, 1996. Said franchise fee shall be further increased to 22 percent, effective October 1, 2004. Said franchise fee shall be further increased to 24 percent, effective October 8, 2009. The franchisee shall, on or before the last day of each month, deliver to the solid waste department a true and correct statement of gross receipts generated during the previous month from its services rendered within the city on or before the last day of each month. Payments of said fee shall be made on a monthly basis to the solid waste department, on or before the last day of each month, representing gross receipts collected the previous month. The franchisee shall on or before 90 days following the close of each fiscal year deliver to the director a certified statement of its annual gross receipts and charge-offs generated from accounts within the city prepared by an independent certified public accountant ("CPA"), admitted to practice in the state, reflecting gross receipts within the city for the preceding fiscal year. The CPA statement shall render an unqualified opinion, based on the result of the audit, relative to the franchisee's accounting of all revenues, fees and charge-offs generated from accounts and activities within the city limits. The franchisees will allow city auditors, during regular business hours after reasonable notice, to audit, inspect and examine the franchisees' fiscal books and records and tax returns, insofar as they relate to city accounts, to confirm the franchisees' compliance with this section. In the event the franchisee fails to pay the full franchise fee percentage of the franchisee's total monthly gross receipts, the city shall charge a penalty of one and one half percent per month on the outstanding balance until paid and additionally the franchisee shall have to pay all expenses of collection, including court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(c)  To effectively provide for the payment of said franchise fee by the franchisees to the city, any person seeking to renew his/her annual local business tax receipt pursuant to the provisions of chapter 31 of this Code shall, in addition to the requirements set forth therein, provide the city finance department with evidence of all fees imposed by the provisions of this chapter as a condition to reissuance or renewal of said business permit. 
(d)  Issuance of a franchise shall require city commission approval for the franchise referenced in section 22-47 of this chapter. 
(e)  The director is authorized to suspend, revoke, or cancel any such franchise for failure to comply with any of the terms hereof, in accordance with the same practice and procedures as are set forth in section 22-48 of this chapter; providing, however, that the director shall afford an existing franchisee a written notice reasonably specifying the reason(s) for the proposed revocation or suspension of an existing franchise, and the franchisee shall be afforded 14 business days to cure the noncompliance stated in such notice. 
(f)  Any decision of the director under the terms of this section may be reviewed, upon written request of the aggrieved franchisee made to the city manager in accordance with the same time period and procedure as are set forth by section 22-49, City Code. 
(Ord. No. 10440, § 7, 5-19-88; Ord. No. 11184, § 6, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-18.12; Ord. No. 11444, § 2, 2-20-97; Ord. No. 11634, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13108, § 5, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13531, § 2, 7-9-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13194, § 2, adopted September 27, 2010, changed the title of section 22-56 from "Franchise fee requirement; monthly franchise fee payment; approval by director as a prerequisite to issuance; financial statements, list of accounts; account permit fees; roll-off permit fees" to "Franchise fee requirement; monthly franchise fee payment; approval by city commission as a prerequisite to issuance; financial statements, list of accounts; account permit fees; roll-off permit fees." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 22-57. - List of qualifications for franchises; term; nontransferability; rules and regulations; tests, inspections and audits. 
(a)  The city may franchise commercial solid waste haulers as defined herein to provide service to commercial establishments as set forth in this article. The franchises issued, however, shall not limit the right to renew local business tax receipts prior to the effective date of this amendment and, further, will not impair existing written contracts between a franchisee and that of a commercial establishment which are in full force and effect on the effective date hereof and said contract does not exceed the effective date of the franchise. Each applicant for the franchise shall respond to a request for qualifications issued by the procurement department. The request for qualifications shall include, as minimum qualifications to be considered in the granting of such franchise: 
(1)  Certification that the applicant has satisfied all requirements of chapter 22 of the Code of the City of Miami. 
(2)  Certification that the applicant has never defaulted on any governmental franchises, contracts, permits or bid awards. 
(3)  Certification that no subsidiary affiliate, or parent corporation or business entity of the applicant already has, or has applied for, an existing franchise. Franchises will not be issued to a subsidiary, affiliate or parent company of an existing franchisee, or any franchisee. 
(4)  Certification that the applicant (or, if renewal, the franchise) is not and will not be, throughout the term that it has a franchise, affiliated with an affiliated entity of any existing franchisee, or any applicant for a franchise under this article, as a parent, or subsidiary, or by virtue of an interlocking directorate or otherwise. 
(b)  Term. Said franchise shall be valid for a period of five years from date of issuance with three one-year options to renew, and, at the expiration or earlier cancellation or revocation thereof, the city may choose to accept applications for a new franchise conditioned and limited as noticed above or, in the alternative, renew the permit issued for an additional three one-year option periods. The option to renew said franchise for the additional three-year period shall be at the sole discretion of the city. In deciding to issue a new franchise and/or accepting applications from applicants for a franchise, the city will consider the following factors: 
(1)  The franchisee's full and faithful compliance with the terms of this chapter; 
(2)  The franchisee's and/or applicants who best meet the qualifications established by this section for the issuance of the franchise; and 
(3)  The current garbage, trash and waste disposal needs of the city, including, without limitation, population, demographic and geographic needs. 
(c)  Transferability. The franchises granted pursuant to this section shall not be transferable by way of assignment, sale, pledge, or other conveyance. Upon change of ownership, including transference of a majority (51 percent or more) of stock and/or partnership shares, of any company to which a franchise has been issued, a new franchise will be granted by the city commission if the new owner satisfies the requirements of this article. 
(d)  The franchise provided for by this article is to ensure and facilitate a minimum standard of municipal regulation of commercial waste collection within the city, to provide uniformity and quality of service from the franchises granted hereunder, and to assure that the citizens of Miami have safe, efficient, sanitary, permitted regulated and qualified solid waste, garbage and trash disposal contractors. 
(e)  The city may, at reasonable times during the term hereof, inspect any franchisee's facilities and perform such test, as the city deems reasonably necessary, to determine whether the goods or services required to be provided by franchisee under its franchise conform to the terms thereof, if applicable. Each franchisee shall make available to the city reasonable facilities and render assistance to facilitate the performance of all tests and/or inspections by city representatives. All tests and inspections shall be subject to, and made in accordance with the provisions of this Code, as the same may be amended or supplemented from time to time. Each franchisee shall allow city auditors, during regular business hours and after reasonable notice, to audit, inspect and examine the franchisee's financial records (as they relate to city revenue) including all fiscal books and records, sales tax returns, bank statements, general ledger (vouching city revenue to the general ledger) contract(s)/agreement(s) between franchisee and customer(s) and any other financial information deemed necessary, in so far as such other financial information relates to city accounts, as well as the franchisee's entire customer base, in order to confirm the franchisee's compliance with its franchise agreement. Each franchisee shall pay a one and one-half percent penalty per month on any monies due and owing to the city, as a direct result of an audit, from whatever applicable revenue stream during the term of the franchise agreement. If a city audit reveals that a franchisee under-reported gross receipts, and the audit shows additional revenue due to the city in an amount per fiscal year of $20,000.00 or more, franchisee shall pay to the city the cost of conducting the audit. Upon audit notification, a franchisee shall deliver all financial and other books and records to the city at no cost to the city. Each franchisee shall allow city auditors to copy any financial related source documents when deemed necessary to substantiate an audit finding. 
(Ord. No. 10440, § 7, 5-19-88; Code 1980, § 22-18.13; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12599, § 2, adopted October 14, 2004, changed the title of § 22-57 from "List of qualifications for franchises; term; nontransferability; rules and regulations" to "List of qualifications for franchises; term; nontransferability; rules and regulations; tests, inspections and audits."  
Sec. 22-58. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  The city reserves unto itself the power to revoke all franchises pursuant to this chapter of the Code. 
(b)  The violation of any of the terms and conditions of this Code which endanger the public health, safety and welfare or the violation of any of the terms and conditions of the franchise shall be cause for revocation of a franchise. 
(c)  The director may revoke a franchise for a violation or violations as aforementioned and may immediately declare such franchise null and void, and upon such declaration, franchisee shall immediately cease all operations, and shall be considered to have forfeited said franchise and the rights acquired thereunder. Should the director decide to revoke a franchise, he/she shall provide the franchisee with notice of such revocation and the reasons therefore. Upon receipt of such notice, the franchisee may appeal said revocation to the city manager or the city manager's designee and the appeal and hearing thereon shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 22-49. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.14; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 22-59. - Procedure upon violation of sections 22-46 through 22-58. 
Any violation of sections 22-46 through 22-58 herein may result in action taken by the director pursuant to section 22-93 herein, and such action shall be cumulative in nature and not the exclusive action available to the director. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-18.15)  
Secs. 22-60—22-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 22-86. - Waste fees; implementation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of each lot, tract or parcel of land in the city having a residential unit situated thereon, except as may otherwise be provided herein, to pay or cause to be paid the waste fee or fees due for each residential unit or commercial establishment, as the case may be, as provided for in section 22-12 and section 22-87 herein, and failure on the part of such owner to make such payment shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Each person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity who is the owner of each lot, tract or parcel of land in any area in the city shall pay for residential waste collection service as billed directly by the city or, at the discretion of the city, on the tax bill to and in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 197. Other special collection billings will be billed as authorized by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 11184, § 7, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-23)  
Sec. 22-87. - Schedule of waste collection and disposal fees; records to be kept. 
(a)  Any special collections which exceed the normal weekly trash collection will be charged according to equipment and manpower usage. 
(b)  The department shall maintain complete and accurate records of the costs and expenditures for providing waste collection services, and shall provide the city manager and the city commission with periodic statements and reports showing such costs and expenditures. The city commission shall make periodic adjustment of the fees, assessments and charges for waste collection and disposal services in accordance with the cost analysis of providing such services. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 11184, § 8, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-24; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02)  
Sec. 22-88. - Payment of waste fees. 
(a)  All payment of waste fees shall be payable in advance on or before the due date annually based on the method deemed most appropriate and cost effective by the city manager. In the event that payment of said waste fees is by check made payable to the city and said check is returned by the bank due to insufficient funds or any other reason not the fault of the bank or the city, a charge of $20.00 shall be added to the waste fee due to cover administrative costs incurred by the city. In addition, late charges and interest on past due accounts shall be charged as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The finance director shall give notice to the owner of the property at the owner's last known mailing address, as disclosed by city records or by the county tax rolls, or at the property's address, or upon any occupant thereof. If the address of the owner is unknown to the finance director, and if the property is unoccupied and the owner thereof has no agent or employee available for service of such notice, the posting of a notice upon such property by the finance director shall constitute and be sufficient notice to the owner thereof. All methods of giving notice as provided for herein are cumulative and independent of the other, and the finance director may use one or all of the same as the finance director may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 11184, § 9, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-26; Ord. No. 11276, § 2, 7-13-95)  
Sec. 22-89. - Waste and right-of-way cleaning fees shall constitute special assessment liens against all improved real property. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all owners of improved real property in the city are required to have accumulations of garbage, bulky waste, and solid waste removed by the department, and for such governmental service of garbage, bulky waste and solid waste collection, or the availability of such service, all such improved real property shall be liable for the payment of the waste and right-of-way cleaning fees set forth in this chapter. All such fees becoming due and payable on and after January 1, 1983, shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as, special assessment liens against the real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of city and county ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Such fees shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 60 days after the due date. Total outstanding balance for delinquent fees and related charges shall bear an interest charge of one percent per month, on any and all of the outstanding balance of such fees due, and if not fully paid with all accrued interest by the due date of the next succeeding waste fee payment, will continue to accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month. Unpaid and delinquent fees, together with accrued interest, shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved. Such special assessment liens for waste and right-of-way cleaning fees and interest and costs may be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85, or in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions of F.S. ch. 173, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The owner and/or operator shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and abstracting and related lien expenses imposed by virtue of this chapter. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all waste fees due and unpaid for the period from January 1, 1981, until December 31, 1982, shall constitute special assessment liens against all improved real property for which waste collection and disposal services were provided or made available. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all waste fees due and unpaid for the period from March 1, 1980, until January 1, 1981, shall constitute special assessment liens against all improved real property for which waste collection and disposal services were provided or made available, unless the present owner and record title holder of the particular real property involved shall fully pay all waste fees maturing since such owner acquired title, including current waste fees, and shall file with the finance department a verified statement showing that the property involved was purchased in good faith for valuable consideration and that a transfer of title was not accomplished for the purpose of avoiding payment of delinquent waste fees, on a date subsequent to March 1, 1980, and giving the full and correct legal description and street address of the property involved, and the name and address of the former owner, if known, and such other information as may be reasonably required by the finance department. Thereupon, such present owners shall be required to pay such waste fees for the period from March 1, 1980, until January 1, 1981, during which period they were the record title holders of the property involved, and current waste fees. Provided further, that waste fees becoming due and unpaid prior to January 1, 1981, shall constitute special assessment liens only if the finance department shall cause to be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Dade County, Florida, on or before December 31, 1983, a notice of lien or statement showing a legal description of the real property against which the lien is claimed and its location by street and number, and the name of the owner as reflected by the records of the finance department, and an accurate statement of the total amount of unpaid and delinquent waste fees claimed to be due as of January 1, 1981, and a copy of such notice of lien shall be mailed to the owner of the property involved, as shown by the records of the finance department. Such notices of liens shall be filed in a special waste lien docket book maintained by the clerk of the circuit court for such purpose, which shall contain such liens as have been filed. In the event the department fails to file a notice of lien as aforesaid on or before December 31, 1983, no special assessment lien shall exist for any waste fees becoming due prior to January 1, 1981. Such liens, if filed, may be discharged and satisfied by payment to the city of the aggregate amounts specified in the notice of liens together with interest thereon from the date of filing of the lien computed at the rate of 18 percent per annum, together with the administrative costs, filing and recording fees. When any such lien has been fully paid or discharged, the finance department shall promptly cause evidence of the satisfaction and discharge of such lien to be entered in said waste lien docket book. Delinquent waste fees accruing during the period from March 1, 1980, until January 1, 1981, shall not in any event become special assessment liens against improved real property unless the finance department shall comply with the requirements of this paragraph (2), subsection (b). Where the record title to improved real property was acquired after March 1, 1980, and prior to January 1, 1981, in good faith for good and valuable consideration and not for the purpose of avoiding payment of delinquent waste fees, the present owner and record title holder of the involved property shall be liable only for waste fees due for the time period within which the record title was acquired and subsequent periods. Where the record title is so acquired after January 1, 1981, and prior to the filing of the notice of lien or statement required under the provisions of this paragraph (2) of subsection (b), the property shall not be liable for any delinquent waste fees accruing to January 1, 1981. In such instances, the former record title holder shall be personally liable for the delinquent waste fees, and not the property. 
(c)  (1) Where property owners have paid delinquent waste fees for which they are not liable, a refund or credit, if presented within the time period permitted by Florida Statutes, shall be given for such payments in accordance with the provisions of this subsection upon written request and delivery of all receipts evidencing payment of the delinquent waste fees for which a refund or credit is sought. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the record title holder to furnish the finance department with the information required by this subsection in order to release the property from liability for such delinquent waste fees. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity, other than the present owner of the property involved, who pays any herein listed special assessment liens shall be entitled to receive an assignment of the lien held by the city and shall be subrogated to the rights of the city in respect to the enforcement of such lien. 
(3)  The finance department is authorized and directed to execute and deliver, upon request, written certificates certifying the amount of waste fees due upon any parcel of real property subject to payment of waste fees, or certifying that no waste fees are due, which certificates shall be binding upon the city. The finance department shall make rules and regulations prescribing procedures governing the administration of the provisions of this chapter and providing procedures for the payment of waste liens in periodic installments and the cancellation of waste liens, which rules and regulations when approved by resolution of the city commission and filed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall have the force and effect of law. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10371, § 4, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 10475, § 1, 9-8-88; Ord. No. 10600, § 1, 7-13-89; Code 1980, § 22-28)  
Sec. 22-90. - Waste fee receipts. 
Receipts evidencing the payment of waste fees, in such form as may be approved by the finance director, shall be retained by the occupant of the premises covered thereby, and shall be exhibited upon demand of any employees of the finance department. Failure to exhibit such receipt upon demand shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-29)  
Sec. 22-91. - Multiple occupancy of premises. 
A commercial establishment and a residential establishment under the same ownership located in separate buildings on the same parcel of property in which the owner has a separate collection point for residential and commercial solid waste shall have the option of having separate collection points, in which case the refuse for the residential portion may be billed as a residential account. The commercial refuse shall be the responsibility of a private hauler commercial account. Cans must be separated on multiple occupancy properties and placed in separate locations. Cans must be marked for separate identification. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 11184, § 10, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-30)  
Sec. 22-92. - Certain exemptions from payment of waste fees. 
Commercial establishments actually employing and using the services of a private waste collector holding a valid franchise provided for in article II of this chapter shall not be liable for the payment of waste fees otherwise required to be paid hereunder so long as such employment and use continues. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-31; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02)  
Sec. 22-93. - Enforcement and administrative fees. 
(a)  The director of solid waste, or designee, shall have the authority to initiate enforcement proceedings, against any person, franchisee, firm, corporation or other legal entity who has not strictly complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  If an inspector finds a violation of this chapter, the director of solid waste, or designee, shall issue a notice of violation to the violator, as provided in section 2-823 of this Code. The notice shall inform the violator of the nature of the violation, the amount of fine for which the violator may be liable, instructions and due date for paying the fine, notice that the violation may be appealed by requesting an administrative hearing within ten days after service of the notice of violation, and that failure to do so shall constitute an admission of the violation and waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(2)  A non-franchisee roll-off/container shall be subject to seizure and impoundment. Written notice of the department's intent to seize the roll-off/container shall be posted to the roll-off/container which is subject to seizure and impoundment. The department shall not seize any roll-off/container within 24 hours from the posting of the written notice. In addition to posting notice, the department shall also provide written notice of such seizure and impoundment to all persons or other legal entities who have a legal interest in the subject roll-off/container by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 24 hours of posting notice. The written notice shall include the following: 
a.  The name of the city department or division issuing such notice. 
b.  The date upon which the notice was issued. 
c.  The date that the notice was posted to the roll-off/container. 
d.  The section number of the City Code or ordinance that has been violated. 
e.  Notice that the department will seize and impound the roll-off/container in the event that the roll-off/container is not removed from the premises within 24 hours from the date of the posting of the written notice. 
f.  Notice of the right to request a preliminary hearing, pursuant to section 22-94, to contest the seizure and impoundment of the roll-off/container. 
g.  Notice of the right to request a preliminary hearing, pursuant to section 22-94, to contest the seizure and impoundment of the roll-off/container and immediately retrieve the roll-off/container from the department upon the posting with the department a cash bond in the amount of $500.00, plus costs incurred by the department. 
h.  Notice of the right to waive the preliminary hearing and immediately retrieve the roll-off/container from the department upon the payment of a $500.00 administrative penalty, plus costs incurred by the department. 
i.  Notice that the failure to request a preliminary hearing within ten days after the notice was mailed shall constitute a waiver of the right to a preliminary hearing pursuant to section 22-94. 
A roll-off/container that has been seized and impounded, which has not been returned to the owner or interested party by virtue of a preliminary hearing, final hearing, appeal, or payment of an administrative penalty, shall become the property of the city. 
(3)  The department is authorized to seize and impound a roll-off/container, after the 24-hour notification, in the event the department determines that said roll-off/container constitutes a public nuisance and poses a health and safety concern. Written notice of the department's action shall be posted at the site where the roll-off/container was located. In addition to posting notice, the department shall also provide written notice of such seizure and impoundment to all persons, firms, corporations, or other legal entities, whom the department knows, or with reasonable investigation should know, to have a legal interest in the subject roll-off/container by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 24 hours of posting notice. The written notice shall include the following: 
a.  The name of the city department or division issuing such notice. 
b.  The date upon which the notice was issued. 
c.  The date that the notice was posted at the location where the roll-off/container was found. 
d.  The section number of the City Code or ordinance that has been violated. 
e.  Notice of the right to request a hearing, pursuant to section 22-94, to contest the seizure and impoundment of the roll-off/container. 
f.  Notice of the right to request a hearing, pursuant to section 22-94, to contest the seizure and impoundment of the roll-off/container and immediately retrieve the roll-off/container from the department upon the posting with the department a cash bond in the amount of $500.00, plus costs incurred by the department. 
g.  Notice of the right to waive the hearing and immediately retrieve the roll-off/container from the department upon the payment of a $500.00 fine, plus costs incurred by the department. 
h.  Notice that the failure to request a hearing within ten days after the notice was mailed shall constitute a waiver of the right to a preliminary hearing pursuant to section 22-94. 
A roll-off/container that has been seized and impounded, which has not been returned to the owner or interested party by virtue of a preliminary hearing, final hearing, appeal, or payment of an administrative penalty, shall become the property of the city. 
(b)  Appointment and qualifications of sanitation inspectors, powers and duties. 
(1)  The city manager is hereby authorized to designate and appoint, as sanitation inspectors, certain city employee(s), normally trained and assigned to inspection functions for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and the rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(2)  Sanitation inspectors shall have the following qualifications: 
a.  A high school diploma or its equivalent. 
b.  Satisfactory completion of a course of at least 40 hours' duration pertaining to the duties of sanitation inspectors, which course shall be jointly given by the directors of the city police department, department of general services administration, department of resilience and public works, law department and other relevant departments. 
c.  Approval and certification by the city police chief as persons of good moral character and standing in the community suited by temperament and learning to be sanitation inspectors of the city. 
(3)  Sanitation inspectors shall, while on duty: 
a.  Issue notices of noncompliance and perform such other acts pursuant to section 22-5(b) for enforcement of this chapter. 
b.  Perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or by administrative orders, regulations and directives as may be issued by the city manager. 
(4)  Sanitation inspectors shall be identified either by special uniform or badge or both. Sanitation inspectors shall not carry firearms. 
(c)  Obstructing sanitation inspector in the performance of duties. 
(1)  Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists the sanitation inspector or other person authorized by the sanitation inspector, in the discharge of his or her duty, as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(2)  Sanitation inspectors shall notify the city police department immediately when in their judgment an arrest or forcible restraint becomes the appropriate response to a situation. 
(d)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the city on the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an administrative hearing before a hearing officer, or if proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally decided adversely to the named violator. The amount of such penalty assessed shall constitute and is hereby imposed as a lien against the subject property with equal rank and dignity of any other special assessment liens. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this article shall be assessed in accordance with the minimum administrative fee schedule as set forth below: 
Acts/Conditions of 
Noncompliance 	Fee 	  Section 
(Subsection) 
1st offense: 	$262.50 	22-46(b) and 22-47(6) 
2nd offense: 	525.00 	22-46(b) and 22-47(6) 
3rd offense: 	1,050.00 	22-46(b) and 22-47(6) 
Each additional offense: 	1,050.00 	22-46(b) and 22-47(6) 
Container(s), Garbage/Trash/Industrial/other waste placed on public rights-of-way (Residential 1st offense, tag; 2nd offense, tag and warning; 3rd offense, Fine). Commercial 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense and thereafter, $525.00. 	262.50 	22-2(e) 
4404 
Residential and/or commercial dumpster(s) not kept in approved garbage enclosure 	158.00 	22-2(f) 
Failure of commercial property to have adequate Solid Waste contract for service, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense and thereafter, $525.00. 	262.50 	22-14(b) 
4406 
Failure of Commercial Hauler/Solid Waste of intent to discontinue service, 1st offense, $75.00; 2nd offense, $150.00; 3rd offense, $250.00. 	75.00 	22-2(a) 
4435 
Commercial container violation (construction, placement, accessibility, not screened from public view) 1st offense, $75.00; 2nd offense, $150.00; any additional offenses, $300.00. 	75.00 	22-2(c) 
1-4 
4401 
Failure to remove raw or processed organic waste matter from food service establishment, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense and thereafter, $525.00. 	262.50 	22-2(b) 
4432 
Failure to maintain property/adjoining public areas, easements, alleys free of industrial Bulky Waste, Garbage, Trash or other waste, or failure to mow grass to curbside (residential, $75.00), commercial 1st offense, $75.00; 2nd offense, $150.00; 3rd offense, $250.00. 	75.00 	22-5(a) 
22-9 
4410 
Failure to properly mark container 	52.50 	22-2(f) 
4409 
Disposal of trash or other waste materials placed in right-of-way at other than authorized time 	79.00 	22-18(b) 
4419 
Illegal dumping by a person or business 	525.00 	22-11 
Littering 	525.00 	22-6(l) 
Illegal dumping from any commercial vehicle 	1,050.00 	22-11 
4411 
Illegal dumping of waste tires 	1,050.00 	22-11 
4408 
Unauthorized bulky waste on right-of-way 	79.00 	22-18(b) 
Garbage not containerized 	79.00 	22-8(1) 
Sunken containers in ground of property 	105.00 	22-2(c)(4) 
Operating a Commercial Solid Waste vehicle without a valid registration 	262.50 	22-50 
4423 
All other Chapter 22 violations, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense, $525.00; 3rd offense, $1,050.00. 	262.50 	ch. 22 
Failure of franchisee to remove container(s) from discontinued accounts 	79.00 	22-2(b) 
Failure of commercial property to have sufficient service, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense, $525.00. 	262.50 	22-2(b) 
4434 
Engaging in commercial solid waste collection without city Franchise Agreement, 1st offense, $1,000.00; 2nd offense, $1,500.00; 3rd offense, $2,000.00 and all equipment subject to seizure and impoundment procedures as set forth in Section 22-93 	1,000.00 	22-6(e) and 
22-46 
Failure of commercial Solid Waste hauler to properly identify equipment/container, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense, $525.00. 	262.50 	22-52 
4402 
Failure of commercial Solid Waste hauler to provide Recycling program, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense, $525.00; 3rd offense, $1,050.00. 	262.50 	22-20 and 
22-93 
Failure of property owner to provide Recycling program, 1st offense, $262.50; 2nd offense, $525.00; 3rd offense, $1,050.00. 	262.50 	22-20 and 
22-93 
 
(e)  If the owner, agent, or occupant of any property within the city shall fail to comply with any determination of the city manager, or his/her designee, the director shall cause such work to be done and shall keep an accurate accounting of the costs thereof, whereupon the amount of such costs and the interest thereon shall constitute and is hereby imposed as a lien against the subject property with equal rank and dignity of any other special assessment liens. An aggrieved party may appeal both the fees and costs imposed under this section to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(f)  Failure by an occupant of any commercial property other than multifamily residential property to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter shall cause the city to revoke the certificate of use and local business tax receipt for said business. 
(g)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or any other city ordinance, the director and the director of the department of resilience and public works shall have judicial remedies available to them for violations of this chapter or any other lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder as enumerated below but not limited to: 
(1)  They may institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damage for any costs incurred by the city in conjunction with the abatement of any condition prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  They may institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, to enjoin and prohibit said violation or to compel the performance of actions which will result in compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(h)  These remedies are cumulative and the use of any appropriate remedy shall not constitute an election of remedies by the departments. The use of one remedy shall not preclude the use of any others. 
(i)  All violations of this chapter may be brought before the code enforcement board or may be prosecuted in the county court. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 10535, § 2, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 11184, § 11, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 22-32; Ord. No. 11352, § 5, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 11703, § 15, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 11837, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 12258, § 2, 7-25-02; Ord. No. 12400, § 2, 9-11-03; Ord. No. 12599, § 2, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 12835, § 2, 10-12-06; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13142, § 9, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13194, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13317, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 22-94. - Hearings. 
(a)  The owner, or authorized representative, of a roll-off/container that has been seized and impounded pursuant to subsections 22-93(a)(2) or 22-93(a)(3) of this chapter, may file a written request with the department of hearing boards for a preliminary hearing within ten days from the date the department's notice is mailed. 
(1)  The hearing shall be scheduled before a special master of the city within ten days of receipt of the written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. 
(2)  At the hearing, the city shall have the burden to show that probable cause existed to believe that the roll-off/container constituted a public nuisance under chapter 22 of the City Code and was subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to subsection 22-93(a)(2). If the roll-off/container was immediately seized and impounded pursuant to subsection 22-93(a)(3), the city shall have the burden of showing that probable cause existed to believe that the roll-off/container constituted a public nuisance under chapter 22 of the City Code and posed a health and safety concern. 
(3)  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay and circumstantial evidence is admissible. 
(4)  If, after the hearing, the special master determines that the city has met its burden, as set forth by subsection (a)(2), the special master shall order the continued impoundment of the roll-off/container, if applicable, and set the date for a final hearing. The owner, or authorized representative, may immediately retrieve the roll-off/container from the department upon the posting of a cash bond with the department in the amount of $500.00 without impairing the right to a final hearing. 
(5)  If, after the hearing, the special master determines that probable cause did not exist, the roll-off/container shall be released forthwith to the owner, or authorized representative, without the imposition of the administrative civil penalty. If the owner, or authorized representative, has already posted a bond for the immediate release of the roll-off/container, the bond shall be refunded to the owner or authorized representative. 
(b)  The final hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the special master, no later than 30 days after the date that the roll-off/container was seized and impounded. At the final hearing, the city shall have the burden of showing by clear and convincing evidence that the roll-off/container constituted a public nuisance under chapter 22 of the City Code. If the roll-off/container was seized and impounded pursuant to subsection 22-93(a)(3), then the city must also show by clear and convincing evidence that the roll-off/container posed a health and safety concern. If, after the hearing, a finding is made that the roll-off/container was properly impounded and seized, then the special master shall enter an order finding the owner of the roll-off/container civilly liable to the city for an administrative civil penalty of up to $500.00, as outlined in subsections 22-93(a)(2)h. or 22-93(a)(3)g., plus costs incurred by the department. If, after the hearing, a finding is made that the city did not meet its burden of proof as set forth in this subsection, the roll-off/container shall be returned to the owner along with any cash bond posted. 
(Ord. No. 13317, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 22-95. - Appeal. 
The city or the owner of the roll-off/container that has been the subject of a seizure and impoundment pursuant to subsections 22-93(a)(2) or 22-93(a)(3) may, after a hearing pursuant to section 22-94, appeal the final ruling and decisions of the special master to the appellate division of the circuit court of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit of Miami-Dade County, Florida, within 30 days of the date of the final order being appealed. The city may charge the appellant a reasonable fee for preparation of the record for purposes of making the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 13317, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Secs. 22-96—22-112. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MAINTENANCE OF LOTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13044, § 2, adopted December 11, 2008, amended article IV, §§ 22-116—22-118 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article IV pertained to lot clearing, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 22-36, 22-37; Ord. No. 10128, § 1, adopted July 10, 1986; Ord. No. 11746, § 1, adopted January 12, 1999. 
 
Sec. 22-113. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by: 
(1)  Establishing a program for identification and registration of vacant lots. 
(2)  Establishing the responsibilities of owners of lots. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(4)  Allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08 on lots. 
(5)  Providing a fair, equitable, and efficient method of allocating and apportioning the assessed service costs, which constitute a special benefit to residential and commercial properties, among property owners within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Sec. 22-114. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Owner means any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership interest in real property, including but not limited to, owners identified on the vacant lot registration form; or a purchaser, devisee, lessee, fiduciary, or holder of an unrecorded deed. This term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction on or maintenance of the lot involved, as well as any person, legal entity or agent authorized to initiate a foreclosure or collection proceeding against the property, whether or not such proceeding has in fact been initiated. This term shall not apply to the city. 
Structure means a structure or building as defined by the Florida Building Code. 
Vacant lot means a lot, tract, or other parcel of land in the city that does not have a structure or building on the land. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Sec. 22-115. - Registration. 
(a)  Every owner of a vacant lot shall, at no cost to the owner, register said vacant lot with the city. Such registration shall include: 
(1)  A description of the lot including address, legal description, and folio number; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and contact numbers of the owner, or agents, that can be contacted within 24 hours; and 
(3)  Written consent by the owner allowing the city police department to enforce the trespassing penalties described in F.S. § 810.08. 
(b)  This registration must be done upon any transfer of the property and every October 1st thereafter. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall subject the owner to code enforcement action, pursuant to F.S. § 162.06 and chapter 2, article 10, as amended and specifically section 2-814. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Sec. 22-116. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other persons in possession of any lot, tract, or other parcel of land in the city, improved or unimproved, to allow on any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city to such an extent that it constitutes a menace to life, property, the public health, public welfare or creates a fire hazard the accumulation of any of the following: solid waste, biological, hazardous or industrial waste, as described herein; tires; stagnant water; a dense growth of trees, vines and underbrush; or to allow a growth of grass, weeds or bushes over one foot in height; or to allow the existence of depressions or excavations wherein water may accumulate. Any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land in the city who violates any provision set forth in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Sec. 22-117. - Lot clearance; failure to comply; notice to owner. 
(a)  The owners or agents of all rental units, including multiple apartments, and the owners of all structures, either residential or commercial, shall be responsible at all times for keeping their premises clean and free from all trash and litter, including the sidewalks and swales on which the buildings or lands front. It shall be the duty of all owners of lots, parcels and tracts of land within the city to keep such property in a safe clean and presentable condition, and to remove therefrom all garbage, surplus grass, saplings, weeds and other growths, and all trash, and to fill in all excavations and depressions thereon, and to limit the growth of grass, weeds, or bushes to no more than 12 inches in height. 
(b)  In the event the owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land within the city fail or refuse to keep such property in a safe, clean and presentable condition, the code enforcement inspector shall provide notice to the owner that the owner has committed a violation of this chapter and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the owner must correct the violation. 
(c)  The code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, shall give the notice by registered or certified mail to the owner of the property at the owner's last known mailing address, as disclosed by the city records or by county tax rolls, or at the property's street address, or upon any occupant thereof, or upon any agent or employee of the owner thereof. Said notice shall be deemed sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. If the address of the owner is unknown to the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, and if the property is unoccupied and the owner thereof has no agent or employee available for service of such notice, the posting of a notice upon such property by the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, shall constitute and be sufficient notice to the owner thereof. All methods of giving notice as provided for herein are cumulative and independent of the other, and the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, may use one or all of the same as may be deemed necessary. The notice shall include an opportunity for a hearing as provided in section 22-93. 
(d)  In the event the owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land shall fail to remove therefrom all surplus grass, saplings, weeds, trash or garbage, or fail to fill in all excavations and depressions thereon, or allow the growth of grass, weeds, or bushes to exceed 12 inches in height after notice has been given by the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, the city may clean or cause to be cleaned such lot, tract or parcel of land and place it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(e)  Any actions taken by the city to bring a lot into compliance does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the local governing body to maintain the lot and does not create any liability against the local governing body for any damages to the property if such actions were completed in good faith. 
(f)  Vacant lots that are not maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and are in repeated violation of this section shall be subject to the city's Continual Maintenance Program ("CMP") and shall be notified of such by certified mail and posting on the property. The CMP will allow city employees and/or vendors to enter upon the vacant land for maintenance and lot clearing purposes after due notice is provided. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08; Ord. No. 13647, § 2, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 22-118. - Cost of clearing as lien on property—collection, foreclosure and sale. 
(a)  In case the work is done or caused to be done by the city, the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, shall keep an itemized accounting of expenses of the work done and the cost thereof including an administrative charge of $150.00 and mail the statement to the owner of the property. The owner shall have ten days from the date the request for payment has been served to appeal the lot clearing process and/or the amount of the expenses and costs. If the statement is not paid or appealed within ten days, the amount shall bear interest at the maximum statutory rate allowable by law until paid. Such amounts, together with all penalties imposed thereon, shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as special assessment liens against the real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the line of city and county ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Such liens shall be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 86 or, in the alternative, foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions applicable to practice, pleading and procedure for the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate set forth in state statutes, or may be foreclosed pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The payment of all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees, penalties, administrative charges, and lien amounts is required before said lien shall be discharged or satisfied. All delinquent liens may be offered for sale at the annual lien sale of the city next following the date of delinquency as provided by law. Costs associated with CMP lot maintenance and lot clearing will be considered as a special assessment on the property as with all other lot clearing and maintenance expenses pursuant to F.S. § 170.201 and F.S. ch. 173. 
(b)  This notice will be the only notice given within a one-year period of time. Any subsequent violations occurring under this section shall be remedied by the city without further notice. 
(c)  The filing of an appeal from the city's determination of the need for lot clearance by the city shall not delay action by the city as described in section 22-117. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 22-93.4. 
(d)  The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
Date: _____ 
Name of owner: _____ 
Address of owner: _____ 
As the registered property owner per Miami-Dade County tax rolls of the above described property, you are hereby notified that an inspection discloses that you are in violation of the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended, Sections 22-116 through 22-118 because (state why property is in violation.) 
Chapter 22, Garbage and Other Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended requires that your property be kept in a safe, clean condition, not allowing the accumulation of any of the following: solid waste, biological, hazardous or industrial waste, as defined herein, tires, stagnant water; a dense growth of trees, vines and underbrush; or to allow a growth of grass, weeds or bushes over one foot (1 ft.) in height; or to allow the existence of depressions or excavations wherein water may accumulate on any lot, tract or parcel of land within the City to such an extent that it constitutes a menace to life, property, the public health, and public welfare or creates a fire hazard. 
You are directed to correct said violation within _______ (_______) days of receipt of this notice and to notify this office that the violation has been corrected. Failure to do so will cause the City to clean the property therefore imposing a special assessment lien against the property including the payment of all costs of collection, penalties, lien amounts and administrative fees. The City may also exercise the option of foreclosure on your property. 
This notice, which shall be recorded in the official records of Miami-Dade County will be the only notice given to you in a period of one (1) year from this date. Any other violations occurring under this section shall be remedied by the City without further notice. City of Miami Code Enforcement Official. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08; Ord. No. 13647, § 2, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 22-119. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to any lots protected by federal, state, or local law or any lots owned by the federal government, state government, Miami-Dade County, or the city. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Sec. 22-120. - Alternative procedures. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preempt existing remedies of the city authorized under existing law. 
(Ord. No. 13044, § 2, 12-11-08)  
Secs. 22-121—22-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REMOVAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Junked, abandoned property on public property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-146. - Removal from private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park, place, store or leave any abandoned property on private property in the city, unless it is in connection with a purpose or business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed; any article of abandoned property parked and/or stored in connection with a legitimate business enterprise shall be parked and/or stored in complete compliance with the city's zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever the code inspector, as defined in section 2-811, shall ascertain that an article or articles of abandoned property are present on private property within the limits of the city in violation of the zoning ordinance or regulation, the antilitter ordinance or regulation, or other similar ordinance or regulation of the city, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of location) is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance or regulation violated) and must be removed within ten days or, if the property is a boat, 30 days from date of this notice; otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of ___________ (enforcement officer) unless a request for hearing as provided in Code of the City of Miami section 22-93 is filed by owner with the enforcement officer within the specified timeframe for removal of the property as set forth herein, thereby staying the enforcement officer's action pending the outcome of the hearing. If no hearing is requested the property will be removed and destroyed. If the property is a motor vehicle or boat, the owner will be liable for the costs of removal and destruction. Dated this: (setting forth date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer). 
(c)  Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements for a period of ten days. In addition to posting the notice, and on or before the date of posting, the enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner. If such is reasonably available to the officer, he/she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or before the date of posting. If the property is a motor vehicle as defined in F.S. § 320.01(1) or a vessel as defined in F.S. § 327.02(27), the law enforcement agency shall contact the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles or the state department of environmental protection, respectively, in order to determine the name and address of the owner and any person who has filed a lien on the vehicle or vessel as provided in F.S. § 319.27(2) or (3) or F.S. § 328.15(1). On receipt of this information, the enforcement agency shall mail a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to the lienholder, if any. 
(d)  If, at the end of ten days or if the property is a boat, at the end of 30 days after posting such notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article described in such notice has not removed the article and has not requested a hearing in compliance with the ordinance or regulation cited in the notice, the enforcement officer may cause the article of abandoned property to be removed and destroyed. The salvage value, if any, of such article shall be retained by the city to be applied against the cost of removal and destruction thereof, unless the costs of removal and destruction are paid by the owner as provided in section 22-147 hereof, in which case the salvage value may be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-40; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 22-147. - Owner responsible for costs of removing abandoned property. 
The owner of any abandoned motor vehicle or boat who, after notice as provided in this section, does not remove the vehicle or boat within the specified period shall be liable to the city for all costs of removal and destruction of such property, less any salvage value received by the city. Upon such removal and destruction, the enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the amount owed and of the penalty provisions of this section. In the case of an abandoned boat, any person who neglects or refuses to pay such amount shall not be entitled to be issued a certificate of registration for any boat until such costs have been paid. The enforcement officer shall supply the state department of environmental protection with a list of persons whose boat registration privileges have been revoked under this section. In the case of an abandoned motor vehicle, any person who neglects or refuses to pay such amount shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-41)  
Sec. 22-148. - Obstruction of enforcement officer. 
Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the enforcement officer, in the discharge of his/her duties as provided in this section, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-42; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 22-149. - Enforcement officer immune from prosecution. 
Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the enforcement officer, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-43)  
Sec. 22-150. - Enforcement officers designated. 
The designated enforcement officers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article are the city manager, the chief of police, the director of the department of general services administration and the director of the department of planning, building and zoning or their designees and the code inspectors as defined in section 2-811. 
(Ord. No. 10128, § 1, 7-10-86; Code 1980, § 22-44)  
Secs. 22-151—22-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DONATION COLLECTION BINS 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Donation bins prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful to deposit, store, keep or maintain or to permit to be deposited, stored, kept or maintained a donation collection bin in or on any lot, parcel or tract of land or body of water in any zoning district. A donation collection bin is hereby defined as a receptacle designed with a door, slot or other opening and which is intended to accept and store donated items; provided, however, the definition of donation collection bins shall not include trailers, where personnel are present to accept donations. 
(b)  Designation of enforcement officer. The director shall designate an enforcement officer who shall be responsible for the removal of donation collection boxes. 
(c)  Notification. Whenever the enforcement officer ascertains that a donation collection bin is present on any property within unincorporated Dade County, the officer shall cause a notice to be placed on such bin in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE 
This donation collection bin is unlawfully upon property known as (setting forth brief description of location) and must be removed within 72 hours from the time of this notice. Failure to remove the bin shall result in the removal and destruction of the bin by order of the City of Miami. 
Date this: (setting forth the date, time of posting of the notice) Signed: (setting forth name, with the address and telephone number of the enforcement officer). 
Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. 
(d)  Removal of donation collection bin. If at the end of 72 hours after posting of such notice, the donation collection bin has not been removed from the property, the enforcement officer shall cause the bin to be removed. 
(e)  Assistance of city police department. If the enforcement officer is unable to successfully remove a donation collection bin subject to seizure under this section, the enforcement officer or his/her designated representatives may secure the assistance of the City of Miami police department to effect the removal of said bin. 
(f)  Obstructing an enforcement officer in the performance of duties. Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists the enforcement officer in the discharge of duties as provided in this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. 
(g)  Destruction of donation collection bin. Whenever a donation collection bin remains unclaimed as provided in subsection (d) above, it shall be destroyed by order of Dade County. The contents of the bin may be destroyed or donated to charity. 
(h)  Recovery of costs. All costs incurred pursuant to this section shall be paid by the owner of the donation collection bin. The enforcement officer may institute a suit to recover such expenses against the bin owner. 
(i)  Responsibility for compliance. The owner of the donation collection bin and the tenant and/or owner of the property on which the bin is maintained shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11531, § 2, 7-24-97; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Secs. 22-162—22-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13693, § 2, adopted July 13, 2017, changed the title of article VII from "Commercial solid waste management advisory committee" to "Commercial solid waste and recycling management advisory committee." 
 
Sec. 22-170. - Established. 
There is hereby created and established the "commercial solid waste and recycling management advisory committee" which shall be hereinafter be referred to as the "committee". 
(Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-171. - Purpose, powers and duties; prohibitions. 
(a)  Purpose; powers and duties. The purpose, powers and duties of the committee include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Providing advice and recommendations to the city commission concerning solid waste and recycling management within the city, in conjunction and cooperation with the department of solid waste; 
(2)  Providing advice and recommendations regarding the levy of fines or warnings (as established by the commission or the department of solid waste), and suspension and revocation of nonexclusive franchises for failure of a hauler of commercial solid waste ("hauler") to comply with city ordinances and regulations related to solid waste management; 
(3)  Offering recommendations related to the establishment of suggested guidelines consistent with or more stringent than those currently established by the commission or department of solid waste relating to the business of commercial solid waste management; 
(4)  Performing any other duties as may be specifically requested by the commission or city manager as relates to the department of solid waste; 
(5)  Adopting bylaws and resolutions consistent with the powers delegated to the committee by the commission; 
(6)  Negotiating directly with haulers applying for or renewing valid nonexclusive franchises, with the assistance and input of the city manager, when requested by the city manager; 
(7)  Providing for voluntary in-kind contributions of commercial solid waste management services, as determined by a formula established by the committee based upon each participating hauler's proportionate volume of the business within the city, for city special events, such as the Coconut Grove Arts Festival, the Calle Ocho Parade, the Orange Bowl Parade, Martin Luther King, Jr., Parade, the Three Kings Parade, and those events where the costs for waste removal is waived by the commission or city manager, as well as any other special event identified by the committee in conjunction with the department of solid waste and the commission; 
(8)  Providing quarterly written reports to the commission and the department of solid waste setting forth a review of the status of commercial solid waste management in the city; and 
(9)  Providing a detailed report of all recommended actions taken by the committee against haulers within the city including warnings, citations, fines, permit suspension and revocations; and suggestions for improvement of the provision of both residential and commercial solid waste management services within the city, including financial projections setting forth specific savings to the city that such improvements would be expected to provide. 
(b)  Prohibitions. The committee members are prohibited from discussing issues related to pricing which would be in violation of any local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 11849, § 3, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-172. - Membership; terms of office; vacancies; officers; rules of procedure; meetings; quorum; attendance requirements. 
(a)  Membership. The committee shall consist of no less than nine regular members who shall be exempt from the provisions set forth in section 2-284 and be composed as follows: 
(1)  One member appointed at-large by the members of the city commission. 
(2)  One representative from the city manager's office appointed by the city manager. 
(3)  Two representatives selected by the director of the department of solid waste. 
(4)  One representative of each hauler handling a volume of 25 percent or more of the total commercial solid waste management business within the city. 
(5)  Two representatives collectively selected by all haulers handling a total volume of less than 25 percent of the commercial solid waste management business within the city. 
(6)  Two non-voting ex officio members as set forth herein to be selected as set forth in the bylaws adopted by a majority vote of the voting members of the committee: 
a.  One individual representing the city's business community, who is not a subcontractor, employee or owner of a franchise; and 
b.  One individual representing the city's residential homeowners, who is not a subcontractor, employee or owner of a franchise. 
(b)  Terms of office; vacancies. The provisions set forth in section 2-885 of this Code as they relate to terms of office and the filling of vacancies shall apply to all regular members of the committee. 
(c)  Officers. The committee shall select one of its regular members as chairperson. No chairperson shall serve more than two years in office. A vice-chairperson may also be designated by the committee from among its members to serve as chairperson at any meeting if the chairperson is absent from such meeting. 
(d)  Rules of procedure; parliamentary authority. The committee may adopt its own order of business and rules of parliamentary procedure governing its meetings, and actions on matters within its jurisdiction, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth herein, which rules of procedure shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  Meetings; quorum. The committee shall hold regular quarterly meetings and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. All meetings of said committee shall be open to the public. The provisions set forth in section 2-887 of this Code as they relate to quorum requirements shall apply to members of the committee. 
(f)  Attendance requirements. The provisions set forth in section 2-886 of this Code as they relate to attendance requirements shall apply to members of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 11849, § 3, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 13693, § 2, 7-13-17)  
Sec. 22-173. - Assignment of staff. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide administrative support to the committee which shall include the services of an individual to handle procedural activities for all public hearings required to be held by the committee, maintain minutes of meetings, maintain correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports and perform all other necessary support functions. 
(Ord. No. 11849, § 3, 10-26-99)  
Sec. 22-174. - Notices, filing of official records; annual reports; minutes. 
All notices, record keeping, and submittal of the annual report as they relate to this committee shall be provided pursuant to the provisions set forth in sections 2-888, 2-889 and 2-890 of this Code. 
Copies of minutes of all committee meetings shall be furnished to the mayor, commissioners and the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 11849, § 3, 10-26-99)  
Secs. 22-175—22-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 22-180. - Definitions. 
Benefactor means the owner of the business advertised in the commercial handbill whose agent, employee, contractor, promoter, or other representative did or caused the throwing, discarding, placing or depositing. 
Business means any commercial or industrial activity, entity, or event in or for which any goods or services are made, sold or offered for sale or other consideration, pecuniary or otherwise. 
Commercial handbill means any handbill that conveys any information about any good or service provided by a business. 
Handbill means any flyer, paper, document, dodger, circular, folder, booklet, letter, card, pamphlet, sheet, poster, sticker, banner, notice or other written, printed or painted matter or object that conveys any information, except that "handbill" shall not include a newspaper or its contents. 
Litter means any paper, handbill, garbage, or other waste that has been placed or deposited and left on a public sidewalk, street, road, avenue, beach, swale, median, building, fence, wall, boardwalk, park, or any other public area, or on any object located on public property, or on the kneewall, window ledge or sill of any public or private building, or on a motor vehicle or private property. Handbills attached to a trash receptacle, but not within the trash receptacle in the usual manner, shall also be considered litter. 
One day means a 24-hour period from noon to noon. 
Person, benefactor, or owner include, within their respective meanings, either an individual or an entity. 
(Ord. No. 12972, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 22-181. - Throwing or discarding handbills prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or benefactor to throw, discard, place or deposit, scatter, cast or cause to be thrown, discarded, placed, or deposited, scattered or cast handbills or commercial handbills in any manner or amount whatsoever in or on any public highway, sidewalk, road, street, alley, thoroughfare or any other public place, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefore. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or benefactor to throw, discard, place or deposit, scatter, cast or cause to be thrown, discarded, placed, or deposited, scattered or cast handbills or commercial handbills in any manner or amount whatsoever on any private property, unless prior consent of the owner has been given and the owner is willing to receive the handbill and unless such handbills or commercial handbills will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws, rules or regulations. Nothing herein shall relieve the property owner's responsibility of maintaining the property in a safe and clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 12972, § 2, 2-14-08)  
Sec. 22-182. - Distribution of commercial handbills during certain events prohibited; penalty; enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to post, display or distribute any commercial circulars, handbills, printed or written matter relating to any business or commercial activities at any event with an attendance of 15,000 or more persons, on any property or facilities owned or operated by or for the city, or within a 1,000-foot radius in or around the property, facility or venue, without first obtaining a written permit issued or authorized by the neighborhood enhancement team (NET); provided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to licensees, concessionaires, lessees or agencies of the city. 
(b)  Each person who distributes permitted commercial circulars, handbills, printed or written matter relating to any business or commercial activities must: 
(1)  Provide the name and date of birth of the person seeking such permit, the name of the business represented, the business address, the business telephone number, a valid business tax receipt or similar licensure from another jurisdiction and a non-refundable fee of $150.00; 
(2)  Provide a copy of the printed material intended for distribution; and 
(3)  Provide for the proper removal of any of the above-described materials discarded and left as litter in the surrounding event area. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the county court. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city police to enforce the provisions of this section against any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity found violating the same within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13503, § 2, 3-12-15)  
Sec. 22-183. - Enforcement by code inspectors/enforcement officers; civil infraction notice. 
(a)  Enforcement of this section may be enforced by either a code enforcement inspector or sanitation enforcement officer as follows: 
(1)  If a code inspector as defined in section 2-813 finds a violation of this article, such code inspector shall issue a civil infraction notice to the violator pursuant to the provisions in sections 2-823 through 2-830. 
(2)  If an enforcement officer as defined in section 22-1 finds a violation of this article, such code inspector shall issue a civil infraction notice to the violator pursuant to the provisions in section 22-93. 
(b)  At any prosecution for violation of this section when the litter involved is a commercial handbill, if ten or more commercial handbills advertising the same business or benefactor are found in plain view as litter under circumstances that make it more likely than not that the commercial handbills were placed there, or caused to be placed there, by an agent, employee, contractor, promoter, or other representative of the business or benefactor advertised on the face of the handbills, the special master shall apply a rebuttable presumption that the business or benefactor advertised on the face of the handbills threw, discarded, placed or deposited the commercial handbills as litter. 
(c)  If a person is found littering with commercial handbills, the code inspector is authorized to seize, for use as evidence in the prosecution of the person, business or benefactor before the special master, all commercial handbills in the possession of the person. 
(d)  The city may cause the removal, at the violator's expense, of all litter distributed or placed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12972, § 2, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13503, § 2, 3-12-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13503, § 2, adopted March 12, 2015, redesignated the former sections 22-182—22-184 as sections 22-183—22-185. The historical notation of the former sections has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 22-184. - Fines. 
The following civil fines shall be imposed for violations of this section: 
(1)  If the offense is the first offense, $100.00 fine plus $50.00 per handbill or commercial handbill; 
(2)  If the offense is the second offense within the preceding 12 months, $250.00 fine plus $50.00 per handbill or commercial handbill; 
(3)  If the offense is the third or subsequent offense within the preceding 12 months, $500.00 fine plus $50.00 per handbill or commercial handbill; 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(3), no person, business or benefactor shall receive more than one offense within any one-day period, however, the $50.00 per handbill or commercial handbill fine shall apply to all littered handbills or commercial handbills found during that one-day period. 
(Ord. No. 12972, § 2, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13503, § 2, 3-12-15) 
Note— See editor's note at section 22-183.  
Sec. 22-185. - Recovery of unpaid fines; unpaid fines to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
(a)  The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil fines. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator and it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After two months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute upon the lien. 
(Ord. No. 12972, § 2, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 13503, § 2, 3-12-15) 
Note— See editor's note at section 22-183.  
Chapter 22.5 - GREEN INITIATIVES  
ARTICLE I. - GREEN FLEETS 
 
Sec. 22.5-1. - Definitions. 
Biodiesel means diesel fuel derived from a renewable resource such as plants, waste oils, and animal fats. 
Emergency response vehicle means any vehicle used to respond to imminent threats to public health or safety. 
Fuel economy means the estimated miles a vehicle can travel for each gallon of fuel consumed. For vehicles 8,500 pounds or less, this value is determined by the EPA's Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards. 
Greenhouse gases mean gases which will likely contribute to global warming, as identified by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Currently, the EPA lists carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases as the primary greenhouse gases of concern. For the purposes of this ordinance, the primary greenhouse gas of concern is carbon dioxide produced by the combustion of fossil fuels such as gasoline and diesel. 
Heavy duty vehicle means any wheeled motor vehicle, licensed for use on roadways, having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating greater than 14,000 pounds. 
Idling means: 
(1)  Where the engine is running and in park or neutral in vehicles with automatic transmissions; 
(2)  Where the engine is running but not in gear for vehicles with manual transmissions. 
Light duty truck means any wheeled motor vehicle, with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 pounds or less, which is designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivative of such a vehicle, or is available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Medium duty vehicle means any wheeled motor vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000 pounds or less and which is not a light-duty truck or passenger vehicle. 
Passenger vehicle means any wheeled motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of persons and having a design capacity of 12 persons or less. 
Vehicle means any device powered by an engine and used for the transportation of persons or property upon roadways, excluding aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 13001, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-2. - Intent. 
The intent of the green fleet ordinance is to reduce vehicle fuel consumption by five percent per year and reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the fleet by at least five percent per year to a total of at least 25 percent by 2015. The city will accomplish this goal by: 
(1)  Optimizing the fleet size and operation by eliminating unnecessary vehicles. 
(2)  Increasing the fleet's average fuel economy to be consistent with operational needs. These standards will be included in each department's green fleets plan and reviewed and approved by the green fleets committee (the "review committee"). 
(3)  Minimizing fuel usage by eliminating unnecessary or redundant trips, by increasing efficiency of routes and by minimizing idling. 
(Ord. No. 13001, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-3. - Fleet inventory. 
In order to establish a baseline of data showing vehicle specifics so that a green fleet plan ("GFP") can be established, implemented, and monitored, each department director or designee shall develop an inventory and analysis of the fleet vehicles at least once annually and submit to the city manager or designee before July 1. This inventory shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Number of vehicles classified by the model year, make, model, engine size, vehicle identification number (VIN), and drivetrain type (two-wheel drive or four-wheel drive), and the rated vehicle weight and classification (light-duty, medium-duty, heavy-duty); 
(2)  Miles per gallon (or gallon equivalent) per vehicle; 
(3)  Type of fuel (or power source, e.g., electricity) used; 
(4)  Average cost per gallon (or gallon equivalent) of fuel; 
(5)  Annual miles driven per vehicle; 
(6)  Fuel (or power) consumption per vehicle; 
(7)  Vehicle function (i.e., the tasks associated with the vehicle's use); 
(8)  Total fuel consumption of each fuel type (or power source used) for the fleet. 
City department directors or designees shall be responsible for providing the baseline data in a uniform, reliable and verifiable manner. Annually, the data will be compiled and submitted to the review committee as described herein. 
The Miami Office of Sustainable Initiatives (MSI) will compute fleet greenhouse gas emissions, fleet fuel efficiency, and average fuel cost per mile based on the data reported above. 
(Ord. No. 13001, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-4. - Department green fleet plans. 
Annually, the GSA, fire, police and solid waste departments shall prepare a written GFP describing the implementation of the policies described below. The general services administration ("GSA") GFP shall address GSA vehicles and all other department vehicles not addressed by other GFPs. Copies of each plan will be submitted to the review committee as referenced. 
Each department plan shall summarize their fleet inventory and fleet greenhouse gas emissions as described in this ordinance. The plan shall describe how fuel consumption compares to the city's goal of five percent reduction per year and how greenhouse gas emissions compares to the city's goal of at least five percent reduction per year. 
Departments that provide emergency response functions shall develop an independent GFP and calculate fuel consumption for emergency response and non-emergency response vehicles. In their annual report, departments will identify all emergency response vehicles and the emergency response role of each designated vehicle. The goal for fuel consumption of emergency response vehicles shall be to reduce fuel consumption to the extent feasible without compromising emergency effectiveness or preparedness. Reduction of fuel consumption in emergency response vehicles may include, but are not limited to, purchasing new vehicles that have increased fuel efficiency and reducing fuel consuming activities during non-emergency operations. For all departments, the fuel consumption goal for non-emergency response vehicles remains five percent. 
Each department shall establish a minimum fuel efficiency standard in miles per gallon (or gallon equivalent), as defined herein, for each vehicle class that is purchased or leased by the department. The initial standard will be set at a minimum five percent greater than the current fleet average for the vehicle class. That standard will be mandated to be increased by five percent annually. Exceptions to this policy may be allowed by the green fleets committee if the fuel efficiency standard does not allow vehicles that meet the operational needs of the department. 
The GSA department shall review all vehicle procurement specifications and modify them to allow the purchase or lease of alternatively fueled or powered vehicles. 
Each department shall review its operational use of vehicles and identify for elimination uses of vehicles which are operationally unnecessary and inefficient. 
Each department shall review every new vehicle purchase request and modify them as necessary to ensure that the vehicle is appropriate for its performance requirements. 
Each department shall review usage of vehicles and schedule the elimination or replacement of vehicles that are unused or inefficient compared to current fuel economy standards for the department and vehicle class and complies with the approved GFP. 
Each department shall develop and implement an anti-idling policy prohibiting city employees from idling city-owned or operated vehicles for an excessive period of time. 
Each department shall review fleet maintenance needs and plan to maintain vehicles at optimal efficiency by reviewing current maintenance schedules for all fleet vehicles and increasing maintenance wherever cost-effective benefits will accrue as a result. 
The solid waste department and other such route intensive departments shall implement a route optimization program using applicable software and consultations to determine the most efficient routes for waste collection, recycling and street sweeping. 
(Ord. No. 13001, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-5. - Monitoring of the green fleet article. 
There shall be created a green fleet review committee to ensure goal compliance and monitor departmental responsibilities. The city manager will appoint a five-member review committee, which may include one of the following departments: 
Purchasing department; 
General services administration; 
Police department; 
Fire department; 
Solid waste department; 
Office of sustainable initiatives. 
The review committee's responsibilities shall be to: 
(1)  Review the progress towards the goals of this article and the city's climate action plan. 
(2)  Recommend new policies or ordinances to improve the city's progress towards its goals of reducing vehicle fuel consumption by five percent per year and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the fleet by at least five percent per year. 
(3)  Review the status of use of biodiesel and the biofuel content of biodiesel where appropriate. In addition, the review committee shall evaluate the overall environmental impact of the fuels entire life cycle as compared to fossil fuels, other biodiesel fuels, and other alternative fuels. Based on these reviews, the committee may recommend changes in the sources and/or quantities of biofuels purchased. 
(4)  Review new fuels and technologies that may be incorporated in the city's green fleet program. 
On an annual basis, the departmental directors shall submit a draft green fleet plan to the review committee. The GFP will also include, as an appendix or addendum, an updated fleet vehicle inventory list in the same format as the fleet vehicle inventory completed in section 22.5-4. 
Each GFP shall be reviewed by the review committee for overall conformity with the green fleet policy and for completeness in addressing the green fleet goals as outlined in section 22.5-3. Inadequate plans shall be returned to the submitting department for revisal and discussion with the review committee. 
Any appeal of the review committee's decisions must be made in writing to the city manager accompanied by appropriate documentation of the reason and justification for the appeal. Valid reasons for an appeal include unavailability of appropriate fleet vehicles, incremental costs in excess of the full life-cycle savings that would accrue from the acquisition of a given vehicle and the primacy of a given vehicle's mission to public safety or a similar area judged to be applicable by the prior acting review committee. 
Approval of vehicle procurement requests for each department is contingent upon a satisfactory recommendation from the review committee as to the merit of the department's green fleet plan. Final approval of individual purchases will be made by the GSA director. 
The department submitting and implementing the most innovative green fleet plan shall receive an annual award. The review committee shall determine the recipient of the award during the annual green fleet plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 13001, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Secs. 22.5-6—22.5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GREENSPACE MANAGEMENT FUND 
 
Sec. 22.5-26. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the assigned definitions for all purposes under this article: 
Greenspace means The interconnected network of landscapes that serve the residents, businesses, visitors, and future generations of the city by providing natural drainage, clean water, wildlife habitat, and passive recreational opportunities to the city. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-27. - Intent. 
The greenspace management fund (the "fund") will serve as an account for the receipt of voluntary contributions and funds appropriated from the city each fiscal year which will be used to acquire, improve, and preserve the city's public greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-28. - Established. 
There shall be established the greenspace management fund. It will be maintained and administered by the city pursuant to this article and used to fund the acquisition, improvement, and preservation of greenspace in the city, for activities such as: 
(1)  Planting or maintaining trees on city-owned property; 
(2)  Developing multi-use trails to connect city parks, points of interest and existing or proposed trails in adjoining communities; 
(3)  Preserving watersheds, wildlife corridors and other essential components of the natural environment; 
(4)  Restoring the integrity of natural resources in areas that have been degraded or damaged; 
(5)  Maximizing the ability of natural resources to control run-off and flooding; 
(6)  Providing environmental education that promotes the preservation and acquisition of greenspace; 
(7)  Promoting public and private participation in the stewardship of resources such as forests, watersheds, bays, wetlands, floodplains, groundwater recharge areas, wildlife habitats, urban trees, and open spaces; and 
(8)  Acquiring additional greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13002, § 2, adopted June 12, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections a.—h. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(8).  
Sec. 22.5-29. - Payments to fund. 
Payments into the fund shall include appropriations from the city general revenue fund, voluntary contributions, including any federal or state moneys, money awarded through grants, fundraising or promotions, including all accumulated interest. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-30. - Management. 
The fund will be managed by the city manager or designee, whose duties shall include: 
(1)  Accounting for deposits and accrued interest and expenditures from the fund; and 
(2)  Allocating at least 80 percent of the fund to greenspace management during each fiscal year; and 
(3)  Limiting expenditures from the fund to no more than five percent of each fiscal year for administrative costs related to reporting and management of the fund; and 
(4)  Seeking additional funding resources; and 
(5)  Presenting to the city commission an annual financial report at the close of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13002, § 2, adopted June 12, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections a.—e. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(5).  
Sec. 22.5-31. - Allowable expenditures. 
(a)  All fund transactions shall be made by the city manager or designee, in accordance with this chapter; 
(b)  Before funds are dispersed, due consideration must be given to written recommendations from the directors of sustainable initiatives and resilience and public works; 
(c)  The city commission may approve, deny or expedite any expenditure under this chapter; and 
(d)  Approval by the city commission will be required for those transactions in excess of $50,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 13002, § 2, 6-12-08; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 22.5-32—22.5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTALLY PREFERABLE PURCHASING 
 
Sec. 22.5-51. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide the framework to reduce negative impacts to human health and the environment through environmentally preferable purchasing in order to: 
(1)  Increase purchases of environmentally preferable products and services to achieve the city's mission, while maintaining performance and availability and remaining cost effective, with continual improvement. 
(2)  Reduce occupational health hazards for city staff and reduce exposure of city residents and visitors to potentially toxic chemicals by purchasing environmentally sensitive, sustainable goods for use or identifying products to be used by service providers that do not harm human health or the environment. 
(3)  Reduce the city's contribution to global climate change by purchasing goods and services that lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from commodities. 
(4)  Improve the air quality for city residents and visitors by purchasing commodities that minimize emissions of air pollutants. 
(5)  Protect the quality of the city's ground and surface waters by eliminating the use of chemicals known to contaminate local water resources and ecological systems through toxicity, bioaccumulation or persistence. 
(6)  Preserve resources locally and globally through purchasing practices that include: 
a.  Maximizing the use of water and energy efficient products; 
b.  Maximizing post-consumer recycled content and readily recyclable or compostable materials; 
c.  Reducing the use or creation of landfilled materials; 
d.  Favoring long-term product use through durability, repairability, and reuse; 
e.  Considering life-cycle analysis of products consisting of, but not limited to, manufacture, transportation, use, and disposal; 
f.  Supporting strong recycling markets; 
g.  Creating a model for successfully purchasing environmentally preferable products that encourages other purchasers or consumers in our community to adopt similar practices. 
(Ord. No. 13003, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-52. - Definitions. 
Environmentally preferable products and services means products or services, including construction and professionally related services, that have a lesser or reduced deleterious effect on human health and the environment when compared with competing products or services that serve the same purpose. This comparison may consider raw materials acquisition, production method or location, manufacturing, packaging, distribution method, reuse, operation, maintenance, or disposal of the product or service. 
Environmental violations means violations of federal, state, county, and city laws, codes, and ordinances instituted to protect the environment, including but not limited to, Titles 33 and 42, of the United States Code, as amended, chapter 62 of the Florida Administrative Code, as amended, chapter 24 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended, and chapters 10, 14, 22, 35, and 49, of this Code, as amended. 
Life cycle analysis means the comprehensive examination of the environmental and economic aspects of a product and potential impacts throughout its lifetime, including raw material extraction, transportation, manufacturing, use, and disposal. 
Post-consumer recycled material means only those by-products generated by a business or consumer after a desired material or product has served its intended use, and which has been separated or diverted from the solid waste stream for the purposes of collection, recycling and disposition. This does not include newsstand returns and printers' overruns. 
Practical or practicable means in compliance with local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations; without reducing safety, quality, or effectiveness; and sufficient in performance and available at a reasonable price. 
Price premium differential is the difference in price between the environmentally preferable product or service and the non-environmentally preferable product or service. 
(Ord. No. 13003, § 2, 6-12-08)  
Sec. 22.5-53. - Responsibilities of city offices, departments, and agencies. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall: 
(1)  Develop a list of approved environmentally preferable products or services designated the approved alternatives list, which shall contain: 
a.  Environmentally preferable products and services based on life cycle analysis, environmental impact, cost, availability, price-premium differential, performance and safety. The list shall include to the maximum extent practicable, but not be limited to, specifications for: paper products, wood products, furniture, toner cartridges, plastic bags, electronics, batteries, appliances, lighting, exit signs, traffic signals, construction products, landscaping, janitorial products, food containers, chemicals, packaging, meeting accommodations, thermostats, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, building insulation, playfield surfaces, landscaping, vehicles and reusable products. 
b.  For products for which the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has adopted a comprehensive procurement guideline (CPG) under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the minimum recycled content standard for products on the approved alternatives list shall not be less than the content standards specified in the most recent CPG. 
c.  The approved alternatives list shall include products for which the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Energy Star® program provides ratings, such as for any equipment that uses electricity, natural gas, or fuel oil as well as products that indirectly impact energy use, such as, but not limited to, windows, doors and skylights. 
(2)  Develop and maintain achievable practicable standards, for all products on the approved alternatives list. The standards shall include, but not be limited to: energy efficiency, contribution to greenhouse gas emissions, depletion of natural resources, reusability, waste generation, potential impact on human health and the environment, recycled content, water efficiency, and life-cycle. 
(b)  All city offices, departments, and agencies shall: 
(1)  Purchase and use environmentally preferable products and services on the approved alternatives list, when practicable. 
(2)  Institute practices that reduce waste and result in the purchase of fewer products whenever practicable, without reducing performance or safety. 
(3)  Consider short-term and long-term costs (life-cycle analysis) in comparing product alternatives, when practicable. This includes evaluation of total costs expected during the time a product is owned, including, but not limited to, acquisition, extended warranties, operation, supplies, maintenance, disposal costs and expected lifetime compared to other alternatives. 
(4)  Purchase products that are durable, long lasting, reusable or refillable whenever practicable. 
(5)  Explore the elimination of packaging or minimize the amount necessary for product protection to the greatest extent practicable. 
(6)  Identify or use packaging that is reusable, recyclable or compostable, when suitable uses and programs exist. 
(7)  Reuse pallets and packaging materials, whenever possible. 
(8)  Require suppliers of electronic equipment, including, but not limited to, computers, monitors, printers, and copiers, to reuse or safely recycle the products upon discarding or replacing such equipment. 
(9)  Incorporate training on environmentally preferable products and services into existing procurement training programs and supplier and vendor outreach programs to encourage contractors, consultants, sponsors, suppliers, and vendors to use environmentally preferable products and services with the maximum amount of post-consumer recycled material and certify that products and services are environmentally preferable. 
(10)  Insure all specifications, standards, scope of work, or scope of services, drawings, or work statements incorporate the purchase of environmentally preferable products or services as required in this article and eliminate any standards or specifications that create artificial barriers to the purchase of environmentally preferable products and services. 
(c)  Procurement pursuant to the procurement code of the city, as amended, more specifically, issued invitation for bids (IFB), request for proposals (RFP), request for qualifications (RFQ), and request for letters of interest (RFLI) shall reference the ordinance from which this article derives, define environmentally preferable products and services, and reference the approved alternatives list when applicable. 
Environmental compliance history shall be considered during procurement. Bidders with three or more environmental violations within a one-year period shall not be considered. 
Additional environmental violations may include: 
(1)  Neglecting to institute or maintain best management practices (BMPs), as described in the environmental protection agency's Storm Water Management for Industrial Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices Summary Guidance Manual (1992), in order to reduce or prevent unfavorable environmental impact to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  Illicit discharges and connections, or illegal dumping as defined by the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, issued by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, for which the resilience and public works, building, solid waste, and code enforcement departments or any other city, county, or federal department or agency of competent jurisdiction have issued a citation, notice of violation (NOV) or other written notice of non-compliance. 
Bidders that have committed environmental violations while contracted by the city, Miami-Dade County, the state, or the United States government shall be excluded from consideration on future city projects for at least one year from the date of the most recent violation. If a contractor or consultant commits an environmental violation while performing work for the city, payment shall be withheld until the contractor or consultant, at its own expense, completely corrects and mitigates the environmental violation to the satisfaction of the city and any other applicable regulatory agencies. The violator, its agents, servants, affiliates, or representatives shall fully hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, directors, and employees, from liabilities, penalties, damages, losses, and costs, including, but not limited to the correction and remediation of an environmental violation and reasonable attorney's fees, to the extent caused by the environmental violation. 
(d)  Upon the recommendation of the chief procurement officer, the budget director, or the chief financial officer, the city manager or designee may waive the requirement to purchase environmentally preferable products and services on the approved alternatives list based on the following: 
(1)  When the price premium differential is over ten percent; 
(2)  A finding is made that the city is at a financial deficit and the purchase of environmentally preferable products or services would be cost-prohibitive; 
(3)  The product or service is not available; 
(4)  The product or service is unsafe; or 
(5)  The product or service does not have adequate competition. 
The city manager or designee will periodically issue reports detailing the implementation status of this article, review product standards, make recommendations for raised standards, and total quantities by volume and dollar amount of environmental preferable products or services purchased. 
(Ord. No. 13003, § 2, 6-12-08; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 22.5-54—22.5-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 22.5-71. - Intent. 
The intent of the water conservation ordinance [this article] is to establish a water conservation program that serves to protect the quality and quantity of the water resources of the city. The city will cooperate with the South Florida Water Management District and Miami-Dade County to promote methods to conserve and reuse this valuable resource for city residents as well as city operations. 
(Ord. No. 13071, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 22.5-72. - Definitions. 
Address means the "house number" (a numeric alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes the physical location of a specific property. This includes "rural route" numbers but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the United States Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the property's address. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar residential community is not used by the United States Postal Service (e.g. the park manager sorts incoming mail delivered to the community's address), then the community's main address shall be the property's address. If a property has no address it shall be considered "even-numbered." 
Athletic recreation area means all golf course fairways, tees, roughs and greens and other athletic play surfaces; including, football, baseball, soccer, polo, tennis and lawn bowling fields, rodeo, equestrian and livestock arenas. 
City means the City of Miami. 
City manager means the city manager or designee. 
District means the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD). 
Even numbered address means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or the letters A—M, or locations with no address, such as rights-of-way. 
Existing landscape means any landscaping which has been planted and in the ground for more than 60 days. 
Irrigation systems means equipment and devices which deliver water to the landscape being irrigated including, but not limited to, pumping stations, controls, main and submain pipelines, lateral pipelines, emitters, valves, fittings and safety devices. 
Landscape means all residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental areas which are ornamentally planted including, but not limited to, turf, ground covers, flowers, shrubs, trees, sand, mulch, hedges and similar plant materials, lawns, sod, grass, and such other flora, not intended for resale, which are situated in such diverse locations as residential landscapes, recreation areas, cemeteries, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, public medians, and rights-of-way except athletic play areas as defined in this section. 
Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, sod, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, ornamental gardens, and such other flora not intended for resale, which are planted and are situated in such diverse locations as residential landscapes, recreation areas, cemeteries, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, public medians, and rights-of-way except athletic play areas as defined in this section. 
Low volume hand watering means the watering of landscape by one person, with one hose, fitted with a self canceling or automatic shutoff nozzle. 
Low volume irrigation means the use of equipment and devices specifically designed to allow the volume of water delivered to be limited to a level consistent with the water requirement of the plant being irrigated and to allow that water to be placed with a high degree of efficiency in the root zone of the plant. The term also includes water used in mist houses and similar establishments for plant propagation. Overhead irrigation and flood irrigation are not included. 
Micro-irrigation means the application of small quantities of water on or below the soil surface as drops or tiny streams of spray through emitter or applicators placed along a water delivery line, including methods or concepts such as bubblers, drips, trickles, mists or microsprays, and subsurface irrigation. 
New landscaping means any landscaping which has been planted and in the ground for 60 days or less. 
Odd numbered address means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, or the letters N—Z. 
Reclaimed water means wastewater that has received at least secondary treatment and basic disinfection and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater treatment facility as defined by Rule 62-40.210, F.A.C. 
User means any person, individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company, agent, employee or other legal entity whether natural or artificial, the United States of America, and the State of Florida and all political subdivisions, regions, districts, municipalities, and public agencies thereof, which directly or indirectly takes water from the water resource, including uses from private or public utility systems, uses under water use permits issued pursuant to Chapter 40E-2 or 40E-20, F.A.C., or uses from individual wells or pumps. 
Water waste means allowing water to be dispersed without any practical purpose; for example, excessive landscape irrigation, leaving an unattended hose on a driveway with water flowing, allowing water to be dispersed in a grossly inefficient manner, regardless of the type of water use; for example, allowing landscape irrigation water to unnecessarily fall onto pavement, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces; allowing water flow through a broken or malfunctioning water delivery or landscape irrigation system. 
Water resource means water on or beneath the surface of the ground including, but not limited to, natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 13071, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 22.5-73. - Water shortage emergency. 
(a)  Applicability. All properties owners under the authority of the Miami-Dade Water and Sewer Department ("MDWASD") within the city limits. 
(b)  Water shortage guidelines. 
(1)  The city hereby adopts the water shortage plan, Rule 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as amended, which is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(2)  The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency as defined by the governing board or executive director of the district, within all or any part of the city, shall invoke the provisions of this article. Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district shall be applicable to the city or any portion thereof and be enforced pursuant to subsection (c). Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C. as amended, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. Every code enforcement officer or designee of the city manager shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  Violations of the provision of this article may be punished pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, as amended and the code enforcement ordinance of the city, as amended with a civil infraction. 
(2)  Violations of any provision of this section shall be subject to chapter 2, article 10, and to the following penalties: 
a.  First violation: $75.00 fine. 
Second and subsequent violations: Fine not to exceed $500.00. 
b.  Each day in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this article, no person shall be found to have committed a repeat violation of the provisions of this article that occurred during a prior water shortage or water shortage emergency which is no longer in effect. 
(3)  The provisions of this article are not the exclusive remedy or means for enforcement of the code of the city and do not precluded any other remedies available by law. 
(Ord. No. 13071, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 22.5-74. - Year-round water conservation. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  To assist in reducing overall per capita water use in the city in accordance with the goals established by MDWASD. 
To reduce landscape irrigation and irrigation-related Water Waste by residents and other entities that receive water from MDWASD as well as water from other ground water and surface water sources for landscape irrigation. 
(2)  To reduce water waste, i.e., overwatering, inefficient watering. 
(b)  Year-round watering restrictions. These restrictions apply to all property owners within the city. 
(1)  Irrigation is allowed two days a week, on the following schedule: 
a.  Landscape irrigation of existing landscaping shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
b.  Residents and businesses with an odd-numbered properties: Landscape irrigation is permitted on Wednesdays and Saturdays only. 
c.  Residents and businesses with even-numbered properties: Landscape irrigation is permitted on Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Irrigation of new landscaping shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Irrigation of new landscaping shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  On the day the new landscaping is installed, the new landscaping may be irrigated once without regard to the normally allowable watering days and times. Irrigation of the soil immediately prior to the installation of the new landscaping is also allowable without regard to the normal allowable watering days and times. 
c.  The 60-day period begins the day the new landscaping is installed. The new landscaping shall be installed within a reasonable time from the date of purchase which may be demonstrated with a dated receipt or invoice. 
d.  Irrigation of new landscaping which has been in place for 30 days or less may be accomplished on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and/or Sunday. 
e.  Irrigation of new landscaping which has been in place for 31 to 60 days may be accomplished on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and/or Saturday. 
f.  Irrigation of the new landscaping is limited to areas containing the new landscaping only. An entire zone of an irrigation system shall only be utilized for landscape irrigation under this paragraph if the zone in question is for an area that contains at least 50 percent new landscaping. If a zone contains less than 50 percent new landscaping, or if the new landscaping is in an area that will not typically be irrigated by an irrigation system, only the individual new plantings are eligible for additional irrigation under this paragraph. Targeted watering may be accomplished by low volume hand watering, or any appropriate method which isolates and waters only the new landscaping. 
(3)  Landscape irrigation systems may be operated during restricted days and/or times for cleaning, maintenance, and repair purposes with an attendant on site in the area being tested. Landscape irrigation systems may routinely be operated for such purposes no more than once per week, and the run time for any one test should not exceed ten minutes per zone. 
(4)  Landscape irrigation for the purpose of water-in fertilizers, insecticides, pesticides, fungicides and herbicides, where such watering-in is recommended by the manufacturer, or be federal, state or local law, or best management practices, shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
a.  Such watering-in shall be limited to one application unless the need for more than one application is stated in the directions for application specified by the manufacturer; and 
b.  Such watering-in shall be accomplished during normally allowable watering days and times set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (2) unless a professional licensed applicator has posted a temporary sign containing the date of application and the date(s) of needed watering in activity. 
(5)  Any plant material may be watered using low volume irrigation, micro-irrigation, low-volume hand watering methods, and rain barrels, cisterns, or other rain harvesting devices without regard to the watering days or times allowed pursuant to this section. 
(6)  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b)(1)—(3): 
a.  Low-volume irrigation systems and hand-watering including but not limited to the use of a hose with a self-canceling or closing nozzle. 
b.  Irrigation with treated wastewater effluent, reclaimed water in accordance with federal, state and local water reuse quality standards, or the use of saltwater. 
c.  Irrigation of landscaping for purposes of watering in fungicides, insecticides and herbicides, where watering is required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or local laws. This exemption shall apply only to licensed pest control applicators and shall be limited to the minimum amount specified by the manufacturer's recommendations for the products applied. 
d.  The operation of irrigation systems for installation, cleaning, repairs, and maintenance purposes by a licensed irrigation contractor or the property owner(s). Each irrigation zone may be tested no more than once a week by the property owners and more frequently by a licensed irrigation contractor. However, such testing shall be limited to the minimum necessary to maintain efficient operation of the system. 
e.  Irrigation of new lawns and landscaping between 11:00 a.m. and 12:01 p.m. daily for a period of 30 days or until the lawn or landscaping is considered established, whichever period is shorter. 
(7)  Enforcement. Every code enforcement officer or designee of the city manager shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this section. 
(8)  Penalties. Violations of any provision of this section shall be subject to chapter 2, article 10, and to the following penalties: 
a.  First violation: $75.00 fine. 
Second and subsequent violations: Fine not to exceed $500.00. 
b.  Each day in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
c.  The provisions of this article are not the exclusive remedy or means for enforcement of the Code of the city and do not precluded any other remedies available by law. 
(Ord. No. 13071, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 22.5-75. - Requirements for plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  Intent. To require reduced flow rates and consumption for plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings, and appliances installed within the city. Such high efficiency plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings, and appliances shall comply with the specifications below or with the United States. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WaterSense Program, where applicable. 
(b)  Requirements for plumbing fixtures. 
(1)  The city hereby adopts Section 8-31(A) of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, which consists of the following local technical amendments to Table 604.4 of Chapter 6 (Plumbing) of the Florida Building Code. 
604.4 Maximum flow and water consumption. 
The maximum water consumption flow rates and quantities for all plumbing fixtures and fixture fittings shall be in accordance with Table 604.4. Permit applications for new residential and commercial structures shall include high efficiency plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances as provided in Table 604.4. Such high efficiency plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances shall comply with the specifications in Table 604.4 or have received the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WaterSense Label. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Blowout design water closets having a maximum water consumption of 3.5 gallons (13 L) per flushing cycle. 
2.  Vegetable sprays. 
3.  Clinical sinks having a maximum water consumption of 4.5 gallons (17 L) per flushing cycle. 
4.  Service sinks. 
5.  Emergency showers. 
TABLE 604.4 MAXIMUM FLOW RATES AND CONSUMPTION FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING 	MAXIMUM FLOW RATE OR QUANTITY;sup\sup; 
Lavatory, private 	1.5 gpm at 60 psi 
Lavatory, public, (metering) 	0.25 gallon per metering cycle 
Lavatory, public (other than metering) 	0.5 gpm at 60 psi 
Shower head (a) 	1.5 gpm at 80 psi 
Sink faucet 	1.5 gpm at 60 psi 
Urinal 	Waterless or 0.5 gallon per flushing cycle 
Water closet 	1.28 gallons per flushing cycle (effective 1.28 gpf for dual flush systems) 
Dishwasher (residential) 	6.5 gallons per cycle or less (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) (c) 
Dishwasher (commercial) 	Less than 1.2 gallons per rack for fill and dump machines and less than 0.9 gallons per rack for all other types of machines 
Dishwasher (under the counter machines) 	1.0 gallon or less per rack for high-temperature machines and 1.7 gallons per rack for low temperature machines. 
Washing machine 	Water factor of 8 or lower (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) (c) 
gpm: gallons per minute 
psi: pounds per square inch 
For SI: 
1 gallon = 3.785 L 
1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m 
1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa. 
(a) A handheld shower spray is a showerhead. 
(b) Consumption tolerances shall be determined from referenced standards. 
(c) Water factor in gallons per cycle per cubic foot. 
 
(2)  The city hereby adopts Section 8-31(B) of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, which consists of the following local technical amendments to Table P2903.2a of Chapter 29 (Residential) of the Florida Building Code. 
P2903.2a Maximum flow and water consumption. 
The maximum water consumption flow rates and quantities for all plumbing fixtures, fixture, fittings and appliances shall be in accordance with Table P2903.2a. Permit applications for new residential structures shall include high efficiency plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances as provided in Table P2903.2a. Such high efficiency plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances shall comply with the specifications in Table P2903.2a or have received the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WaterSense Label. 
TABLE P2903.2a 
MAXIMUM FLOW RATES AND CONSUMPTION FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES, FIXTURE FITTINGS AND APPLIANCES 
PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING 	PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING MAXIMUM FLOW RATE (b) 
Lavatory faucet 	1.5 gpm at 60 psi 
Shower head (a) 	1.5 gpm at 80 psi 
Sink faucet 	1.5 gpm at 60 psi 
Water closet 	1.28 gallons per flushing (gpf) cycle (effective 1.28 gpf for dual flush systems) 
Dishwasher (residential) 	6.5 gallons per cycle or less (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) (c) 
Washing machine 	Water factor of 8 or lower (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) (c) 
 
(Ord. No. 13071, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Secs. 22.5-76—22.5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION INDOOR ENVIRONMENTAL AIR QUALITY (IAQ) MANAGEMENT PLAN DURING CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 22.5-91. - Intent. 
The city is committed to minimizing short and long term negative impacts that construction may have on the environment. The intent of this article is to increase indoor air quality in buildings for the benefit of its occupants. 
(Ord. No. 13080, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-92. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all construction sites under the authority and within the limits of the city which meet the criteria below. 
(1)  Construction of a new residential building with three or more units. 
(2)  Construction of a new non-residential building, for projects of more than 4,000 total square feet. 
(3)  Any substantial rehabilitation of a structure where the estimated construction cost exceeds 50 percent of the value of said structure. 
(Ord. No. 13080, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-93. - Standards and requirements: Construction. 
Construction IAQ Management Plan. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a statement of the plans detailing the Construction IAQ Management actions to be implemented during the construction and pre-occupancy phases of the building shall be submitted to the city and shall include: 
(1)  Construction IAQ Management plan that shall be based upon the recommended Control Measures of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning National Contractors Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guidelines for Occupied Buildings Under Construction, 2nd Edition 2007, ANSI/SMACNA 008-2008, Chapter 3; and 
(2)  Proof that on-site or installed absorptive materials will be protected from moisture damage; and 
(3)  If permanently installed air handlers are used during construction, proof that filtration media with a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 8 will be used at each return air grille. In addition, all filtration media shall be replaced immediately prior to occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 13080, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-94. - Compliance. 
Prior to the issuing of a final zoning inspection, a statement of substantial compliance will be submitted by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 13080, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Secs. 22.5-95—22.5-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION, WATERWAY SEDIMENTATION, AND AIRBORNE DUST GENERATION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 22.5-121. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to locally implement F.S. § 403.0885 and Florida Administrative Code Chapter 62-621.300, known as the "generic permit for stormwater discharge from large and small construction activities" (the permit") by providing the City of Miami with improved water and air quality. Preventive jobsite practices can minimize environmental risks from the erosion, air pollution, and sedimentation on sites with disturbed soil. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits or approvals to undertake construction, demolition or renovation projects within the city. Best management practices ("BMPs") means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable erosion, dust generation, off-site sedimentation, and pollution of City of Miami waterways and storm drainage systems. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from material storage. 
Construction means the act of creating or maintaining stockpiles of soil or other material which are erodible if exposed to water or wind and are capable of generating dust; or developing or improving public or private land which involves the removal of surface cover or disturbance of soils and includes clearing, grading, demolition, and excavation. 
Dust control means providing temporary fencing to mitigate the effects of dust upon the surrounding community in accordance with Ordinance 12930. 
Erosion means the detachment, transport, and deposition of particulate matter by the action of wind, water, and gravity. 
Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and which occurs immediately following, a rainfall event. 
Stormwater discharge facility means a stormwater management system which discharges stormwater into surface waters of the state. 
Stormwater Management System means the designed features of the property which collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit or divert the movement of stormwater. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (the "plan") means a written plan, approved by the city submitted by the applicant which identifies a strategy to minimize stormwater runoff that will be generated. The SWPPP shall follow the guidelines of the Florida Stormwater, Erosion, and Sedimentation Control Inspector's Manual published by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-123. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all construction and demolition sites and activities under the authority of the City of Miami. All such sites and activities within the authority of the City of Miami shall be required to contain and control all sediment and sediment-laden water on-site. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-124. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (the "plan"). 
To obtain a permit for construction projects which will disturb over one acre of soil, the applicant must develop and implement a plan in accordance with the requirements the "permit" or local erosion and sedimentation control standards and codes, whichever is more stringent. Construction sites with areas of disturbed soil between 0.5 acres and one acre may use an alternative format, approved by the city, provided it supplies all the information required by the permit. The plan must be approved by the City of Miami Department of Resilience and Public Works National Pollution Discharge Elimination System section prior to the commencement of construction activities. 
The plan shall describe the current and final conditions of the construction site, the nature of the work to be performed, the BMPs to be implemented to prevent stormwater pollution, control erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation, who will implement these measures, the schedule of implementation, and include a narrative section; site plan; details, specifications, and notes; and calculations. The plan must include the following: 
(1)  Name of the person who is responsible should the site fall out of compliance. 
(2)  Narrative description of the procedures to be used to control erosion, sedimentation and air pollution. 
(3)  Site map indicating locations of disturbed soil and control methods. 
(4)  Inspection schedule for all erosion, stormwater, and sediment control measures or best management practices (BMPs): A qualified person procured by the applicant must perform erosion, sediment and stormwater pollution prevention inspections at least weekly and within 24 hours after every rain event of one-half inch or more for sites less than five acres. Sites greater than five acres must be inspected at least weekly and within 24 hours after every rain event of one-quarter-inch or more. Maintenance must be performed within one week of the first inspection that indicates such maintenance is required. 
(5)  Method to be instituted to ensure that all parties who engage in activities which disturb soil or have the potential to cause stormwater pollution engage in such activities in a manner that minimizes erosion, off-site sedimentation, dust migration, and stormwater pollution to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  Identify how materials on the construction site which are capable of causing stormwater pollution will be handled and stored in order to prevent such pollution. Such materials include, but are not limited to: paint, concrete, aggregates, fertilizers, pesticides, and fuels. 
If the approved plan is found to be ineffective in controlling erosion, stormwater pollution, or off-site sedimentation, the site shall be deemed out of compliance with this section. The construction site operator is responsible to amend the plan to ensure compliance. In such cases where off-site sedimentation or turbidity originates from a different site, then the property owner of that site shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 22.5-125. - Plan management. 
The approved plan as amended and documentation of all inspections must be kept on the construction site until a final certificate of occupancy is issued. Within 30 days after the completion of construction for any covered project, the applicant shall submit official documentation that the applicant has complied with the plan requirement for the project. Commercial properties are further required to submit the environmental resource permit approved by the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD) or any successor agency for the property's stormwater management system. 
The documentation for the plan shall include the following: 
(1)  The steps taken to remove sludge and waste; 
(2)  Documentation of all construction site inspections and modifications to BMPs; 
(3)  The plan, including any amendments made during the course of construction; and 
(4)  Any additional information that the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter. 
The documentation submitted with the environmental resource permit shall contain: 
(1)  A construction certification affidavit signed by a registered professional engineer; and 
(2)  A maintenance schedule plan for the onsite stormwater management system. Subsequent to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the property owner shall be held responsible for compliance with the environmental resource permit. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-126. - Failure to submit documentation. 
If the documentation is submitted after the required 30-day time period, there will be a fee of $100.00. A city official shall evaluate whether the applicant has otherwise complied with the stormwater pollution prevention requirement for the project. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09)  
Sec. 22.5-127. - Administrative fee. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any resilience and public works, zoning, planning, building, or demolition permit for a construction project which will disturb 0.5 acres or more of soil, the applicant shall pay the city a stormwater utility fee of $395.00. All fees and fines generated as a result of this article shall be deposited into the stormwater utility fee account in the general fund for the stormwater management system and shall be used to administer this program and to further the city's efforts prevent pollution of stormwater systems. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09; Ord. No. 13195, § 3, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13366, § 3, 3-14-13; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18;m Ord. No. 13798, § 3, 10-25-18)  
Sec. 22.5-128. - Compliance and enforcement. 
The code enforcement department and resilience and public works department shall evaluate compliance with this article during the course of their regular inspections. Additional inspections may be conducted by other city departments as needed, to ensure compliance with this section. If the city inspector finds that the applicant does not comply with the requirements of this article, the violated portions of this article shall be noted in the inspection report and a hold may be placed on future inspections or the temporary or final certificate of occupancy may be withheld, as appropriate. 
The certificate of occupancy for a project subject to this section shall be withheld until the applicant both (A) submits the required documentation, including, where applicable, proof that any fine due under this subsection has been paid in full, and (B) performs any actions required by the resilience and public works department, building department, code enforcement department, the Miami-Dade County Department of Environmental Resource Management (DERM), or any other agency of competent jurisdiction in order to correct erosion, sediment control, or stormwater violations observed at the construction site. 
Applicants and property owners whose sites fail to meet the stormwater pollution prevention criteria identified shall be subject to the following fines by code enforcement: 
(1)  Failure to implement or properly maintain sufficient erosion, sediment, or airborne dust controls: $1,000.00 per violation per day. 
(2)  Causing off-site sedimentation or turbidity to waterways, private or public property, or the storm sewer system: $1,000.00 per violation per day. 
(3)  Discharging water containing sediments or other substances to waterways, the storm sewer system, public, or private property: $1,000.00 per violation per day. 
(4)  Causing the off-site migration of airborne dust: $1,000.00 per violation. 
(5)  Failure to obtain or comply with the environmental resource permit subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy which results in the discharge of sediment, turbidity or stormwater from private property to adjacent private or public property: $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 13081, § 2, 7-9-09; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Chapter 23 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Overtown Advisory Board, § 2-1051 et seq.; historic and environmental preservation board, § 62-26 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13008, § 2, adopted June 26, 2008, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article I pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 23.1-1—23.1-6; Ord. No. 10875, § 1, adopted April 25, 1991; Ord. No. 11200, § 3, adopted November 17, 1994; Ord. No. 11564, § 11, adopted October 28, 1997; Ord. No. 12195, § 2, adopted March 7, 2002; Ord. No. 12496, § 2, adopted February 26, 2004.  Ord. No. 13008 enacted provisions intended for use as sections 23-7—23-9. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as sections 23-6.1—23-6.3. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this chapter is to preserve and protect the heritage of the city through the identification, evaluation, rehabilitation, adaptive use, restoration, and public awareness of Miami's historic, architectural, and archaeological resources. This chapter is further intended to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of structures, landscape features, archaeological and pale ontological resources, areas, neighborhoods, and scenic vistas which represent distinctive elements of the city's historic, cultural, archaeological, pale ontological, aesthetic, and architectural heritage. 
(2)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past. 
(3)  Protect and enhance the aesthetic and environmental character, diversity, and interest of neighborhoods. 
(4)  Stabilize and improve property values in neighborhoods and in the city. 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to residents, tourists, and visitors and thereby serve as a support and stimulus to the economy. 
(6)  Promote the use of historic resources, historic districts, and archaeological sites and zones for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Provide the framework and legal mechanism for identifying and designating those properties that have major significance in the city's historic, cultural, archaeological, paleontological, aesthetic, and architectural heritage. 
(2)  Provide a mechanism whereby the HEPB may, in the interest of historic preservation, waive certain zoning requirements for those existing structures deemed individually significant, or "contributing" within a designated historic district, or a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation. 
(3)  Provide a mechanism whereby the historic and environmental preservation board may, in the interests of historic preservation, allow signage which has been deemed "historic" to remain, and be repaired, restored, relocated, structurally altered, or reconstructed. 
(4)  Through the historic preservation exception or exclusion, provide mechanisms for the granting of certain uses when the granting of such use is necessary to encourage or assure the continued preservation of the individually designated historic resource, or "contributing" building within a historic district, or a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation. 
(5)  Provide an incentive for historic resources, and those deemed "eligible" by the city HEPB for historic designation, known as "Transfer of Development Rights and Density for Historic Resources." 
(6)  Establish minimum standards to qualify eligible resources, that while not yet officially locally designated under the provisions of this chapter, qualify as eligible for listing and thereby may apply for transfer of development rights and density, provided that the resource is formally listed in the city register of historic places within one year from the date of the historic and environmental preservation board's review of the application. 
(7)  Establish procedures for the review of nominations to the national register of historic places as governed by the requirements of the state division of historical resources. 
(8)  Assure that alterations and new construction within designated historic sites, historic districts, multiple property designations, and archaeological zones are compatible with the property's historic character. 
(c)  Pursuant to subsection 16A-3(2)(c) of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, the city expressly reserves and retains jurisdiction over archaeological zones and sites within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13180, § 2, 5-27-10; Ord. No. 13537, § 2, 7-23-15; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17; Ord. No. 13785, § 2, 9-13-18)  
Sec. 23-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply only to this chapter; undefined terms shall be defined as set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, or as commonly used: 
Accelerated certificate of appropriateness. A review of proposed physical changes to a historic resource that is conducted by the board concurrently with a request for historic designation. 
Adaptive reuse. The process of converting a building to a use other than that for which it was designed. 
Addition. A construction project physically connected to the exterior of a building. 
Alteration. Any change affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or its setting by additions, reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance involving change in color, form, texture, signs, or materials, or any such changes in appearance of designated interiors. 
Applicant. The owner of record of a property and/or structures located thereon, or their authorized representative. 
Application, complete. An application for approval sought pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed complete if it is on a form approved by the city and all applicable information is provided by the applicant on the form, or attachment(s), as applicable or necessary, at the time of its filing and all required fees are paid. 
Archaeological conservation area. A geographically defined area delineated in the Miami comprehensive neighborhood plan on the future land use plan map series entitled "Historic District Boundaries and Historically Significant Properties Meriting Protection" where the probability of sub-surface artifacts is considered likely. 
Archaeological site. A single specific location which has yielded or is likely to yield information on local history, prehistory, or paleontology, and which has been designated as such through the provisions of this chapter. 
Archaeological zone. A geographically defined area which may reasonably be expected to yield information on local history, prehistory, or paleontology based upon broad prehistoric or historic settlement patterns, and which has been designated as such through the provisions of this chapter. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A written document, issued pursuant to this article, permitting specified alterations, demolitions, or other work; or to allow certain waivers from the criteria set forth in the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
Certificate of approval. A written document permitting tree removal or development activity within those areas identified and established as environmental preservation districts or scenic transportation corridors. 
Certificate of eligibility. A written document issued by the planning director or designee to the eligible historic resource (sending site), stipulating the amount of area and/or density available for transfer. 
Certificate of transfer. A document issued by the planning director or designee that authorizes the transfer of specified undeveloped rights from a historic resource (sending property) to a receiving site. Certificates of transfer shall comply with all applicable land development regulations as that term is defined by F.S. § 163.3164, as amended, "Community Planning Act; definitions". 
Certificate to dig. A written document permitting certain ground disturbing activities, such as filling, grading, swimming pool excavation and the removal of vegetation or trees that may involve the discovery of as yet unknown or known archaeological resources within a designated archaeological site or zone. 
Certified local government. A government satisfying the requirements of the U.S. National Historic Preservation Act amendments of 1980 (Public Law 96-515) and the implementing of applicable regulations of the department of the interior and the state. 
Contributing resource/landscape feature. A building, landscape feature, site, structure or object that adds to the historical/architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because: it was present during the period of significance of the district, and possesses historic integrity, reflecting its character at that time; or it is capable of providing important information about the period; or it independently meets the National Register of Historic Places criteria for evaluation set forth in 36 CFR Part 60.4 incorporated by reference. 
Cultural facility. A place established for the advancement of culture, including but not limited to: art, dance, music, literature and other intellectual and performance activities. 
Demolition. The complete destruction of a structure, or any part thereof. 
Demolition by neglect. The deliberate or inadvertent failure to maintain minimum maintenance standards for those properties designated historic either individually or as a contributing property within a historic district or as a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation by action of the historic and environmental preservation board. 
Density. Density will be as defined by Article 1 of Miami 21 and by F.S. § 163.3164, as amended, "Community Planning Act; definitions," which provides that it means an objective measurement of the number of people or residential units allowed per unit of land, such as residents or employees per acre. 
Eligible historic resource. A term used to describe archaeological sites and individual buildings, which have not yet been locally designated under the provisions under this chapter but have met the eligibility criteria and been certified by the historic and environmental preservation board as having met that criteria; so that they may take advantage of the transfer of development and density rights programs, providing that their owners commit to the official local designation within a period of one year from the board's approval of the determination of eligibility. 
Environmental preservation district. Geographical areas, parcels or corridors, which have been or may be identified in the future, established by the city commission as having significant natural or landscape attributes in need of preservation and control because of their educational, economic, ecological and environmental importance to the welfare of the general public and the city as a whole, and identified in the official atlas of environmental preservation districts and scenic transportation corridors. 
Existing conditions report. A report prepared by a registered architect or engineer that describes the current general condition of an eligible historic resource that is applying for a certificate of transfer. 
Florida master site file (FMSF). The list, or catalog, maintained by the division of historical resources, of those recorded historical and archaeological sites and properties in the state, usually the result of a systematic survey. 
Ground disturbing activity. Any excavation, filling, digging, removal of trees, or any other activity that may alter or reveal an interred archaeological or pale ontological site. 
Historic district. A geographically defined area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites or structures united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
Historic and environmental preservation atlas. The official historic and environmental preservation atlas of the city, as amended, which shows all designated historic sites, historic districts, multiple property designations, and archaeological zones. 
Historic preservation exception. When used in this chapter, an exception allows for a certain use to be allowed in specifically identified transects, when such use results in significant preservation strategies. 
Historic preservation exclusion. When used in this chapter, an exclusion allows for a cultural facilities use in medium and high density multifamily (general urban) zones, when such use results in significant preservation objectives. 
Historic preservation waiver. When used in this chapter, a difference from what is required under the underlying transect provisions and what may be allowed when used to promote historic preservation. 
Historic resource. An overarching term used to describe the various categories of properties which have demonstrated significance in the history of the city, the county, the state and/or the nation. These properties include landscape features, archaeological sites and zones, structures, buildings, districts, multiple property designations, and objects. 
Historic sign. A sign that has demonstrated artistic, historic, cultural, and/or aesthetic value, as determined by resolution of the HEPB. 
Historic site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a vanished structure, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, archaeological, or pale ontological value. 
Infill. New construction that has been designed and built to replace missing structures or otherwise fill gaps in the streetscape of a historic district. 
Interim protection measure. The interim period of time needed to protect a property building, structure, object and/or landscape feature from demolition, relocation, alteration, or new construction until such period of time provided by law passes for the property to be considered for designation as a historic site, historic district, multiple property designation, or archaeological zone. 
Landscape feature. Vegetation, geological features, ground elevation, bodies of water or other natural or environmental features. 
Locally designated historic resource. Any archaeological site or zone; individual building; structure, object, landscape feature, historic district, or multiple property designation that has been approved for designation by the city's HEPB, as prescribed by the provisions of this chapter, and shown in the historic and environmental preservation atlas. 
Maintenance plan. A written document submitted by the owner of an eligible historic resource for the transfer of development rights program, that identifies any existing deficiencies in the building along with a remediation plan for the short term, and which further identifies a plan for the cyclical maintenance of the building for the long term. 
Miami register of historic places. The list of locally designated historic resources that have met the criteria for significance and have been designated by the HEPB, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Multiple property designation. A collection of two or more historic resources related by a common theme, general geographical area, and period of time that has been designated by the HEPB pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A group of historic resources shall qualify for designation as a multiple property designation when each historic resource meets the designation criteria set forth in section 23-4. Each property in a multiple property designation shall be evaluated and reviewed individually even though it is included in the multiple property designation. Multiple property designation(s) including thematically-related multiple property designation(s) may only be made or considered in the following Neighborhood Conservation Districts ("NCD") as set forth in Appendix A to the Miami 21 Code: (i) NCD-2: Village West Island District and Charles Avenue; (ii) NCD-3: Coconut Grove Neighborhood Conservation District. 
National register of historic places. The list of historic properties significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the Secretary of the Interior, as established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. 
Non-contributing resource. A building, landscape feature, object, structure, or archaeological resource that does not add to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because it was not present during the period of significance of the district; due to alterations, disturbances, additions or other changes, it no longer possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time, or is incapable of yielding important information about the period; or does not independently meet the national register of historic places criteria for evaluation. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair. Any work, the purpose and effect of which is to correct any deterioration or decay of a structure or landscape feature, or any part thereof, by restoring it, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to such deterioration or decay, using the same materials or those materials available which are as close as possible to the original. 
Preservation. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a building or structure. It may include initial stabilization work as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building. 
Receiving site. A parcel or parcels that have increased their development rights and/or density through the purchase and application of a historic TDR and/or TDD purchase. 
Reconstruction. The act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished structure as it appeared at a specific period of time. 
Rehabilitation. The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. 
Relocation. Any change of the location of a structure in its present setting or to another setting. 
Restoration. The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
Scenic transportation corridor. Those roadways that have been identified as having a unique landscape character and/or an expansive tree canopy that is of substantial environmental importance to the city, as described in subsection 17-31(3). 
Sending property. The qualifying historic resource that is selling its unused base development rights and/or development density to the receiving site. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground or attachment to something having fixed location on the ground. 
Thematically-related. A group of historic resources related by a common theme. 
Transfer of development density (TDD). The sale of the unused development density to another party upon a binding written commitment that results in the restoration, rehabilitation, and/or preservation of the historic resource for the public benefit. A TDD shall comply with all applicable land development regulations as that term is defined by F.S. § 163.3164, as amended, "Community Planning Act; definitions". 
Transfer of development rights (TDR) for historic resources. The sale of the unused development rights to another party upon a binding written commitment that results in the restoration, rehabilitation and/or preservation of the historic resource for the public benefit. 
Unreasonable or undue economic hardship. An onerous and excessive financial burden that destroys reasonable and beneficial use of property and that would amount to the taking of property without just compensation, or failure to achieve a reasonable economic return in the case of income-producing properties. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13133, § 1, 1-28-10; Ord. No. 13180, § 2, 5-27-10; Ord. No. 13537, § 2, 7-23-15; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17; Ord. No. 13785, § 2, 9-13-18)  
Sec. 23-3. - Historic and environmental preservation board; preservation officer. 
The historic and environmental preservation board (hereinafter referred to as the "board") and the preservation officer, as established pursuant to sections 62-186 and 62-191, as amended, shall carry out the duties as assigned by this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08)  
Sec. 23-4. - Designation of historic resources, historic districts, multiple property designations, and archaeological sites and zones. 
(a)  Criteria for designation. Properties may be designated as historic resources, historic districts, multiple property designations, or archaeological sites and zones only if they have significance in the historical, cultural, archaeological, paleontological, aesthetic, or architectural heritage of the city, state, or nation; possess integrity of design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association; and meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Are associated in a significant way with the life of a person important in the past; 
(2)  Are the site of a historic event with significant effect upon the community, city, state, or nation; 
(3)  Exemplify the historical, cultural, political, economic, or social trends of the community; 
(4)  Portray the environment in an era of history characterized by one or more distinctive architectural styles; 
(5)  Embody those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, or period, or method of construction; 
(6)  Are an outstanding work of a prominent designer or builder; 
(7)  Contain elements of design, detail, materials, or work of outstanding quality or which represent a significant innovation or adaptation to the South Florida environment; or 
(8)  Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
(b)  Criteria exceptions. Ordinarily cemeteries, birth places, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature and properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered eligible for listing in the Miami register of historic places. However, such properties will qualify for designation if they are integral parts of districts or multiple property designations that do meet the criteria, or if they fall within the following categories: 
(1)  A building or structure that has been removed from its original location but is significant primarily for architectural value, or is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; 
(2)  A birthplace or grave of a local historical figure of outstanding importance if no appropriate site or building exists directly associated with his or her productive life; 
(3)  A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of outstanding importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; 
(4)  A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented appropriately as part of a restoration master plan and no other building or structure with the same association has survived; 
(5)  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own exceptional significance; 
(6)  A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is exceptionally important; or 
(7)  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance. 
(c)  Procedures for designation. Properties which meet the criteria set forth in section 23-4 may be designated as historic resources, historic districts, multiple property designations, and archaeological sites and zones according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Proposals and preliminary evaluation. Proposals for designation may be made to the board by any one of its members, the mayor, the city manager, resolution of the planning, zoning and appeals board, resolution of the city commission, the property owner, resolution of the county historic preservation board, resolution of any organization that has been a registered non-profit corporation in the state for at least five years with a recognized interest in historic preservation, or the preservation officer. In those instances when a historic district or multiple property designation is being considered, the preservation office shall conduct outreach involving all relevant home owner associations and neighborhood associations, ultimately ascertaining their level of support by way of resolution or vote. Said level of support shall be taken into consideration by staff and members of the HEPB when evaluating any proposed historic district or multiple property designation. The board shall conduct a preliminary evaluation of the data provided in the proposal for conformance with criteria set forth in subsection (a); and shall, if appropriate, direct the planning department to prepare a designation report. The board may require the party initiating such proposal to provide any necessary documentation, and to pay any applicable fees. 
a.  Notification. At least ten days prior to the meeting at which the board will consider the preliminary evaluation, the owner of property or his designated agent or attorney, on file with the city, which is the subject of said proposal for designation shall be notified by certified mail of the board's intent to consider the preliminary evaluation of the property. Should the applicant be a person other than the property owner or designated agent or attorney on file with the city, the applicant shall be notified and the owner of record of the subject property shall be notified. For historic districts or multiple property designations where there are more than 50 properties to be considered, for designation, the owners shall be notified by first class mail and by the published notice. 
The notice sent by certified mail of the board's intent to consider the preliminary evaluation of the property, when sent to the property owners of involuntarily designated residentially zoned properties in a T3-O designated transect zone that are not the applicants, will state the right to appeal the board's final decision regarding designation to the city commission, and will include in the notification a statement of the fee waiver provision contained in subsection (c)(7) herein. 
b.  Interim protection measures. From the date said notice of the preliminary evaluation is mailed, no building permit for any new construction, alteration, relocation, or demolition that may affect the property proposed for designation shall be issued until one of the following occurs: 
1.  The board finds that the property does not appear to meet the criteria for designation and votes not to direct the planning department to prepare a designation report in accordance with subsection (b)(1); 
2.  The board approves or denies the designation in accordance with subsection (b)(3), or 120 days have elapsed, whichever shall occur first, unless this time limit is waived on the record by mutual consent of the owner and the board; or 
3.  The owner applies for an accelerated certificate of appropriateness prior to final action on the designation by the board, and such certificate of appropriateness has been issued in accordance with the provisions of section 23-6.2. The preservation office shall place said application for a certificate of appropriateness on the next available agenda of the board. Any owner who carries out or causes to be carried out any work without the required certificate of appropriateness shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 23-6.2(f). 
(2)  Preparation of designation report. For every proposed historic site resource, historic district, multiple property designation, and archaeological zone, the planning department shall prepare a designation report containing the following information: 
a.  Designation report. The designation report shall contain a statement of the historic, architectural, and/or archaeological significance of the proposed historic resource, historic district, multiple property designation, or archaeological site or zone; the criteria upon which the designation is based; a physical description of the property; an identification of contributing structures, landscape features, and/or thematically-related historic resources; present trends and conditions; and incentives to encourage preservation, rehabilitation, or adaptive use. 
b.  Boundaries. The designation report shall include a map or maps indicating proposed boundaries. Boundaries for historic resources shall generally include the entire property or tract of land, unless such tract is so large that portions thereof are visually and functionally unrelated to any contributing structure or landscape feature. Historic district boundaries shall in general be drawn to include all contributing structures reasonably contiguous within an area and may include properties which individually do not contribute to the historic character of the district, but which require regulation in order to control potentially adverse influences on the character and integrity of the district. Multiple property designation boundaries shall, in general, be drawn to include all historic resources related by a common theme and may include properties which individually have no relation to the theme. Properties within the boundary that have no relation to the theme will not require regulation under this chapter of the City Code unless they are individually designated historic resources or included within a historic district or archaeological zone. Archaeological zone boundaries shall generally conform to natural physiographic features which were the focal points for prehistoric and historic activities or may be drawn along property lines, streets, or geographic features to facilitate efficient management. 
c.  Interiors. Interior spaces that have exceptional architectural, artistic, or historic importance and that are regularly open to the public may be subject to regulation under this chapter. The designation report shall describe precisely those features subject to review and shall set forth standards and guidelines for such regulations. Interior spaces not so described shall not be subject to review under this chapter. 
(3)  Notice and public hearing. The board shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the proposed historic resource, historic district, multiple property designation, archaeological site or zone meets the criteria set forth in subsection (a) and shall approve, amend, or deny the proposed designation. The board may rehear proposals based upon policies set forth in its rules of procedure. All public hearings on designations conducted by the board, except as provided in subsection (b)(1)a., and hearings on appeals of board decisions to the city commission regarding designations shall be noticed as follows: 
a.  The owner of property or his/her designated agent or attorney, if any, which is the subject of such designation shall be notified by mail at least 15 days prior to the board's meeting and ten days prior to subsequent administrative appellate hearings. The owner shall receive a copy of the designation report unless there are more than 20 owners, in which case the notice shall state that a copy is available and where it may be obtained. 
b.  An advertisement shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
c.  Signs shall be posted pursuant to subsection 62-129(2)a., as amended. 
d.  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing by the board, or city commission, as the case may be, shall be sent at least ten days in advance of the hearing by mail to all owners of property within 500 feet of the property lines of the land for which the hearing is required. The applicant shall be charged the appropriate fee established for this purpose. 
e.  For the purpose of this chapter, the names and addresses of property owners shall be deemed those appearing on the latest tax rolls of Miami-Dade County. The preservation officer, or his/her designee, shall certify at the time of the public hearing that notice as herein required was given to the persons as named and with addresses shown on his/her certification by the placing in the mail system of the United States on the date certified the herein required notice, the certification shall be conclusive of the giving of such notice; in the case of condominiums, notice will be sent solely to the condominium association. No action taken by the board, or the city commission, as the case may be, shall be voided by the failure of an individual property owner or property owners to receive notice pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  Historic and environmental preservation atlas. Historic sites, historic districts, multiple property designations, and archaeological zones designated pursuant to section 23-4 shall be shown in the "Official Historic and Environmental Preservation Atlas of the City of Miami, Florida," as amended. 
(5)  Electronic building records. Following the designation of a resource, the historic preservation officer shall note the property as a historic resource in the city's building department records. 
(6)  Notifications. Following the designation of a resource, the historic preservation officer shall notify the following parties with a copy of the resolution: 
a.  The owner(s) of record. 
b.  The Miami-Dade County Clerk of the Courts. 
(7)  Appeals. 
a.  The property owner, any one member of the city commission, the planning department, or any aggrieved party may appeal to the city commission any decision of the board on matters relating to designations by filing within 15 calendar days after the date of the decision a written notice of appeal with the hearing boards department, with a copy to the preservation officer. Such notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Appellate fees for property owners of involuntarily designated residentially zoned properties in a T3-O designated transect zone that are not the applicants, are waived. The city shall bear the cost of $3.50 for each mailed notice required pursuant to subsection (c)(3). Except as appellate fees and mailed notice costs are expressly waived above, each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $525.00, plus the cost of $3.50 for each mailed notice required pursuant to subsection (c)(3). The city commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision as promptly as possible. The city commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the board's decision. Any decision to reverse the board's decision shall require a three-fifths vote of all members of the city commission. Appeals from decisions of the city commission may be made to the courts as provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. The provisions of subsection (b) shall remain in effect during the entire appeal process, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction. The appeal shall be a de novo hearing and the city commission may consider new evidence or materials in accordance with the zoning ordinance. Appeals shall be made directly to the city commission, within 15 calendar days after the date of the decision, and follow the procedures described in subsections 23-6.2(e) or 23-4(7). 
(8)  Amendments. The board may amend any designation by following the same procedures as set forth in this section. The board may likewise rescind any designation if the structure or feature of principal historic significance has been demolished or destroyed. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Effect of designation. Upon designation, and thereafter, the provisions of section 23-6.2 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13142, § 10, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13512, § 2, 4-9-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17; Ord. No. 13777, § 2, 7-26-18)  
Sec. 23-5. - Nomination to the national register of historic places. 
(a)  Responsibilities under the certified local government program. As part of the duties under the certified local government program, the HEPB shall receive all nominations to the national register of historic places for any properties located within the city, following the regulations of the state division of historical resources. 
(b)  Notice requirements. The HEPB shall give notice to the owners of the property at least 30 days but not more than 75 days prior to the historic preservation board meeting at which the nomination will be considered. The HEPB shall also obtain a written recommendation from the city commission and the Miami-Dade Board of County Commissioners whether each property should be nominated to the National Register, and these recommendations shall be given to the HEPB within 30 days. 
(c)  Owner notification and requirements for comment. The HEPB shall obtain comments from the public that shall be included in the report making a recommendation. Objections to being listed in the national register by property owners must be notarized and filed with the historic preservation office. Within 30 days after its meeting, the HEPB shall forward to the state historic preservation officer its action on the nomination and the recommendations of the local officials. Appropriate local officials, the owner and the applicant shall be notified of the HEPB's actions. 
(d)  Referral to the state historic preservation officer. The state historic preservation officer will take further steps on the nomination in accordance with federal and state regulations. If either the HEPB or local officials, or both, support the nomination, the state historic preservation officer will schedule the nomination for consideration by the state review board for the national register at its next regular meeting. If both the HEPB and the local officials recommend that a property not be nominated to the national register, the state historic preservation officer will take no further action on the nomination unless an appeal is filed with the state historic preservation officer. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08)  
Sec. 23-6. - Transfer of development rights and density for historic resources; provision for a determination of eligibility process, and special provisions for resources within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District; prohibiting certain uses; and establishing a 35-foot height limit. 
It is the intent of this section to encourage the preservation of historic resources by creating a process whereby the otherwise unusable development and density rights for historic resources may be converted into an asset that may be sold to a receiving site. Receiving sites for unused development rights will be located within a T-6 transect, where a public benefits bonus may be used. Receiving sites for unused development density will be located near a Transit Oriented Development ("TOD") pursuant to Article 4 of Miami 21, the zoning ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended or superseded. Publicly owned sending properties may transfer density at a discounted rate for use as affordable housing. Owners of eligible properties shall be issued a "certificate of eligibility" following confirmation that the property meets the criteria established in subsection (1) or has been determined eligible under the process described in subsection (3). 
(1)  Eligible properties (sending sites). 
a.  Under the TDR and TDD provisions described in this section, a property owner is automatically eligible to apply to sell their unused development rights if the property is located in a T3-O transect zone or higher, and is classified as one or more of the following: 
1.  Individually listed in the national register of historic places; 
2.  Listed as a contributing property within a national register district; 
3.  Individually listed in the Miami register of historic places under the provisions of section 23-4; 
4.  Listed as a contributing property within a local historic district under the provisions of section 23-4; 
5.  Listed as a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation under the provisions of section 23-4 of the City Code. 
6.  Qualified as an "eligible historic resource," after having met the criteria for eligibility set forth in subsection (3), and so determined by the HEPB. 
7.  Otherwise qualifies as a historic resource, but that has lost its historic integrity because of major alterations and/or additions; provided that it can be shown to the HEPB that: 
A.  The building's original appearance can be documented; 
B.  The owner applies for and receives a special certificate of appropriateness, detailing the steps to be taken to restore the original appearance of the building; 
C.  The owner substantially completes the proposed restoration activity before an application for transfer of development rights is submitted. 
8.  A multi-family residential structure in a T4-R transect, shall be eligible for the TDR and TDD programs, only in the event it is: 
A.  Individually listed in the national register of historic places; and/or 
B.  Individually listed in the Miami register of historic places. 
C.  Qualified as an "eligible historic resource" by the HEPB after having met the criteria for eligibility set forth in subsection (3), for an individually significant resource. 
For those individual buildings that are locally designated historic resources on the Miami register of historic places and deemed eligible by the preservation officer to participate in the transfer of development rights or density ("TDR or TDD") programs under the terms of section 23-6, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall calculate the unused development potential (base development rights) that may be transferred to a receiving property at 225 percent per square foot of the available square feet permitted by the underlying transect zone. The zoning administrator or designee shall also calculate the unused density potential that may be transferred to a receiving site rounding up to the nearest hundredth, thereby recognizing the significance of Miami's locally designated historic resources and the additional requirements associated with the rehabilitation of a historic property. 
9.  A contributing or non-contributing resource contained within the boundaries of the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District shall be eligible for the TDR and TDD incentive as further described in subsection (2). 
(2)  Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard historic district. On June 6, 2006, the HEPB designated that portion of Biscayne Boulevard from NE 50th Street on the South to NE 77th Street on the north, as a historic district. Historically, Biscayne Boulevard was a premier shopping destination, and later the principal corridor leading tourists to the spectacular attractions in the Miami area. 
As the MiMo/Biscayne Boulevard historic district is the only overwhelmingly commercial historic district in the city that has been listed in the Miami register of historic places, it is deemed deserving of special considerations not applicable to the residential historic districts. 
Over the years, inappropriate infill construction changed the character of Biscayne Boulevard, resulting in a less-than-cohesive character. It is the desire of the city to encourage new construction and improvements or remodelings to existing structures so that they either return to the classic types prevalent during the historic periods of significance, or represent an improvement that maintains the high standards of appearance for the entire historic district, as determined by the HEPB. 
Further, the TDR and TDD incentives shall be available to the structures judged as non-contributing only in the MiMo/Biscayne Boulevard historic district and only when the proposed work will bring the property closer to becoming a contributing structure as determined by the HEPB. The incentive for non-contributing buildings is intended to promote reinvestments within the overall area encompassed by the historic district leading to its betterment. 
a.  Permitted uses. In a further effort to maintain a balance of retail, entertainment, lodging and services uses, any commercial, civic, civil support, and educational use within the MiMo Biscayne historic district shall be limited to only those permitted under the T4-O transect zone. 
b.  Calculations of available development rights and development density (sending property) for the MiMo (Miami Modern)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District. 
1.  For those contributing properties contained within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District deemed eligible by the preservation officer to participate in the TDR and TDD programs under the terms of section 23-6, the zoning administrator or their designee shall calculate the unused development potential (base development rights) that may be transferred to a receiving property at 225 percent per square foot of the available square feet permitted by the underlying transact. The zoning administrator or designee shall also calculate the unused density potential that may be transferred to a receiving site rounding to the nearest hundredth unit, thereby recognizing the additional requirements associated with the rehabilitation of a historic property. Notwithstanding these calculations, based on the allowable development rights prescribed by the Miami 21 Code transects for this historic district, no building or structure contained within the boundaries of the Miami Modern (MIMO)/Biscayne Boulevard historic district shall exceed 35 feet in height. Buildings existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be grandfathered and allowed to remain. 
2.  For those non-contributing properties contained within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District as described in section 23-6, the zoning administrator or their designee shall calculate the base unused development rights at 175 percent per square foot of the total available square feet permitted by the underlying transect which shall be available for transfer (sale). The lot itself may be developed at 100 percent of its capacity under the requirements of the historic district guidelines, and the Miami 21 Code. Notwithstanding these calculations, based on the allowable development rights prescribed by the Miami 21 Code transects for this historic district, no building or structure contained within the boundaries of the Miami Modern (MIMO)/Biscayne Boulevard historic district shall exceed 35 feet in height. Buildings existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which section derives shall be grandfathered and allowed to remain. 
(3)  Standards for the improvements to non-contributing structures. When improvements to non-contributing buildings are made, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 
a.  Use of building materials commonly found in the construction of the "contributing" structures within the historic district; 
b.  Installation of signage that is in keeping with the periods of significance represented in the district (1924-1956); 
c.  Architectural design that complements the historic building types and vocabulary which include: 
i.  Mediterranean Revival; 
ii.  Art Moderne; 
iii.  Art Deco; 
iv.  Miami Modern (MiMo); 
v.  South Florida Regional Vernacular, e.g. a style or type of building that represents the local or indigenous adaptations of design resultant from the climate, traditions, and available building materials in the region. 
Nothing in these standards shall be construed to encourage a false sense of historical appearance. Replications or reconstructions shall be permitted only as specifically allowed by the HEPB, and under the provisions of subsection (1)a.6. 
(4)  Qualification as an eligible historic resource—Requirements and certification process. A property may be determined eligible for local historic designation in order receive a "certificate of eligibility," and therefore take advantage of the transfer of development rights and density provisions, provided that the building meets certain eligibility criteria; and that a formal application for local historic designation is submitted to the planning department within one year from the date the eligibility application is approved by the historic and environmental preservation board. The time period may be extended by HEPB. If the application is not received within one year of the period of extension, the "certificate of eligibility" will be withdrawn. If sale of development rights or density has taken place without designation, proceeds must be paid to the city for the historic preservation trust fund. If proceeds are not paid to the city, a lien on the property equal in value to the proceeds plus a five percent administrative fee will be placed on the property. 
a.  Criteria for eligibility. In general, the resource must be at least 50 years old and maintain its physical integrity so that it sufficiently conveys its original character; possess integrity of design, setting, material, technique, feeling and association, and meet at least one of the following criteria: 
1.  Is associated in a significant way with the life of a person important in the past; 
2.  Is the land or location of a historic event with significant effect upon the community, city, state, or nation; 
3.  Exemplifies the historical, cultural, political, economic, or social trends of the community; 
4.  Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by one or more distinctive architectural styles; 
5.  Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, or period, or method of construction; 
6.  Is an outstanding work of a prominent designer or builder; and 
7.  Contains elements of design, detail, materials, or work of outstanding quality or which represents a significant innovation or adaptation to the South Florida environment. 
(5)  Application process and documentation required to qualify as an "eligible historic resource." Applications for a determination of eligibility in connection with the transfer of development rights program will contain the information required within a local historic designation report, and sufficient supporting documentation to enable the HEPB to make a valid conclusion. The application will include: 
1.  Photographs of all elevations illustrating the existing conditions; 
2.  Most recently available copy of the Miami-Dade County assessor's office record for the property; 
3.  Affidavit for proof of ownership; 
4.  Written description of the property, noting architectural style, building materials, roof shapes, and ornament, as applicable; 
5.  Written description of the changes to the property that have occurred over time, as applicable; 
6.  Results of Miami City Directory search to identify original resident/business establishment, as applicable; 
7.  Bibliography of historical records used in the research, as applicable; 
8.  Written evaluation of the property's significance using the criteria established in subsections 23-4(a)(1—8); 
9.  Other information as deemed necessary by the planning director; and 
10.  Any fees specified for this purpose. 
(6)  Review for certification of an eligible historic resource. Once the application for a determination of eligibility has been deemed complete, the preservation officer shall schedule the application before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the HEPB. At least ten days prior to the meeting at which the application will be heard, the owner or their designated agent or representative, shall be notified of the board's intent to consider the application. 
In making its decision as to whether to certify the resource, the board shall consider: 
a.  Whether the resource is of such interest or quality that it meets one or more of the criteria established by subsections 23-4(a)(1—8); 
b.  Whether the resource maintains its physical integrity, or whether it has been altered to such a degree that it no longer conveys the qualities for which it was deemed historically significant; 
c.  Whether the preservation of the resource will promote the general welfare of the city by providing an opportunity for the study of local history, architectural and design, or develop an understanding of the importance and value of a particular culture and heritage; 
d.  Whether or not the resource is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the city, region, or state. 
e.  Should the HEPB find that the proposed resource meets the criteria and considerations to be deemed an eligible historic resource; within 30 days of that decision, a "certificate of eligibility" will be prepared by the historic preservation officer, and mailed (via certified mail) to the applicant. 
f.  Appeals from the decision of the HEPB. The property owner, any one member of the city commission, the planning department, or any aggrieved party may appeal to the city commission any decision of the board on matters relating to designations by filing within 15 calendar days after the date of the decision a written notice of appeal with the hearing boards department, with a copy to the preservation officer. Such notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00, plus $3.50 per mailed notice required pursuant to subsection 23-4(b)(3). The city commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision as promptly as possible. The city commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the board's decision. Any decision to reverse the board's decision shall require a three-fifths vote of all members of the city commission. Appeals from decisions of the city commission may be made to the courts as provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. The provisions of subsection 23-4(b) shall remain in effect during the entire appeal process, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction. The appeal shall be a de novo hearing and the city commission may consider new evidence or materials in accordance with Section 2004 of the zoning ordinance. Appeals shall be made directly to the city commission, within 15 calendar days after the date of the decision, and follow the procedures described in subsection 23-6.2(e) or 23-4(c)(7). 
g.  Requirement for local historic designation, "eligible historic resources." 
1.  A resource classified as an "eligible historic resource" may apply for a certificate of transfer following the determination of eligibility. 
2.  Should the applicant apply for and receive a certificate of eligibility the eligible historic resource will be required to be locally designated through the formal process described in this chapter, within one year following the HEPB's determination. 
h.  Conditions and safeguards—"Eligible historic resources." 
1.  Upon the determination of eligibility by the HEPB, the owner shall be subject to the restrictions concerning the requirement for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for changes made to the building. The owner is prohibited from demolishing a structure deemed an eligible historic resource, until such time as an application for a special certificate of appropriateness for demolition under the process contained in section 23-6 is adjudicated by the HEPB. 
2.  The "certificate of eligibility" will expire within one year from the HEPB's determination, at which time, the property owner must have applied for local historic designation of the resource which had been determined eligible. 
(7)  Calculations of available development rights (sending property). For those properties deemed eligible to participate in the TDR program under the terms of section 23-6, the zoning administrator or their designee shall calculate the unused development potential (base development rights) that may be transferred to a receiving property at 100 percent of the available square feet permitted by the underlying transect, thereby recognizing the additional requirements associated with the rehabilitation of a historic property. 
(8)  Requirements for the preservation of eligible historic resources (sending properties) using the provisions of the TDR and TDD—Application process. The purpose of this incentive is to ensure that historic resources are preserved for the public benefit, public welfare, conservation, and aesthetics. The requirements that follow apply to all buildings which make use of the TDR and TDD programs. The use of the TDR and TDD resource will be tied to capital improvements on the sending property. The quantity of TDD and TDR value available for sale will be tied to the value set out in the building permit application for large scale work or a signed contract for smaller scale improvements at a ratio specified below. A restrictive covenant to maintain the property is also required, must be in a form acceptable to the city attorney, and must be recorded in the public records of Miami-Dade County. Any work approved by a certificate of appropriateness with an active building permit or issued a certificate of occupancy after April 1, 2012, shall qualify if it meets the criteria specified below. 
Therefore, following the qualification of any eligible historic resource, the applicant requesting the certificate of transfer shall provide the planning department with: 
a.  A copy of the building permit application which lists the estimated cost of construction or a signed contract with a licensed and insured contractor for work approved by a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  A determination of the maximum value of the saleable TDR and TDD resource. The applicant will determine the maximum value of the proposed sale of the combined transferable development rights and transferable development density. The value will equal the following: 
1.  The expenses directly related to the construction of the building (hard costs such as materials, supplies, and equipment) as determined in the building permit application construction cost estimate or by providing a signed contract for work. Soft costs such as professional costs are excluded. 
2.  An additional percent over the hard cost value, with the 30 percent broken down as follows: 
A.  Twenty percent of the value of capital improvements for use by the applicant for fees associated with design, financing, legal, and other pre- and post-construction expenses (soft costs). 
B.  Ten percent of the value of the capital improvements to be retained temporarily by the city in the form of either a letter of credit or a bond after the sale of the resource. The bond will be released back to the applicant upon confirmation of the completion of the work as outlined in subsection (11) below. 
(9)  Requirements for the issuance of TDRs for "non-contributing" properties within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard historic district. "Non-contributing" properties. The intent of the special incentives along Biscayne Boulevard is to provide capital for improvements to buildings that may have fallen into disrepair, and thus contribute to the overall appearance and stability of the boulevard as a whole. Therefore, following the qualification of a non-contributing property as eligible for the TDR and TDD benefits, the owner/applicant shall provide the planning department with: 
1.  All materials as laid out in subsection (8) above. 
2.  A special certificate of appropriateness application for the improvements to be made to the structure, noting the improvements designed specifically to promote a harmonious relationship with other structures within the boulevard historic district. 
3.  The special certificate of appropriateness will be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in section 23-6.2. 
(10)  Release of conditional certificate of transfer. The planning director, or his/her designee, will prepare the conditional certificate of transfer for the unused development rights and density upon receipt of an approved building permit for the historic resource or an executed contract for work approved by a certificate of appropriateness. The conditional certificate of transfer will allow for sale of unused development rights and density, but will expire within a set period of time and render all transactions void unless additional criteria are met as described below in subsection (11). The conditional certificate of transfer will be released when: 
1.  A building permit for the historic resource has been issued or a copy of an executed contract, including proof of applicable bonding, funding, and insurance requirements, for work approved via a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted in the event the work does not require a building permit. 
The approved building permit must be for work reviewed by the HEPB. 
The approved building permit must match that permit applied for and used for calculating the value of the sale pursuant to subsection (8). 
When an executed contract is provided rather than a building permit, proof of licensure and insurance for the contractor shall be provided. 
(11)  Release of certificate of transfer. The planning director, or designee, will prepare the non-conditional certificate of transfer for the unused development rights and density for historic resources upon completion of the following: 
1.  Filing of a restrictive covenant with the city by the sending property. The restrictive covenant shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and be recorded at the owner's expense in the public records of Miami-Dade County within 30 days of its acceptance by the city. The original restrictive covenant or a certified copy of the recorded restrictive covenant to be furnished to the planning director within 30 days of it being recorded will be maintained by the planning department. The restrictive covenant shall provide: 
A.  That the eligible historic resource will be maintained to a standard consistent with the building department's standards for "Forty (40) year recertification"; 
B.  That the requirement for long-term maintenance will follow the title to the property through any subsequent owners; 
C.  That the city will be advised of any change in property ownership. 
2.  A bond or irrevocable letter of credit representing a minimum of ten percent of the value of the improvements proposed in the building permit has been posted with the city's planning department to be used in the event the owner defaults from the owner's promise to make the improvements. A bond shall be written by an approved surety company and shall comply with state law so as to be substantially in the form provided by F.S. § 255.05, and shall carry the name and address of a local representative. Any irrevocable letter of credit shall be drawn on a local bank, which means a national bank authorized to transact business in Florida and maintaining an office in Miami-Dade County. Any bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the city's risk management department and city attorney and must name the city as the sole beneficiary/oblige/payee as applicable. 
A.  A bond or irrevocable letter of credit will be released back to the owner following the full completion and acceptance of the work and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or a review of the work by the historic preservation officer or the historic preservation officer's designee. 
B.  In the case where a cost-of-work estimate was provided rather than a building permit, the historic preservation officer or the historic preservation officer's designee will review proof of payment and the contractors and/or sub-contractor's final release(s) and waiver(s) of lien prior to release of the bond or letter of credit. 
C.  If the historic preservation officer or historic preservation officer's designee determines that the work is not completed pursuant to the approved plans and standards reviewed by the HEPB, the city will collect on the bond or letter of credit and deposit funds into the historic preservation trust fund. 
D.  An owner may appeal the decision to collect on the bond to the HEPB. 
3.  Submission to the city's department of planning of a copy of the sales contract for the TDD and/or TDR between the buyer and seller of the resources. 
4.  Submission to the city's department of planning of an affidavit stating that the buyer and seller of the TDR and TDD resources are acting independently and have no other relationship to each other; that both parties in the transaction are acting in their own self-interest and are not subject to any pressure or duress from the other party; and that there is no collusion between the buyer and seller (a.k.a. an arm's length transaction). 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13512, § 2, 4-9-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17; Ord. No. 13785, § 2, 9-13-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13116, § 2, adopted October 22, 2009, changed the title of section 23-6 from "Transfer of development rights for historic resources; provision for a determination of eligibility process, and special provisions for resources within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District" to "Transfer of development rights for historic resources; provision for a determination of eligibility process, and special provisions for resources within the Miami Modern (MiMo)/Biscayne Boulevard Historic District; prohibiting certain uses; and establishing a 35-foot height limit."  
Sec. 23-6.1. - Waivers, exceptions and exclusions for locally designated historic resources. 
In an effort to promote and encourage the preservation and adaptive reuse of locally designated resources, so designated pursuant to the provisions of section 23-4, the HEPB may grant a certain exception to a use permitted in specific zoning designations, or an exclusion to allow a cultural facility as an allowable use in medium and high density multifamily (general urban) zones, and/or may grant certain waivers to the zoning code provided that it will result in the preservation of a locally designated property. 
Historic preservation waivers. The board may authorize certain waivers to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, to the extent indicated herein. 
(1)  Waivers concerning designated historic resources. 
a.  Any building that is individually locally designated or is classified as a contributing building within a local historic district or is classified as a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation, as identified in the designation report, shall be permitted to be repaired, restored, structurally altered, or reconstructed, notwithstanding any conflicts with provisions of the underlying zoning district requirements. However, the board shall not have the authority to grant any waivers of density, intensity and building height requirements. 
b.  In cases where the size or configuration of a locally designated property, a contributing property within a locally designated historic district or a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation is such that compliance with off-street parking requirements would destroy the historic character of the property, the board may authorize a reduction of up to 100 percent of the number of parking spaces that would ordinarily be required for a new structure of equivalent use and floor area and/or a waiver of loading requirements. 
Such waivers will be granted only when it can be demonstrated that: 
1.  Granting the waiver will further the preservation of the historic and architectural character of the historic resource, or of the historic district in which the proposal is located. 
2.  Granting the waiver would promote the preservation of the historic resource or historic district while reducing nonconformities. 
3.  Granting the waiver would help minimize or mitigate any potential adverse effect of a specific proposal whose implementation promotes the preservation of the historic resource or historic district. 
4.  Special circumstances exist such as adjacencies or shared parking that will practically alleviate concerns for off-street parking. 
5.  The HEPB shall make specific findings that establish how the criteria have been met. Additionally, the board may impose any conditions, restrictions, or limitations deemed appropriate in order to ensure compliance with the criteria set forth above. 
6.  The waiver shall be the minimum necessary to assure the continued preservation of the historic structure. 
(2)  Waivers concerning additions. Waivers for additions to existing buildings may also be authorized by the board when necessary to assure the preservation of historic resources and historic districts, subject to the limitations described in section 23-6.1. 
(3)  Historic preservation exceptions. Unless otherwise authorized by Article 4, Table 3, of the Miami 21 Code, the board may authorize certain exceptions to the requirements of the underlying zoning to the extent indicated herein. Bed and breakfast uses complying with applicable codes may be permissible as an exception in low, medium and high density multifamily residential (general urban, urban center and urban core) zones. Additional allowable uses which include professional offices, and museums will be classified as exceptions and may be allowed except in T3 transect zones. Additional allowable uses which include restaurants and private clubs, as they are respectively defined in section 4-2 of the City Code, will also be classified as exceptions and may be allowed except in T3 and T4 transect zones. Such uses shall be permissible only within existing structures that are individually designated or contributing resources within a designated historic district or thematically-related historic resources within a multiple property designation as identified in the designation report prepared pursuant to chapter 23; and shall not be permissible in any case where the structure(s) of principal historic significance has (have) been destroyed or damaged beyond repair, unless such structure(s) is (are) reconstructed in accordance with a certificate of appropriateness approved by the board pursuant to the provisions of chapter 23. Any use authorized pursuant to this section shall comply with all regulations applicable to the same or similar use in the most restrictive zoning designation permitting such use; to the extent such regulations have not been modified pursuant to this section. 
a.  Exclusion. In an effort to provide even greater flexibility in the adaptive use of locally designated historic resources, and to recognize the concomitant relationship of historic preservation and the cultural arts, the HEPB is authorized to grant an exclusion for a cultural facilities as an allowable use in medium and high density multifamily (general urban) zones; such uses may include: 
1.  Rehearsal/studio space(s); 
2.  Gallery space(s); 
3.  Performance workshop areas; 
4.  Classrooms for arts education. 
(a)  The HEPB shall review each application for an exclusion that would permit the conversion of a locally designated historic resource for use as a cultural facility through the process for a special certificate of appropriateness as defined in this chapter. The special certificate of appropriateness may include requests for both additions and/or new construction in order to meet the programming requirements of the cultural facility. 
(b)  Adjacent land, owned or leased by the facility may be used to provide required parking. 
(c)  The HEPB may concurrently review a waiver of certain zoning requirements in conjunction with a request for an exclusion, provided that the request is the minimum necessary to successfully accomplish the project; and that the impact to the surrounding areas is minimal. 
(4)  Procedures for granting exceptions, waivers and exclusions. An application for a special certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted pursuant to the provisions of section 23-8. In addition, the application shall contain a written statement justifying the requested exception, or waiver or exclusion and provide evidence that the exception, or waiver or exclusion is necessary to assure the continued preservation of the designated historic structure. 
(5)  Notice and hearings, generally. The board shall notice the public hearing at which the waiver, and/or exception or exclusion is requested, following the same procedures as is required for a special certificate of appropriateness. 
(6)  Decision of the board. The board shall make findings based upon the standards set forth in section 23-6.2, as amended, and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Issue the special certificate of appropriateness for the waiver proposed by the applicant; 
b.  Issue the special certificate of appropriateness with specific modifications and conditions; or 
c.  Deny the special certificate of appropriateness. 
(7)  Standards. In addition to the guidelines and standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness as set forth in section 23-6.2, as amended, the board shall determine that the following standards have been met before reaching a decision to grant a special certificate of appropriateness: 
a.  The exception, or waiver or exclusion shall be the minimum necessary to assure the continued preservation of the historic structure; and 
b.  The exception, or waiver or exclusion shall be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter. 
c.  For restaurants and private clubs the property shall be located in a T5-R Transect Zone or higher. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use for any such use, a parking plan must be approved by process of warrant pursuant to the provisions of Miami 21. A parking plan for purposes of this section is a written plan or graphic depiction presented by the applicant providing for traffic control and parking accommodations for the property. 
(8)  Conditions and safeguards. In granting any exception, or waiver or exclusion, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards necessary to protect and further the interest of the area and abutting properties, including, but not limited to, landscape materials, walls, and fences as required buffering; modifications of the orientation of any openings; modification of site arrangements; and control of manner or hours of operation. 
(9)  Requirements for substantial rehabilitation. As a condition of granting an exception, or waiver or exclusion, as determined by the board at the time of granting the special certificate of appropriateness, the board may require that the structure(s) for which the exception or waiver is (are) requested be substantially rehabilitated in accordance with the Florida Building Code, the National Fire Prevention Code, the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation," and any other applicable codes and regulations. 
(10)  Requirements concerning time limitations. Any certificate of appropriateness issued under this section shall be governed by the time limitations stipulated in subsection 23-6.2(g). 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13180, § 2, 5-27-10; Ord. No. 13429, § 2, 2-13-14; Ord. No. 13537, § 2, 7-23-15; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13180, § 2, adopted May 27, 2010, changed the title of section 23-6.1 from "Waivers and exceptions for locally designated historic resources" to "Waivers, exceptions and exclusions for locally designated historic resources."  
Sec. 23-6.2. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Certificates of appropriateness, when required. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for any new construction, alteration, relocation, or demolition within a designated historic site or historic district or for thematically-related historic resources within a multiple property designation. A certificate of appropriateness shall also be required for exceptions, or waivers or exclusion from the provisions of the zoning code, or any successor zoning code. A certificate to dig shall be required for any ground disturbing activity within a designated archaeological site or archaeological zone or within an archaeological conservation area. All certificates of appropriateness and certificates to dig shall be subject to the applicable criteria in this section and any other applicable criteria specified in this chapter, as amended. No permits shall be issued by the building department for any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness unless such work is in conformance with such certificate. 
(b)  Procedures for issuing certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  Pre-application conference(s). Before submitting an application for a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant is encouraged to confer with the preservation officer to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other data. At the request of the applicant, the preservation officer, or any member of the board, an additional pre-application conference shall be held between the applicant and the board or its designated representative. The purpose of such conference shall be to further discuss and clarify preservation objectives and design guidelines in cases that may not conform to established objectives and guidelines. In no case, however, shall any statement or representation made prior to the official application review be binding on the board, the city commission, or any city department. 
(2)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. The applicant shall submit to the preservation officer an application together with supporting exhibits, other materials, and any applicable fees as required by the rules of procedure of the board. No application shall be deemed to be complete until all supporting materials required have been provided and any established fees paid. 
(3)  Standard certificates of appropriateness. Where the action proposed in the application is a minor improvement, as specified by the rules of procedure or the board, and is in accord with the guidelines for issuing certificates of appropriateness as set forth subsection 23-7(c), the preservation officer shall, within ten calendar days of receipt of the complete application, issue a standard certificate of appropriateness with or without conditions, indicating in writing, conformity with said guidelines. Following such approval, permits dependent upon it may be issued if otherwise lawful. An applicant may request that the application be initially classified as a special certificate of appropriateness if they wish to have the matter heard by the HEPB. 
(4)  Special certificates of appropriateness. Where the action proposed in an application involves a major addition, alteration, relocation, or demolition, as specified by the rules of procedure of the board; where the preservation officer finds that the action proposed in an application involving a minor alteration is not clearly in accord with the guidelines as set forth in subsection (c); or when the applicant is requesting a waiver, or exception or exclusion from the requirements of the zoning code the application shall be classified as a special certificate of appropriateness, and the following procedures shall govern: 
a.  Public hearing. When a complete application is received, the preservation officer shall place the application on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board. The board shall hold a public hearing to review the application. All public hearings on all certificates of appropriateness conducted by the board and hearings on appeals of board decisions to the city commission regarding certificates of appropriateness shall be noticed as follows: 
1.  The applicant shall be notified by mail at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
2.  Any individual or organization requesting such notification and paying any established fees therefore shall be notified by mail at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
3.  An advertisement shall be placed in a newspaper at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
4.  Any additional notice deemed appropriate by the board. 
b.  Decision of the board. The decision of the board shall be based upon the guidelines set forth in subsection (c), as well as the general purpose and intent of this chapter and any specific design guidelines officially adopted for the particular historic resource, historic district, multiple property designation, or archaeological site or zone. No decision of the board shall result in an unreasonable or undue economic hardship for the owner. The board may seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. The decision of the board shall include a complete description of its findings, and shall direct one of the following actions: 
1.  Issuance of a special certificate of appropriateness for the work proposed by the applicant; 
2.  Issuance of a special certificate of appropriateness with specified modifications and conditions; 
3.  Denial of a special certificate of appropriateness, including denial of a special certificate of appropriateness for demolition; or 
4.  Issuance of a special certificate of appropriateness with a deferred effective date of up to six (6) months in cases of demolition or relocation of a contributing structure or landscape feature, pursuant to the provision of special certificates of appropriateness for demolition in this section or up to forty-five (45) calendar days for any work potentially affecting an archaeological site, archaeological zone, or archaeological conservation area, pursuant to the provisions of special certificates of appropriateness for demolition in this section. 
5.  Issuance of a written communication prepared by the preservation officer to the director of the planning department and the zoning administrator that sets out the exact parameters for the waiver (s) from the provisions of the Miami 21 code and the reasons wherefore, and/or their decision as to the exception allowed within a certain transect, and their reasons wherefore. 
6.  Accelerated certificate of appropriateness. There are occasions when an applicant is proposing physical changes to a resource that is simultaneously being considered for local historic designation. Under those circumstances, and only if the proposed changes are of a substantial nature, the historic preservation officer shall follow the procedures specified for a special certificate of appropriateness. A hearing for an accelerated certificate of appropriateness will be preceded by the preliminary designation report, in order to establish whether or not the resource appears to meet the criteria for local historic designation. 
(5)  Accelerated certificate of appropriateness. When an applicant is proposing physical changes to a resource that is simultaneously being considered for local historic designation, if the proposed changes are of a substantial nature, the preservation officer shall follow the procedures specified for a special certificate of appropriateness. A hearing for an accelerated certificate of appropriateness will be preceded by the preliminary designation report, in order to establish whether the resource appears to meet the criteria for local historic designation. 
(c)  Time limitations. If no action is taken upon an application by the board within 60 calendar days, excluding those days within the month of August, from the receipt of a complete application, such application shall be deemed to have been approved, and the preservation officer shall authorize issuance of any permit dependent upon such certification, if otherwise lawful, recording as authorization the provisions of this section. This time limit may be waived at any time by mutual consent of the applicant and the board. However, should in the opinion of the preservation officer or the historic and environmental preservation board such delays be attributable to the applicant and/or their agent, this time limitation shall not apply, nor shall the application be considered approved. 
(d)  Records. Written copies of all decisions and certificates of appropriateness shall be filed with the planning department. 
(e)  Appeals. The applicant, the planning department, or any aggrieved party may appeal to the city commission any decision of the board on matters relating to designations and certificates of appropriateness by filing within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the decision a written notice of appeal with the hearing boards department, with a copy to the preservation officer. The notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $525.00, plus $3.50 per mailed notice required pursuant to 23-4. The city commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision as promptly as possible. The appeal shall be de novo hearing and the city commission may consider new evidence or materials. The city commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the board's decision. The decision of the city commission shall constitute final administrative review, and no petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be considered by the city. Appeals from decisions of the city commission may be made to the courts as provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(f)  Changes in approved work. Any change in work proposed subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed by the preservation officer. If the preservation officer finds that the proposed change does not materially affect the property's historic character or that the proposed change is in accord with approved guidelines, standards, and certificates of appropriateness, the officer may issue a supplementary standard certificate of appropriateness for such change. If the proposed change is not in accord with guidelines, standards, or certificates of appropriateness previously approved by the board, a new application for a special certificate of appropriateness shall be required. 
(g)  Expiration of certificates of appropriateness. Any certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance, unless the authorized work is commenced within this time period, or a building permit has been obtained. The preservation officer may grant an extension of time not to exceed 12 months upon written request by the applicant, unless the board's guidelines as they may relate to the authorized work have been amended. 
(h)  Guidelines for issuing certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  Alteration of existing structures, new construction. Generally, for applications relating to alterations or new construction as required in subsection (a) the proposed work shall not adversely affect the historic, architectural, or aesthetic character of the subject structure or the relationship and congruity between the subject structure and its neighboring structures and surroundings, including but not limited to form, spacing, height, yards, materials, color, or rhythm and pattern of window and door openings in building facades; nor shall the proposed work adversely affect the special character or special historic, architectural or aesthetic interest or value of the overall historic site, historic district, or multiple property designation. Except where special standards and guidelines have been specified in the designation of a particular historic resource, historic district, or multiple property designation, or where the board has subsequently adopted additional standards and guidelines for a particular designated historic resource, historic district, or multiple property designation, decisions relating to alterations or new construction shall be guided by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings." 
(2)  Applications for a waiver, or exception or exclusion. An application for a waiver(s), or exception or exclusion from the provisions of the Miami 21 Code will be made on forms provided by the planning department, and will be processed and noticed in accordance with the procedures for a special certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Ground disturbing activity in archeological zones, archeological sites, or archeological conservation areas. 
a.  No certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for new construction, excavation, tree removal, or any other ground disturbing activity until the city's archeologist has reviewed the application and made his/her recommendation concerning the required scope of archeological work. The board may require any or all of the following: 
1.  Scientific excavation and evaluation of the site at the applicant's expense by an archeologist approved by the board. 
2.  An archeological survey at the applicant's expense conducted by an archeologist approved by the board containing an assessment of the significance of the archeological site and an analysis of the impact of the proposed activity on the archeological site. 
3.  Proposal for mitigation measures. 
4.  Protection or preservation of all or part of the archaeological site for green space, if the site is of exceptional importance and such denial would not unreasonably restrict the primary use of the property. 
b.  The board may issue a certificate to dig with a delayed effective date of up to 45 calendar days to allow any necessary site excavation or assessment. 
(4)  Unreasonable or undue economic hardship. 
a.  Where strict enforcement of the provisions of this section would result in an unreasonable or undue economic hardship to the applicant, the board shall have the power to vary or modify the provisions of this section, including adopted guidelines. The fact that compliance would result in some increase in costs shall not be considered unreasonable or undue economic hardship if the use of the property is still economically viable. 
b.  Any applicant wishing to assert unreasonable or undue hardship must submit as a part of the application for a certificate of appropriateness a written statement presenting the factual data establishing such economic hardship. The written statement presenting factual data shall be in the form of a sworn affidavit containing the following information: 
1.  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, whether business or familial, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased; 
2.  The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the three most recent assessments; 
3.  The amount of real estate taxes for the previous three years; 
4.  All appraisals obtained by the owner or applicant within the previous three years in connection with the potential or actual purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
5.  All listings of the property for sale or rent within the previous three years, prices asked and offers received, if any; 
6.  For income producing property only, a profit and loss statement for the property containing the annual gross income for the previous three years; itemized expenses, including operating and maintenance costs, for the previous three years; annual cash flow for the previous three years; and proof that the owner has made reasonable efforts to obtain a reasonable rate of return on the owner's investment and labor; 
7.  Any consideration by the applicant as to uses or adaptive uses of the property; 
c.  In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available to the applicant or cannot be obtained, the applicant shall file with the affidavit a statement of the information that cannot be obtained and shall described the reasons why such information is unavailable. 
d.  Notwithstanding the submission of the above information, the board may require, at the applicant's expense, additional evidence, including, but not limited to, architectural, structural and/or financial evaluations or studies as are reasonably necessary in the opinion of the board to determine the economic feasibility of rehabilitation of the structure. 
(i)  Demolition by neglect. 
(1)  Demolition by neglect prohibited; affirmative maintenance required. The owner(s) of a property designated historic pursuant to this chapter, which includes a property either individually designated, designated as a contributing property within a historic district or designated as a thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation as defined by this chapter, shall comply with all applicable codes, laws, and regulations governing the maintenance of the property. It is the intention of this section to preserve from deliberate negligence, or inadvertent neglect the exterior features of property designated historic and the interior portions thereof when maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the property. All such properties shall be preserved against such decay and deterioration and shall be free from structural defects through prompt corrections of any of the following defects: 
a.  Facades which may fall or damage the subject property, adjoining property, or injure members of the public. 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls, or other vertical structural supports. 
c.  Members of ceilings, roofs, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
d.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken or missing windows or doors. 
e.  Any fault or defect in the property which renders it structurally unsafe, insufficiently protected from weathering, or not properly watertight. 
f.  Defective or insufficient weather protection which jeopardizes the integrity of exterior or interior walls, roofs, or foundation, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or protective covering. 
g.  Any structure designated historic which is not properly secured under the Florida Building Code or other technical codes and is accessible to the general public; or, any fault or defect on the property designated historic that renders it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
h.  Spalling of the concrete of any portion of the interior or exterior of the structure designated historic. 
(2)  Unreasonable or undue economic hardship. A property owner who believes that application of this section creates an unreasonable or undue economic hardship, as that term is defined by this chapter, may apply for a special certificate of appropriateness to the board within 15 days of having notice or knowledge of any defect(s) referred to in this section. The procedure employed by the board shall be the same as for the consideration of a special certificate of appropriateness under this chapter. The board may grant the owner an extension of time to comply with corrective work or limit the scope of the corrective work. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
a.  Notice of administrative enforcement. Enforcement shall be as provided pursuant to Chapter 2, Article X, entitled "Code Enforcement," of the City of Miami Code, as amended. 
b.  Civil actions for injunction and remedial relief; lien on property. In addition to code enforcement remedies, if the property owner fails to take corrective action within the time prescribed, the city may file any civil action ordering the property owner to take corrective actions and the city may seek damages and seek any other relief available under Florida Law. The court may order an injunction providing such remedies if the city proves that the owner has violated this ordinance and such violation threatens the integrity or existence of a designated historic property. In the event that a court order authorizes that the city enter into the property and take corrective action, the cost of the corrective action incurred by the city shall be a municipal special assessment lien against the property. Such lien shall, until fully paid and discharged, be of equal rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes, and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, claims in, to or against the real property involved. Such liens may be instituted and enforced pursuant to Chapter 173, Florida Statutes, as amended, or the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. The property owner shall pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees, service charges, civil penalties, and liens imposed by virtue of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13133, § 1, 1-28-10; Ord. No. 13142, § 10, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13180, § 2, 5-27-10; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17)  
Sec. 23-6.3. - Administration, enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or discourage the ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure when such maintenance or repair does not constitute an alteration, or to prevent the ordinary maintenance of landscape features. 
(b)  Enforcement of maintenance and repair provisions. When the board or preservation officer determines that any designated property is endangered by lack of maintenance and repair, or that any other property in visual proximity to a designated property lacks maintenance and repair to such an extent as to detract from the character of the designated property, the board or officer may request appropriate officials or agencies of the city to require correction of such deficiencies under authority of applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)  Unsafe structures. In the event the building official of the city determines that any designated property is unsafe pursuant to chapter 8.5 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended, he/she shall immediately notify the board with copies of such findings. Where reasonably feasible within applicable laws and regulations, the building official shall endeavor to have the structure repaired rather than demolished and shall take into consideration any comments and recommendation of the board. The board may take appropriate actions to effect and accomplish preservation of such structure, including, but not limited to, negotiations with the owner and other interested parties, provided that such actions do not interfere with the procedures in chapter 8.5 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as amended. 
(d)  Emergency conditions. For the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be imminently dangerous to life, health, or property, nothing contained herein shall prevent any temporary construction, reconstruction, demolition, or other repairs to a designated property, pursuant to an order of a government agency or a court of competent jurisdiction, provide that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the emergency condition may be carried out. The owner of structure damage by fire or natural calamity may stabilize the structure immediately and rehabilitate it later under the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Enforcement. The building department and the code inspectors as defined in section 2-813 shall assist the board by making necessary inspections in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The building department shall be responsible for promptly stopping any work attempted to be done without or contrary to any certificate of appropriateness required under this article; and shall further be responsible for ensuring that any work not in accordance with a certificate of appropriateness is voluntarily corrected to comply with said certificate. 
(f)  Violations and penalties. Any person who carries out or causes to be carried out any work in violation of this article shall be required to restore the locally designated property either to its appearance prior to the violation or in accordance with a certificate of appropriateness approved by the board. The following procedures shall govern: 
(1)  Referral to preservation board. The building department and code inspectors as defined in section 2-813 shall refer all violations to the board, unless such violation is voluntarily corrected to comply with a previously issued certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Preservation board public hearing. The board shall conduct public hearing with notice as set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Decision of preservation board. The board shall make findings based upon the provisions of this section and the guidelines set forth in this article and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Reaffirmation of a previously issued certificate of appropriateness; 
b.  Issuance of an amended special certificate of appropriateness with specified modifications and conditions; or 
c.  Issuance of a new special certificate of appropriateness with specified conditions. 
The board may specify a reasonable limitation of time within which the work authorized by the certificate of appropriateness shall be commenced or completed, or both. Appeals of any decision of the board related to certificates of appropriateness shall follow the same procedures as set forth in subsection 23-6. 
(4)  Referral to code enforcement board. If the work authorized by any certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this article is not commenced and/or completed within the time specified, or if a subsequent violation of a certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this section is found, the building department or code inspectors as defined in section 2-813 shall initiate enforcement proceedings before the code enforcement board pursuant to the provisions of section 2-814. This remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal or civil prosecution and penalty that may be provided. 
(g)  Conflicts. Where there are conflicts between the requirements of this chapter and provisions of the zoning ordinance or other codes covering the same subject, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(h)  Application equally to private parties and public bodies. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to plans, projects, or work executed or assisted by any private party, governmental body or agency, department, authority, or board of the city, county, or state. 
(Ord. No. 13008, § 2, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 23-6.4. - Signage. 
(a)  Historic signs. 
Historic signs shall be permitted to remain and to be repaired, restored, structurally altered, reconstructed, or relocated utilizing the certificate of appropriateness process. Historic signs may possess intrinsic importance, or acquire that importance as a result of their association with the historic resource through which they have become associated. 
In determining whether a sign is "historic," the HEPB shall consider whether it is: 
(1)  Associated with historic figures, events, or places. 
(2)  Significant as evidence of the history of the product, business, or service advertised. 
(3)  Significant as reflecting the history of the building or the development of the historic district or multiple property designation (a sign may be the only evidence of a building's historic use). 
(4)  Characteristic of a special historic period, such as gold leaf on glass, neon, or stainless steel lettering. 
(5)  Integral to the building's design or physical fabric; as when a sign is a part of a storefront made of Carrara glass or enamel panels, or when the name of the historic firm or the date is rendered in stone, metal or tile, (in such cases, removal can cause damage to the materials; or affect the integrity of the building's original design); 
(6)  Outstanding examples of the sign maker's art. Whether because of their excellent work, use of materials or design; 
(7)  Recognized as a local landmark because of its prominence and popular recognition as a focal point in the community; 
(8)  Assists in defining the character of a district as for example marquees in theater districts, or prominent neon signs associated with the proliferation of motels dependent on the tourism industry. 
In conjunction with allowing the retention, restoration, rehabilitation, and/or reconstruction of a historic sign, the HEPB shall make specific findings establishing how the subject sign meets these established criteria. 
(b)  District marker signs. 
(1)  Definitions. 
District marker sign is an artistic sign that has been in existence for at least 20 years which is painted on the side of a building and marks the entrance to a neighborhood, park, or other designated historic, public or geographical area that serves to identify the area, mark a historic destination for visitors, and reinforce the neighborhood's character as a destination for art, culture, dining, and entertainment. 
(2)  Exemptions. In areas designated cultural specialty district, art and theater cultural specialty district pursuant to chapter 4, or historic districts or multiple property designations designated pursuant to chapter 23 of the City Code that are located in a T-5 or less restrictive zoning transect, the city manager, or his/her designee, may permit one district marker sign of not greater than 5,000 square feet in size nor greater than 80 percent of the area of a building wall oriented to face major traffic thoroughfares that serve as the entrance to the district or area. 
Each district or area marker sign shall be comprised solely of "Welcome to [the district or area]," and a commercial message related to the unique character of the district or area and recognizing the district or area marker sign sponsor, whose commercial message shall be limited to no more than 15 percent of the area of the district or area marker sign. The "Welcome to [the district or area]" portion of the district or area marker sign shall not contain any point of sale signage or commercial message related to the donor or sponsor. District and area marker signs as set forth in this paragraph shall be exempt from the general provisions of chapter 62, but for uniformity, all district and area marker signs are subject to compliance with county, state and federal laws. 
No district or area marker sign shall contain adult content as defined in the Miami 21 zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13116, § 2, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 13518, § 2, 5-14-15; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17)  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-7. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-8. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this article shall create a method that provides the city commission to allow tax exemptions for the taxes levied by the city for the restoration, rehabilitation or renovation of historic properties. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Assessed value means the total value of a tax parcel, excluding the value of the land, as determined by the county property appraiser, and shown on the property tax bill sent to the owner of record by the county. 
Board means the historic and environmental preservation board. 
Contributing resource means a building, landscape feature, site, structure, or object that adds to the historical architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because: 
(1)  It was present during the period of significance of the district, and possessed historic integrity reflecting its character at that time; 
(2)  It is capable of providing important information about the period; or 
(3)  It independently meets the National Register of Historic Places criteria for evaluation set forth in 36 CFR Part 60.4, incorporated by reference. 
Historic property means a building, site, structure, or object that is: 
(1)  Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places; 
(2)  A contributing property in a National Register listed historic district; 
(3)  Designated as a historic property or landmark under the provisions of chapter 23; 
(4)  A contributing property in a historic district designated under the provisions of chapter 23; or 
(5)  A thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation. 
Historic property tax exemption covenant means a form that complies with applicable state Statutes and accompanying rules, and is an agreement made between the property owner and the city, indicating that the owner agrees to maintain and repair the property so as to retain the architectural and historical integrity of the property during the exemption period. 
Improvement means any change in the condition of any eligible real property brought about by the expenditure of money on labor or materials for the restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation of such property. Expenditures for interior or exterior work, including construction of additions or accessory structures, shall be included in the meaning of improvements (i.e., garage, cabana, guest cottage, storage/utility structure) so long as the new construction is compatible with the historic character of the building and site in terms of size, scale, mass, design and materials, and preserves the historic relationship between a building or buildings, landscape features and open space. 
National Register of Historic Places means the list of historic properties significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the secretary of the interior, as established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (Public Law 89-665; 80 STAT 915, 16 U.S.C. 470), as amended. 
Noncontributing resource means a building, landscape feature, site, structure, or object that does not add to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because: 
(1)  It was not present during the period of significance of the district; 
(2)  Due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time or is incapable of yielding important information about the period; or 
(3)  It does not independently meet the National Register of Historic Places criteria for evaluation. 
Officer means the historic preservation officer. 
Renovation or rehabilitation means, for historic properties or portions thereof that are of historical or architectural significance, "renovation" or "rehabilitation," the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration that makes possible an efficient contemporary use, while preserving those portions or features of the property that are significant to its historical, architectural, cultural and archaeological values. For historic properties or portions thereof that are of archaeological significance or are severely deteriorated, "renovation" or "rehabilitation" means the act or process of applying measures designed to sustain and protect the existing form and integrity of a property, or reestablish the stability of an unsafe or deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form of the property as it presently exists. 
Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later alterations or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17)  
Sec. 23-10. - Historic tax exemption. 
This exemption shall apply to 100 percent of the assessed value of all improvements to eligible historic properties that result from restoration, renovation or rehabilitation made on or after the effective date of this ordinance. The exemption applies only to taxes levied by the city. The exemption does not apply to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or to taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to section 9(b) or section 12, article VII of the Florida Constitution. 
Eligible properties. A property is qualified for an exemption under this section if at the time the exemption is granted the property is: 
(1)  Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places, pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended; 
(2)  A contributing property within a National Register listed district; 
(3)  Individually listed in the city register of historic places; 
(4)  Identified as a contributing structure within a historic district listed in the city register of historic places; or 
(5)  A thematically-related historic resource within a multiple property designation. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 13712, § 2, 11-16-17)  
Sec. 23-11. - Completely exempt from property taxes. 
If an eligible property is used for a non-profit or governmental purpose and is regularly and frequently open for the public's visitation, use and benefit, the city may exempt 100 percent of the assessed value of the property, as improved, from ad valorem taxes levied by the city provided that the assessed value of the improvement is equal to at least 50 percent of the total assessed value of the property as improved. This section applies only if the improvements are made by or for the use of the then existing property owner. An eligible property is considered used for non-profit or governmental purposes if the occupant or user of at least 65 percent of the usable space of the building is an agency of the federal, state or local government or a non-profit corporation whose articles of incorporation have been filed by the Florida department of state in accordance with F.S. § 617.0125. Usable space means that portion of the space within a building that is available for assignment or rental to an occupant. A property is considered regularly and frequently open to the public if the public has access to the property not less than 52 days a year on an equitably spaced basis, and other times by appointment. This exemption does not prohibit the owner from charging a reasonable, non-discriminatory admission fee. If a property that qualifies for this exemption is no longer used for non-profit or governmental purposes or is no longer regularly and frequently open to the public or if ownership is transferred, this exemption shall no longer be effective and the property shall, instead, be subject to the exemption provided for by section 23-10. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-12. - Term of exemption. 
Any exemption granted shall remain in effect for up to ten years with the effective date being October 1, of the year that the applicant and the city have entered into the exemption covenant, and following the county property appraiser's formal evaluation of the completed improvements, and their subsequent valuation. The city commission shall have the discretion to set a lesser term for the duration of the exemption. The exemption shall continue in force if the authority of the city to grant exemptions changes or if ownership of the property changes, including any change from a tax exempt entity to a tax paying entity except as set forth in section 23-10. In order to retain an exemption the historic character of the property, and improvements that qualify the property for an exemption, must be maintained in the historic state over the period for which the exemption was granted. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCESS FOR EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 23-13. - Forms/fees. 
Any person, firm, or corporation which desires a tax exemption for historic properties shall, in the year the exemption is desired to take effect, file a completed application on the appropriate forms obtained from the city historic preservation officer. The forms shall contain all the information required by the division of historical resources, Florida department of state, and promulgated in accordance with Rule 1A-38, F.A.C., but may also contain additional information as determined necessary by the board application forms and summaries of deadlines and application procedures shall be maintained by the officer and shall be made available to the general public upon request. A non-refundable fee of $262.50 will be payable upon submission of the application, with the check made payable to the "City of Miami." 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 13142, § 10, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 23-14. - Preconstruction application (Part I). 
Only expenditures made to an eligible property after the effective date of this article may be reviewed by the officer for approval. Work that has already been completed before an application is approved may not be considered eligible for inclusion in the tax exemption. The board may consider applications of non-eligible properties if the proposed work would restore the building to its original appearance, thus making it an eligible property. 
(1)  Applications for the ad valorem tax exemption may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a special certificate of appropriateness; however, all additional materials, the non-refundable application fee, the specific forms and additional submittal requirements for the historic tax exemption must accompany the request. 
(2)  The application will be made on forms approved by the Florida department of state, and all applicable fees shall be paid at the time the application is submitted. The application must include the following information: 
a.  The name of the property owner and the location of the historic property. 
b.  A description of the real property for which an exemption is requested and the anticipated date of commencement of such improvements. 
c.  Proof to the satisfaction of the Board that the property that is to be rehabilitated or renovated is an eligible property under this section. 
d.  Proof to the satisfaction of the board that the improvements to the property will be consistent with the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation, and any other design guidelines previously promulgated by the board. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-15. - Review of preconstruction application by officer. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed preconstruction application and all required materials, the Officer shall conduct a review to determine: 
(1)  Whether the property for which an exemption has been requested is or is not a historic property pursuant to section 23-10; 
(2)  Whether the proposed, in progress, or completed improvements are consistent with the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings and any other design guidelines previously promulgated by the board; and 
(3)  For applications claiming a 100 percent exemption as a qualifying non-profit or governmental agency, the officer shall verify the specified conditions under section 23-11. 
(b)  The officer shall complete their review of the preconstruction application within 15 days following receipt of the completed application and all required supporting materials. 
(c)  The officer shall submit the preconstruction application to the board that shall contain copies of the preconstruction application, reviews by the officer, and the officer's recommendation for approval, denial, or approval with conditions. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-16. - Project amendments. 
If changes to a project are planned at any time after submission of the preconstruction application, an amendment sheet must be submitted for review. This amendment sheet will allow an applicant to indicate planned changes in project improvements, giving the originally proposed treatment and the amended work item description. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-17. - Request for review of completed work (Part II). 
(a)  A request for review of completed work shall be submitted by the applicant upon substantial completion of the improvements as represented in the preconstruction application and any amendments. The request for review must provide a comprehensive photographic description of the completed improvements. Photographs of the completed improvements should show the same views as the "before" photographs included in the preconstruction application. All photographs should be numbered, dated and labeled with the property name or address, the view, and a brief description of what is shown. The review shall also provide information on project budgets and what portion of the budget went to historical renovations. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a request for review of the substantially completed work and all required supporting materials, the officer shall conduct a review to determine whether or not the completed improvements are in compliance with the renovation, restoration, or rehabilitation described in the preconstruction application, subsequent approved amendments, if any, and the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation. The officer reserves the right to inspect the completed improvements to verify such compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-18. - Time of completion. 
An applicant must substantially complete all renovation, restoration or rehabilitation within two years following the date of approval of a preconstruction application and the approval of a special certificate of appropriateness by the board. A preconstruction application approval shall automatically be void in the event the applicant fails to submit a Part II request for review of completed work within two years following the date of approval of a preconstruction application and special certificate of appropriateness, except that the officer may, in his/her discretion, extend such period of time not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-19. - Completed work application (Part II). 
Once an applicant has filed a request for review of the substantially completed work application with the officer, the officer will prepare a completed work report to submit to the board. The completed work application will include a discussion on the project as completed and a recommendation from the officer to approve or deny the application. The completed work application should also include copies of the preconstruction application, any amendments, the request for review of completed work, and photographs of the project conditions before and after the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-20. - Review by the board. 
The city's historic and environmental preservation board is designated to review applications for exemptions. The board must recommend to the city commission that it either grant or deny the exemption. Such reviews must be conducted in accordance with the rules adopted by the Florida department of state. The recommendations and the reasons, therefore, must be provided to the applicant and to the city commission before consideration of the application at an official commission meeting. The commission shall also be furnished with a covenant executed between the property owner and the city, confirming their intent to maintain the qualifying improvements for the duration of the tax exemption granted by the city commission. The applicant shall also be advised of his/her right to a fair hearing pursuant to F.S. § 120.57, and procedures set forth by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-21. - Appeals. 
Following the board's denial of the preconstruction application, and the officer's notification by mail, the applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the mailing to file an appeal of the determination to the city commission. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the hearing boards department, with a copy to the historic preservation officer. The appeal shall set forth precisely the reasons or grounds for the appeal, and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-22. - Final review. 
(a)  The city commission shall grant or deny the tax exemption based on the recommendations of the board. A vote of the commission shall be required to adopt a motion. 
(b)  If the final application is granted, the city commission shall adopt a resolution granting the historic tax exemption to the property owner. The resolution shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner and the street address and legal description of the historic property that the exemption is granted to; 
(2)  The period of time that the exemption shall remain in effect; and 
(3)  A finding that the historic property meets the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Upon adoption of the resolution, and following the Officer's receipt of the executed historic property tax exemption covenant, the officer shall record the covenant, along with any supporting documents, with the deed for the property in the official records of the county. The applicant will be responsible for payment of all fees associated with the recording of the documents. Following the recording of the covenant, the officer will transmit to the property appraiser a copy of the city commission resolution granting the exemption, with instructions to provide the historic tax exemption to the applicant as provided for in the resolution. A copy of the officer's letter of transmittal to the property appraiser shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-23. - Covenant. 
(a)  To qualify for an exemption, the property owner must enter into a covenant or agreement with the city for the term for which the exemption is granted. The form of the covenant shall be approved by the Florida department of state and will require that the character of the property and the qualifying improvements to the property be maintained during the period that the exemption is granted. 
(b)  The covenant shall be binding on the current property owner, transferees, and their heirs, successors, or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 23-24. - Revocation. 
(a)  The following conditions shall provide justification for removal of a property from eligibility for the property tax exemption by the city commission, provided under this code: 
(1)  The owner is in violation of the provisions of the historic preservation tax exemption covenant, or 
(2)  The property has been damaged by accidental or natural causes to the extent that the historic integrity of the features, materials, appearance, technique and environment, or archaeological integrity that made the property eligible for listing in the National Register or designation under the provisions of chapter 23 have been lost or so damaged that restoration is not feasible. 
(b)  For the exemption granted for non-profits and governmental agencies, the circumstances have changed and the property no longer meets the tests established in section 23-11. 
(c)  Proceedings under this section may also be initiated following a finding by the code enforcement board that a housing code violation has occurred. The board shall provide notice to the current owner of record to the property and hold a hearing in the same manner as in a review of a certificate of appropriateness as specified in section 23-5 before forwarding their recommendation to the city commission. 
(d)  Upon a determination by the city commission that the historic tax exemption is to be revoked, the officer shall provide written notice of the commission's decision to the applicant and the property owner of record, if different, as well as to the property appraiser. The notice to the applicant, or owner of the property, if different, shall be accompanied by reasons and recommendations for changes to the property that may result in reinstatement of the exemption. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a notice of revocation, the property appraiser shall discontinue the historic tax exemption on the property as of October 1, of the year following receipt of the notice of revocation. 
(f)  The notice of revocation shall include a statement that a penalty equal to the total amount of taxes that would have been due in March and each of the previous years in which the historic preservation exemption covenant was in effect had the property not received the exemption, less the total amount of taxes actually paid in those years, plus interest calculated as provided in F.S. § 212.12(3), shall be imposed by the tax collector for violation of the terms, conditions, and standards of the historic preservation exemption covenant. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 23-25. - Reinstatement. 
A property may be reinstated for the historic tax exemption upon satisfactory submission of evidence that the recommendations for changes to the property previously made by the officer and board, and which have been approved by the city commission, have been completed. The process for reinstatement shall be the same as the process for revocation proceedings. Upon reinstatement by the city commission of the exemption, the officer shall notify the property appraiser and the historic tax exemption shall then be reinstated for the remaining unexpired term of the initial exemption. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-26. - Reapplication. 
An applicant previously granted a historic tax exemption by the city commission may undertake an additional substantial improvement project during the exemption period, or following its expiration, and may reapply for additional historic tax exemption for such subsequent work. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-27. - Annual report. 
The officer shall prepare an annual report to the city commission concerning the historic preservation tax exemption program. The report shall be filed at least 30 days before the commission adopts a budget for the following fiscal year, and shall summarize activities of the officer and the board related to the historic tax exemption program during the previous fiscal year. The information contained in the annual report shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A list of the properties that preconstruction applications and completed work applications were made for during the preceding year; 
(2)  An explanation of the disposition of each application; 
(3)  The total exempted amount for each completed project during the preceding year; 
(4)  The total number of properties currently participating in the historic tax exemption program as of the end of the previous year; 
(5)  The total expenditure on all improvement projects currently participating in the program; and 
(6)  Any other information requested by the commission or considered significant by the officer. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-28. - Reserved.  
Sec. 23-29. - Judicial review. 
Judicial review of decisions made by the board or the city commission shall be by certiorari in accordance with state rules of appellate procedure. 
(Ord. No. 12927, § 2, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 23-30. - Classification and assessment of historic property used for commercial or certain nonprofit purposes. 
(a)  The city hereby elects, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 193.503, as currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time, to provide for the assessment of historic property used for commercial or certain nonprofit purposes as described therein solely on the basis of character or use as provided in F.S. § 193.503. The character or use assessment shall apply only to eligible properties within the city limits. 
(b)  A taxpayer claiming the reduction must comply with each and every provision of F.S. § 193.503, as currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13010, § 1, 7-10-08)  
Chapter 25 - HUMAN RELATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS AND BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Legislative findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city recognizes that a significant number of city employees establish and maintain important personal, emotional, and economic relationships with persons to whom they are not married; that individuals forming such domestic partnerships live in a committed family relationship; and that city employees in domestic partner relationships should be granted employment benefits through a system for the city to provide benefits to domestic partners of city employees. 
(b)  The implementation of the provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to accomplish the policies and purposes of the article. However, no construction of this article shall supersede any federal, state, or city laws or regulations, nor be interpreted in a manner as to bring it into conflict with federal, state, or other city laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed as recognizing or treating a domestic partnership as a marriage or the substantial equivalent of a marriage. 
(Ord. No. 13073, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
City employee means any employee of the City of Miami. 
Domestic partners means: 
(1)  Adults who have registered their domestic partnership pursuant to Miami-Dade City Code section 11A-72, or 
(2)  Adults whose relationship has been formalized in another locality, state, or county through a marriage, civil union, domestic partnership, or the like, that is authorized by law in that jurisdiction but that is not recognized under state law. 
(Ord. No. 13073, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 25-3. - Extension of benefits to domestic partners of city employees. 
(a)  Any city employee who has a domestic partner shall be entitled to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic partner or the children of such domestic partner in the same way any city employee may elect insurance coverage for his or her spouse or children. A city employee's right to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic partner, or the partner's children, shall extend to all forms of insurance provided to the spouses and children of city employees, unless such coverage is prohibited by state or federal law or the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. All elections of coverage shall be made in accordance with the requirements of applicable city ordinances, administrative rules, city policies and applicable collective bargaining agreements. However, in no event may an employee make an election for coverage of a domestic partner more than two times in a plan year. 
(b)  Any city employee who has a domestic partner shall be entitled to use all forms of leave provided by the city including, but not limited to, sick leave, annual leave, funeral leave and family leave to care for his or her domestic partner or the children or parents of the domestic partner, as applicable. The use of leave authorized in this section shall be consistent with the applicable requirements in city ordinances, administrative rules, and collective bargaining agreements. 
(c)  Unless prohibited by state or federal law or the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, all other benefits available to the spouses and children of city employees shall be made available on the same basis to the domestic partner, or child of such domestic partner, of a city employee who has a domestic partner. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the benefits provided for in this article, all non-inconsistent provisions of applicable state, federal or other laws or policies shall apply. 
(e)  Any city employee who obtains or attempts to obtain benefits fraudulently or who fails to notify the city of any termination of the domestic partnership under this provision shall be subject to: 
(1)  Recovery of any benefits improperly paid, and 
(2)  Disciplinary action which may include termination. 
Further, the city may bring a civil action against either or both of the parties to the domestic partnership to recover any losses, including attorneys fees, borne by the city as a result of fraudulent request for domestic partnership benefits or because of failure to notify of the termination of the domestic partnership. 
(Ord. No. 13073, § 2, 6-11-09)  
Chapter 29 - LANDFILLS AND WATERFRONT IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Resilience and public works department, § 2-261 et seq.; environmental preservation, ch. 17; noise created by pile drivers, steam shovels, etc., § 36-6; ships, vessels and waterways, ch. 50; city marinas, § 50-221 et seq.; planning and zoning generally, ch. 62. 
County Code cross references— Development within coastal flood hazard districts, ch. 11C; construction, etc., in canal rights-of-way, tidal waters, submerged bay-bottom lands, and wetlands; dewatering; construction of drainage systems, § 24-58 et seq.; developments in incorporated areas creating county impact, ch. 33A. 
State Law reference— Title to tidal lands, F.S. § 253.12 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Fill permits—Required. 
(a)  No submerged land or low-lying land within the city for which a design grade has been or later may be established by the county shall be filled until a permit authorizing the filling has been obtained from the resilience and public works department. Such permit shall be obtained by the owner of the land or by a qualified contractor having a bona fide contract with the owner to perform the work. 
(b)  A fill permit issued by the resilience and public works department shall be required when the elevation of the land to be filled is two feet or more below the design grade established by the county and the areas to be filled consist of 10,000 square feet or more. On land requiring a fill permit, the application for a building permit shall not be made before the fill permit is obtained. The fact that a fill permit may not be required does not lessen the responsibility of the owner or developer to comply with the intent of this article. If, in the opinion of the director of resilience and public works, unsuitable materials are being used for fill, the director of resilience and public works may stop the work and require that a fill permit be obtained. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1; Code 1980, § 29-1; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-2. - Same—Application. 
When applying for a fill permit, the applicant shall submit a plan view of the areas to be filled with notations on the plan as follows: 
(1)  It shall show legal boundaries of the tract or plat and areas to be dedicated for public use. 
(2)  It shall show the area to be filled (crosshatched). 
(3)  It shall show the approximate average depth of the fill. 
(4)  It shall show the approximate existing land elevation on the area to be filled, and areas immediately adjacent to the area to be filled, including the elevation of neighboring land. 
(5)  It shall show the name and address of the owner of the property to be filled. 
(Code 1967, § 27-2; Code 1980, § 29-2)  
Sec. 29-3. - Same—Fees; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  The permit fee for filling upland property that is below the design grade shall be $180.00 for the first 5,000 square feet of area to be filled, and $120.00 for each additional 5,000 square feet of area or fraction thereof. The permit fee for filling submerged land shall be $425.00 for each acre or fraction thereof. Permits issued for filling shall be in effect for only one year from the date of issuance. Such fill permits may be renewed annually for a fee of $115.00. 
(b)  The fee required under this section shall be waived for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Code 1967, § 27-3; Ord. No. 9005, § 1, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Code 1980, § 29-3; Ord. No. 13142, § 11, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13195, § 4, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 29-4. - Requirements for fill material. 
The type and quality of materials which may be used for the filling of land shall be free of undecomposed organic matter, wood, tree stumps, roots or branches and other extraneous matter, and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Acceptable materials. 
a.  Normally acceptable fill shall be a sand and rock mixture. 
b.  Reinforced concrete masonry, rock and stone may be placed as fill; provided that no piece measures more than five feet in its largest dimension and no more than two feet in any other direction, with any encased reinforcing steel protruding not more than 18 inches. No fabricated metal products shall be placed as fill without specific written approval of the director of resilience and public works. 
(2)  Unstable materials. Unstable soils such as muck and fine sand shall not be used as fill material without the written approval of the director of resilience and public works. 
(3)  Stockpiled materials. Materials stockpiled at the site shall be placed and leveled within a reasonable period of time. If, in the opinion of the director of resilience and public works, stockpiled material is not placed and leveled without undue delay or is deemed to be unsafe or subject to shifting, the stockpiled material shall be placed and leveled immediately upon the order of the director of resilience and public works. 
(4)  Finish fill. The top three feet of finish shall consist of material suitable for creating natural surface seepage. Marl clay rock-pit washings, high-clay-content bay bottom and other impervious soils, or soils of low porosity shall not be placed in such a manner as to cause a complete impervious seal. 
(5)  Fill protection. Banks along the edges of a fill, not protected by bulkheading, shall be protected against excess erosion by riprapping or other containment acceptable to the director of resilience and public works. 
(6)  Areas dedicated for public use. Portions of filled land to be dedicated as public rights-of-way or areas to be dedicated for public use shall comply with the following: 
a.  No materials defined in paragraph (2) of this section shall be used as fill. 
b.  Only those materials defined in paragraph (1) of this section shall be used as fill, except that in the top four feet no such fill material shall be larger than 12 inches in any direction. 
c.  In areas dedicated for street purposes, fill materials to be used in the top two feet shall be limited to a sand and rock mixture and shall conform to the following: 
1.  All rock used as fill in the top two feet shall pass through a six-inch ring. 
2.  All rock used as a fill in the top 12 inches shall pass through a 3½-inch ring. 
(Code 1967, § 27-4; Code 1980, § 29-4; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-5. - Supervision of work by resilience and public works department. 
Filling of all submerged or low-lying land within the city, for which a permit under this article has been issued by the resilience and public works department, shall be done under the supervision of the resilience and public works department. 
(1)  Continuous operation. If filling is to be continuous, either by hydraulic or other means, notice shall be given to the resilience and public works department not less than 24 hours prior to the start of such fill. 
(2)  Elimination of voids. Care shall be exercised to insure that during the fill operation no voids are created. If voids are created they shall be filled to the satisfaction of the resilience and public works department. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5; Code 1980, § 29-5; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13792, § 1, adopted October 11, 2018, changed the title of section 29-5 from "Supervision of work by public works department" to "Supervision of work by resilience and public works department." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Secs. 29-6—29-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FILLING OF LAND IN BISCAYNE BAY 
 
Sec. 29-41. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Applicant: Any person, principal on a performance bond, depositor of a cashier's check, or agent thereof, applying for a construction permit under this article. 
Attorney: Attorney at law licensed to practice in the state. 
Bay: That portion of Biscayne Bay lying within the city. 
Board: The zoning board of the city, or the secretary thereof, used interchangeably. 
Department: The resilience and public works department of the city or the director thereof, used interchangeably. 
Material: Sand, rock or earth. 
Trustees: Trustees of the internal improvement fund of the state. 
Unplatted land: Land created or otherwise coming under the provisions of this article. 
Work: Any activity or result of such activity set forth in section 29-42, or the area or location where such activity takes place. 
(Code 1967, § 27-6; Code 1980, § 29-16; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-42. - Purpose of article. 
This article is for the express purpose of prescribing an orderly procedure for the construction, addition or extension of all lands or islands bordering upon or lying in Biscayne Bay within the city; for the pumping or other removal of sand, rock or earth from lands, submerged or otherwise, also lying in Biscayne Bay within the city; and the incidental construction of bulkheads, fill, excavation or extension of sanitary or storm sewer outfalls, relocation of any existing utilities, extension or construction of pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or other utilities which the director may require, all to the effect that the public's interest be best served through strict adherence by all persons to the provisions of this article and to the laws of the state. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7; Code 1980, § 29-17)  
Sec. 29-43. - Construction permit—Petition to zoning board—Filing. 
Each applicant for a construction permit to perform work in the bay shall file a notarized petition with the zoning board in a form and manner prescribed by the secretary thereof. Such petition shall set forth in detail the nature and scope of the work proposed to be done by the applicant; shall contain a notarized statement as to the intended use of the land after completion of the filling, such statement to be made by a person of authority whose statement constitutes a binding commitment upon the applicant, owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees or others having an interest in the land as filled and improved; shall include a certified list of all real property located in whole or in part within a 375-foot radius, and all riparian upland real property lying within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the proposed work, together with the names and addresses of the owners of such property; and also written permission from the holder of the fee simple title of the real property from which any material is to be pumped or otherwise taken. 
(Code 1967, § 27-8; Code 1980, § 29-18)  
Sec. 29-44. - Same—Same—Notice of hearing. 
The zoning board, after the filing of a petition under this article, shall set and publish a legal notice of a public hearing on the proposed work in a daily newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. The board may, in its discretion, send by regular United States mail a copy of such notice to each owner of real property within the prescribed 375-foot radius, and to each owner of riparian upland property lying within 1,000 feet of the proposed work. 
(Code 1967, § 27-9; Code 1980, § 29-19)  
Sec. 29-45. - Same—Same—Hearing; determinations. 
(a)  At the set time and place, the zoning board shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to this article for the general purpose of hearing out the public on the proposed work, and specifically to determine whether or not: 
(1)  The provisions of F.S. ch. 253 (F.S. § 253.124 thereof, in particular), as such chapter and section are worded on the effective date of this section and as they may be amended, supplemented, changed, reworded, redesignated or renumbered thereafter, have been fulfilled; 
(2)  There is any conflict with the Miami plan or any other officially adopted plan; or 
(3)  There is any conflict with any other statute, law, ordinance, regulation, rule or restriction that may be applicable thereto. 
(b)  The board shall hear all parties interested in any manner in the granting or denial of the petition, and may continue or recess such hearing as right and justice shall require. 
(Code 1967, § 27-10; Code 1980, § 29-20)  
Sec. 29-46. - Same—Same—Recommendations of board; decision of city commission; issuance of petition. 
Based on a review of the statements of all interested parties, and after due consideration of all testimony, information and other data presented at the public hearing held pursuant to this article, the zoning board shall promptly make its recommendation in the form of a resolution prepared by the law department to the city commission. The board shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the applicant's petition, and shall accompany such resolution with all written testimony, and oral testimony reduced to narrative form, data and other exhibits adduced at the public hearing. The city commission shall review such recommendation, receiving such additional testimony or evidence as may be deemed appropriate, and shall render its decision approving or disapproving the applicant's petition. In the event the decision is favorable to the applicant, the city commission shall direct that a construction permit for the work be issued by the resilience and public works department after the applicant has further complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 27-11; Code 1980, § 29-21; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-47. - Same—Application; prerequisites to issuance; bond or deposit required. 
The applicant for a construction permit under this article shall apply therefor in the form and manner prescribed by the director of resilience and public works. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following items of data, information and documentation: 
(1)  A legal description of the property and the applicant's interest therein. 
(2)  An attorney's opinion of title, the same showing that fee simple title to the specific submerged land to be filled or improved is vested in the applicant. 
(3)  Written permission obtained from the trustees for the removal or use by the applicant of any material contemplated by the work. 
(4)  Written permission obtained from the United States Army Corps of Engineers for the removal or use by the applicant of any material contemplated by the work. 
(5)  A plan or drawing showing the proposed construction, as required by the laws of the state. 
(6)  Elevation of the completed project, which shall be not less than six feet above mean low water in any area south from Rickenbacker Causeway to the southerly limits of the city and not less than 5½ feet above mean low water in any other part of the bay. 
(7)  Construction plans showing the location of any proposed bulkhead, fill or excavation, the same to show a detail of the bulkhead and quantities of fill and excavation which shall comply in all respects with the specifications for filling submerged land and bulkhead construction heretofore prepared or hereafter modified by the resilience and public works department. 
(8)  A contract or agreement entered into by the applicant with the director of resilience and public works on behalf of the city, the same providing for the construction of bulkheads, fill, excavation, extension of sanitary or storm sewer outfalls, relocation of any existing utilities, extension of or construction of pavement, curbs and gutters, sidewalks or other utilities which the director may require, if conditions encountered at the work make such additional construction desirable. 
a.  Such contract or agreement shall be accompanied by a good and sufficient performance bond in the amount of 110 percent of the total estimated cost of the work, which estimated cost shall have first been approved by the director. The conditions of the performance bond will be such that if the applicant shall fully and faithfully perform the work in accordance with the terms of the contract or agreement, then the performance bond shall be considered complied with. Otherwise the surety thereon, within 30 days after written notice from the director of the failure or neglect of the applicant to perform, construct or cause to be constructed the work set forth in the contract or agreement, shall pay the city such sums as the director estimates necessary to construct or complete such work; and the surety shall also pay to the city any engineering and contingent costs, and any damages, direct or indirect, not to exceed ten percent thereof, such ten percent not to include reasonable attorney's fees, such attorney's fees to be in addition to the ten percent which the city may suffer on account of the failure of the applicant to carry out and execute all of the provisions of the contract or agreement. The city commission shall have the right to construct or cause to be constructed, after public advertisement and receipt of bids, the work provided for in the contract or agreement, and in the event the city commission exercises such right, the applicant and the surety shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the city the final cost of the work, together with any engineering and contingent costs, and any damages, direct or indirect, not to exceed ten percent thereof, such ten percent not to include reasonable attorney's fees, such attorney's fees to be in addition to the ten percent which the city may suffer on account of the failure of the applicant to carry out and execute the provisions of the contract or agreement. Upon completion of construction of the work by the applicant or surety, or payment to the city of the estimated or actual cost thereof, the director shall release the performance bond. 
b.  A cashier's check in the amount of 110 percent of the total estimated cost of the work may be deposited with the city in lieu of the performance bond, the conditions of the deposit thereof to be such that if the applicant shall fully and faithfully perform the work in accordance with the terms of the contract or agreement, the amount of the check shall be returned to the depositor. Otherwise, in the event of the failure or neglect of the applicant to meet his/her obligations under the contract or agreement, the check may be applied by the city to the cost of constructing or completing the work, including any engineering or contingent costs, and any damages, direct or indirect, not to exceed ten percent thereof, such ten percent not to include reasonable attorney's fees, such attorney's fees to be in addition to the ten percent which the city may sustain on account of the failure of the applicant to carry out and execute all of the provisions contracted for or agreed upon. 
c.  The performance bond or cashier's check may be reduced in amount as the works secured thereby are constructed, provided that the amount of the performance bond or cashier's check shall at all times be sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the uncompleted part of the work. 
(Code 1967, § 27-12; Code 1980, § 29-22; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-48. - Same—Issuance. 
Upon the completion of the conditions and requirements of this article, and after ascertaining that any unplatted land filled or extended under a permit issued under this article shall be subject to the provisions of all regulations pertaining to the erection or construction of buildings on such unplatted land, and that all agreements, contracts and covenants required by this article have been executed and delivered to the city, the director of resilience and public works shall thereupon issue to the applicant a construction permit for the approved work. 
(Code 1967, § 27-13; Code 1980, § 29-23; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-49. - Same—Appeals. 
In the event the city commission shall deny a petition applied for under this article, the applicant shall have 60 days within which to appeal, in writing, to the city commission for reconsideration of the zoning board's ruling. The city manager shall set and notify the applicant of the time and place of rehearing. In addition, the city manager shall have published a legal notice of a public hearing of the proposed work in a daily newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the date of the rehearing. After such rehearing, the city commission shall review its previous ruling and announce a decision thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 27-14; Code 1980, § 29-24)  
Sec. 29-50. - Same—Renewal. 
All construction work under this article shall be completed within two years from the date of issuance of the permit, but for good cause shown, such permit may be renewed for an additional two years upon application to the director of resilience and public works, in writing. 
(Code 1967, § 27-15; Code 1980, § 29-25; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-51. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  The city commission may summarily revoke a construction permit under this article for cause, including, but not limited to, fraud in the petition or application for a permit, damage, trespass, depreciation or unlawful use by the applicant, or construction not in accordance with the plans submitted and approved by the resilience and public works department. 
(b)  In addition to the above summary revocation, any construction permit provided for may be revoked by the city commission for a departure from or violation of any of its terms, after written notice of intention to do so has been sent to the applicant by certified mail and an opportunity for a hearing before the city commission has been made available to him/her. 
(Code 1967, § 27-16; Code 1980, § 29-26; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-52. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  The following schedule of fees shall be charged in connection with this article: 
(1)  For publication and notification of property owners, payable at the time of filing a petition, a minimum of $90.00. 
(2)  For removal of sand, rock or earth by pumping or otherwise, from lands submerged, or otherwise, as estimated by the director of resilience and public works and payable upon issuance of a permit, $425.00 for the first 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof, and $125.00 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof. 
(b)  The processing fees required by paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall be waived for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Code 1967, § 27-17; Ord. No. 9005, § 2, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Code 1980, § 29-27; Ord. No. 13142, § 11, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13195, § 4, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-53. - Standards and inspections. 
All work under this article shall be performed in strict accordance with the application for a construction permit and other data, information and representations furnished and made by the applicant, the requirements and conditions of the construction permit, applicable provisions of this Code and other city ordinances and the laws of the state, and shall be in compliance with the resilience and public works department's standards and specifications. All work shall be subject to periodic and final inspection and approval by the resilience and public works department. 
(Code 1967, § 27-18; Code 1980, § 29-28; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-54. - Stopping of noncomplying work. 
Upon the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the director of resilience and public works shall stop the work and shall forthwith notify the city manager of such action. 
(Code 1967, § 27-19; Code 1980, § 29-29; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Sec. 29-55. - Remedies cumulative. 
Any stoppage of the work under this article by the director of resilience and public works, or any revocation of the construction permit therefor, either summarily or after due notice and hearing, shall be independent of the penalty for a violation of this article, and neither the acts of stoppage or revocation, nor the imposition of a fine or imprisonment, or both, shall act as a bar or preclusion of one to the other. 
(Code 1967, § 27-20; Code 1980, § 29-30; Ord. No. 13792, § 1, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 29-56—29-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BULKHEADS, SEAWALLS, PIERS, DOCKS, GROINS, MARINE RAILWAYS AND OTHER SIMILAR STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 29-81. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. Definitions other than those given herein shall be as set forth in the South Florida Building Code. 
Building code: The Florida Building Code. 
Bulkhead: A structure erected along water or a waterway, designed and constructed in such manner as to safely sustain any loads, both vertical and lateral, that may come upon it, such as earth fill, water, moving traffic, storage of materials alongside, and the like. 
Bulkhead line: An official line established by a governmental agency along or near the shore for the purpose of controlling the waterfront alignment of structures. 
Department: The building department of the city, or the director of such department, used interchangeably. 
Engineer: A professional engineer certified competent and licensed by the state. 
Gravity-type wall: A structure whose resultant of acting forces falls within the middle third of the base. Rock-type walls shall be included in this category when the base width equals or exceeds the height of the wall. 
Seawall: Essentially the same as a bulkhead. 
(Code 1967, § 27-21; Code 1980, § 29-41; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-82. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public's health, welfare and safety by setting minimum standards to be used in the design, construction and maintenance of waterfront structures; further, to accomplish this purpose by requiring such design, construction and maintenance to be acceptable in all respects and particulars to the building department; and lastly, to ascertain that all physical improvements included herein are subject to and admit of rational analysis in accordance with established principles of mechanics and accepted engineering practices. This article shall be deemed to supplement the provisions of the South Florida Building Code. 
(Code 1967, § 27-22; Code 1980, § 29-42; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-83. - Permits for waterfront improvements—Required. 
No waterfront improvement shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired until a permit authorizing such construction, reconstruction or repair has been obtained from the building department. No such permit shall be issued for any improvement or repair to an existing improvement which is deemed substandard by the director of the building department. 
(Code 1967, § 27-23; Ord. No. 10658, § 2, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 29-43; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-84. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Generally. Permits required by this article shall be applied for either by the owner-builder or by a licensed contractor certified in a proper category and having a bona fide contract with the owner to perform such work. Application shall be made upon a suitable form provided by the building department. 
(b)  For improvements of $5,000.00 or more. For new construction or repairs amounting to $5,000.00 or more in value, three copies of the plans shall be submitted with the application, which plans shall include the following information, except as to any item which may be waived in writing by the department: 
(1)  A current certified survey sketch of the property upon which the improvement is to be made. 
(2)  A plot plan, showing the relation of the proposed improvement to the site and to adjoining land or areas. 
(3)  Arrangement and structural details in the plan, section and elevation views sufficiently expanded to serve as construction drawings. 
(4)  The type and character of the soil substrata which will bear the improvement or structure. When required by the building department, core borings shall be taken to a depth ten feet deeper than the proposed base of construction or to a depth below the deepest piling, and the findings of the same shall be made a part of the permit application. 
(5)  Soundings and pertinent elevations of the proposed structures shall be shown referred to mean low water, National Geodetic Vertical Datum, as defined in section 20-1 of the City Code ("NGVD"). 
(6)  The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the improvement is to be made or constructed. 
(7)  A construction cost estimate of the proposed improvement substantiated by a fully executed construction contract or validated and attested to by a licensed professional engineer. 
(8)  The signature and seal of the engineer designing the improvements. 
(9)  The engineer's design computations, when required by the building department. 
(c)  For improvements less than $5,000.00. For construction or repairs less than $5,000.00 in value, three copies of the plans shall be submitted with the application, which plans shall include the following information, except as to any item which may be waived in writing by the department: 
(1)  A current certified survey sketch of the property upon which the improvement is to be made. 
(2)  A plot plan, showing the relation of the proposed improvement to the site and to adjoining land or areas. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the improvement is to be made. 
(4)  A cost estimate of the proposed improvement substantiated by a fully executed construction contract or validated and attested to by a licensed professional engineer. 
(5)  The signature and seal of the engineer designing the improvement, when required by the building department. 
(6)  The engineer's design computations, when required by the building department. 
(Code 1967, § 27-24; Ord. No. 10658, § 2, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 29-44; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-85. - Same—Certain title and permits to accompany application. 
As part of a request for a permit under this article, the applicant shall obtain and present the following title and permits, except for any such title proved not to be required: 
(1)  The title to bay-bottom lands from the internal improvement fund. 
(2)  Preliminary approval from Miami-Dade County Department of Permitting, Environment and Regulatory Affairs (PERA). 
(Code 1967, § 27-25; Code 1980, § 29-45; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-86. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  The permit fee for the construction of any new structural improvement covered by this article, excluding the cost of any electrical, mechanical and plumbing work requiring separate permits, shall be based upon the estimated construction costs and shall be a flat fee of $300.00 plus two percent of the estimated construction cost. An after-the-fact permit fee, for any improvements covered by this article on which construction was performed without proper permits and inspection, shall be quadruple the above fee. 
(b)  The permit fee for the repair or reconstruction of any existing structural improvement covered by this article, excluding the cost of any separate permits, shall be based upon the estimated cost of repair or reconstruction and shall be a flat fee of $90.00 or ten percent of the estimated cost of repair/reconstruction up to $525.00, whichever is greater. An after-the-fact permit fee, for any improvements covered by this article on which repairs/reconstruction were performed without proper permits and inspection, shall be quadruple the above fee. 
(c)  The expense of any inspection by the building department shall be in accordance with chapter 10 of the City Code. 
(d)  The fee required under this section may be waived by the director of building for governmental entities and agencies. 
(Code 1967, § 27-26; Ord. No. 9005, § 3, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 9513, § 1, 11-4-82; Ord. No. 10658, § 2, 10-12-89; Code 1980, § 29-46; Ord. No. 13142, § 11, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13195, § 4, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-87. - Same—Refund of fees; time limitations. 
The building department shall be governed, in the matters of permit fee refunds and time limitations of permits, by chapter 10 of the City Code and the Florida Building Code. 
(Code 1967, § 27-27; Code 1980, § 29-47; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-88. - Same—Revocation. 
Any permit issued under this article shall be revocable for good cause, which cause may include, but is not limited to, failure, refusal or neglect by the owner, contractor or engineer to fulfill any of the provisions of this article or the Florida Building Code. 
(Code 1967, § 27-28; Code 1980, § 29-48; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-89. - Design. 
(a)  Design analysis. Responsibility for proper design rests with the engineer who prepares the plans. Each improvement shall be designed to support all loads that may come upon it, to withstand the forces of water, wind and usage; and to meet the specific requirements of the building department for location, elevation, and construction. 
(1)  General. Any improvement, bulkhead, seawall, pier, wharf, dock, groin, cut, marine, railway or other related structure included in this article shall admit of rational analysis in accordance with well-established principles of mechanics and sound engineering practices, and without exceeding the allowed stresses for the various materials as specified in the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Bulkheads. Bulkheads and all parts thereof shall be designed to support the estimated or actual imposed load, either dead, live or any other, both during construction and after the completion of such bulkhead. 
(3)  Terrace-type wall. Subject to certain types of conditions of the site or location of the improvement, step-type bulkheads or terrace-type walls will be permitted. 
(4)  Waterfront properties. For all waterfront properties east of US-1, except those fronting the Miami River, the top elevation of new seawalls shall be set at +5.00 NGVD, if located north of the Rickenbacker Causeway, and set at +6.00 NGVD if located south of the Rickenbacker Causeway. The top elevation of new seawalls for those waterfront properties fronting the Miami River shall be set in accordance with section 54-46 of the City Code. This criteria applies for new construction or when substantial improvements to a property are performed. This subsection is not to be interpreted to impair the obligation of contracts, including without limitation, restrictive covenants or deed restrictions, under the Constitution of the state. 
(b)  Lateral support from fills. No fill deposited as a berm on the water side of the bulkhead shall be considered as offering any lateral support to the bulkhead, without approval by the building department. 
(Code 1967, § 27-29; Code 1980, § 29-49; Ord. No. 12926, § 2, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 12959, § 2, 1-10-08; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-90. - Loads. 
All improvements shall be proportioned for the following loads and forces: 
(1)  Dead load. 
(2)  Live load or surcharge including ordinary impact, except where loading involves unusual impact requiring increased assumed loads. Live loads may consist of material, goods or equipment stored or operated alongside the bulkhead, or any structure adjoining the same, the foundations of which may exert pressure on the bulkhead, or sidewalks, highway or street traffic loads. A sidewalk live load shall be taken as 100 pounds per square foot of sidewalk area, and the highway or street traffic loads shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges adopted by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Unless otherwise indicated by field conditions, the minimum highway or street traffic load shall consist of a two-axle truck of gross weight 20 tons, designated as class H-20 loading in such standard specifications. 
(3)  Impact and dynamic effect of live load. 
(Code 1967, § 27-30; Code 1980, § 29-50; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-91. - Construction. 
(a)  General. Each waterfront improvement shall be permanent in nature, and the character of its soil or fill shall be accurately determined, as shall also its weight and angle of repose. Gravity structures may be constructed of a combination of rocks and concrete, and the minimum percentage of cross sectional area of concrete to the total cross sectional area of the structure shall be 40 percent, excluding concrete used for copings or decorative purposes. 
(b)  Alignment. The alignment of bulkhead shall be closely controlled. The bulkhead shall be constructed entirely on privately owned property unless otherwise approved by the entity or agency controlling the property upon which the bulkhead is to be constructed, and the alignment shall not deviate more than two inches from the designated alignment. The face of the bulkhead shall not in any case protrude beyond the established bulkhead line or the line shown on the plan approved by the building department. 
(c)  Supporting piling. Supporting piles on any improvement constructed shall be driven to a bearing capacity as shown on the plans. These bearing capacities shall be computed in accordance with the driving load formula given in the Florida Building Code. 
(d)  Concrete anchors. Concrete anchors shall be used only where approved by the building department. 
(e)  Precast concrete piles. Precast concrete piles shall conform to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Steel sheet piles. Steel sheet piling shall be of the continuous-interlock type of approved form. All steel sheet piling and accessories shall conform to the requirements of the Specifications for Steel Sheet Piling of the American Society for Testing and Materials, ASTM A328. The minimum thickness of web and flange metal shall be three-eighths of an inch, unless effectively protected from corrosion in the area extending from one foot below mean low water to the top of the exposed steel. 
(g)  Wood piles. Wood piles shall conform to the requirement of the Florida Building Code. 
(h)  Caps. Bulkheads shall be capped. The cap shall be reinforced concrete. The use of the cap as a street curb shall be avoided, but if such function is permitted by the department, the cap shall be designed for a live load of 500 pounds per lineal foot of cap, applied laterally, in addition to any other loads, dead or live, that may come upon it, and shall have a guardrail where required by the department. 
(i)  Special piles or special conditions. The use of types of piles or conditions not specifically covered herein may be permitted, subject to the approval of the building department, upon the submission by the engineer of acceptable test data, calculations or other information relating to the properties and load-carrying capacity of such piles. 
(Code 1967, § 27-31; Code 1980, § 29-51; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 29-92. - Materials. 
Permanent materials shall include concrete, steel, stone masonry construction, or any combination of the same. Other materials not specifically covered herein may be permitted, subject to the approval of the building department. Reinforced concrete shall be of the materials, proportions, strength and consistency set forth in the Florida Building Code, as also shall the materials, design and fabrication in the erection of steel. 
(Code 1967, § 27-32; Code 1980, § 29-52; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-93. - Review of plans; duty to inspect. 
The building department shall review all plans and inspect all construction to insure that minimum standards set forth in this article are met, and shall require corrections in plans or construction when indicated. 
(Code 1967, § 27-33; Code 1980, § 29-53; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-94. - Procedure for inspections. 
(a)  Inspection of work in progress on waterfront improvements shall be carried out as set forth in the building code, according to the following sequence: 
(1)  Layout inspection after survey for location and before excavation is begun. 
(2)  Pile inspection during the driving of piles and after all piles are driven, but before placing of any concrete. 
(3)  Foundation inspection after necessary excavations have been made, forms erected and reinforcing steel placed, but before concrete is placed. 
(4)  Reinforcing inspection after any reinforcing steel is in place and tied, but before the placing of any concrete. 
(5)  Electrical, mechanical or plumbing inspections after installation of such named equipment, but before any part of such installation is covered or concealed from view. 
(b)  In the event the waterfront improvement includes any electrical, mechanical and plumbing work, a permit for such work shall be required in addition to the permit covered by this article, and the permit fee for such electrical, mechanical and plumbing work shall be as set forth in chapter 10 of the City Code. 
(Code 1967, § 27-34; Code 1980, § 29-54; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Sec. 29-95. - Maintenance. 
Privately owned waterfront improvements shall be privately maintained, even though a portion of the improvement may extend into publicly owned land. Failure by the owner to keep improvements in a state of repair acceptable to the building department shall be subject to enforcement as set forth in chapter 2, article X of the City Code, entitled "Code enforcement," and may be brought for further proceedings before the code enforcement board. The foregoing shall not be an exclusive remedy and the city may at its option additionally institute a civil action to enforce the provisions in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 27-35; Code 1980, § 29-55; Ord. No. 13315, § 2, 3-8-12)  
Secs. 29-96—29-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATERFRONT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 29-121. - Creation. 
The Miami waterfront advisory board is hereby created and may be referred to by that term or "city waterfront board" or "board." 
(Ord. No. 10459, § 1(b), 7-14-88; Code 1980, § 29-61)  
Sec. 29-122. - Scope. 
(a)  The board shall have responsibility to review and evaluate issues related to the use and development of city-owned waterfront property and shall provide advice to the city commission concerning those issues and only such other matters as are referred to it by the city commission in regard to city or public land abutting water. The city commission shall not be bound by any recommendation or advice received from the board. The board is expected to be aware of city policy concerning development and coordinate its endeavors with the city's planning advisory board and any other committees or boards which will be affected by the board's recommendations. 
(b)  The Miami waterfront advisory board shall be informed of all issues concerning the major development and/or disposition of city-owned waterfront property for its input and advice at the conceptual planning stage for such development and/or disposition; "major development and/or disposition" shall be defined as such activities that require public notice and hearings pursuant to the City of Miami Charter and Code and shall not encompass minor changes, renovations and/or alterations to any existing city-owned waterfront property. Nothing herein is intended to interfere or conflict with any existing provisions in the City of Miami Charter and Code setting forth procedures concerning the development and/or disposition of city-owned waterfront property. 
(Ord. No. 10459, § 3, 7-14-88; Ord. No. 10638, § 1, 9-14-89; Code 1980, § 29-62; Ord. No. 11873, § 2, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 29-123. - Composition; terms; appointment; removal. 
(a)  The board shall consist of 12 members, composed as follows: 
(1)  Two members appointed by the mayor. 
(2)  Ten members appointed by the city commission, with each commissioner nominating two individuals; and 
(b)  All members shall serve without compensation for terms of office of one year or until the nominating commissioner leaves office, whichever occurs first, and shall be subject to removal by the commission for any cause. A member's absence from four of the cumulative meetings within any one calendar year period or from three consecutive meetings of the board within a calendar year shall result in the member's removal from the board upon the chairperson's filing of a certificate of such absences with the city clerk. Any vacancy occurring during such term shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(c)  Members shall reside in the city or maintain a place of business or office in the city or own real property in the city at the time of their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 10459, § 2, 7-14-88; Ord. No. 11130, § 12, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 11189, § 3, 10-27-94; Code 1980, § 29-63; Ord. No. 11373, § 7, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 11564, § 12, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 12388, § 2, 7-17-03)  
Sec. 29-124. - Officers; meetings; quorum; reports; support. 
(a)  The board shall select one of its members as chairperson. No chairperson shall serve more than three years in that office. A vice-chairperson may also be designated by the board from among its members to serve as chairperson at any meeting if the chairperson is absent from the meeting. 
(b)  A quorum shall consist of six members. A decision of the board shall be made only upon an affirmative vote of the majority of those members in attendance. For instances of a tie vote, the outcome of the vote shall be determined by the vote of the chairperson. 
(c)  Meetings shall be scheduled by the board at least once each month and if there is no business pending before the board, the meeting may be dispensed with. The time and place of the meetings shall be fixed by the board. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any six members of the board upon reasonable notice being given to all board members. Meetings shall be open to the public and the board shall adopt its own order of business and rules of parliamentary procedure. 
(d)  The board shall report in writing to the city commission at least once each three months and shall file a copy of the report with the city clerk. The board shall provide such additional reports as from time to time may be necessary to discharge its responsibility. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide administrative support to the board which shall include the services of an individual to keep minutes of meetings, maintain board correspondence, post meeting notices, file reports, and perform all other necessary support functions. 
(Ord. No. 10459, § 4, 7-14-88; Code 1980, § 29-64; Ord. No. 12388, § 2, 7-17-03)  
Chapter 31 - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12885, § 1, adopted February 8, 2007, changed the title of chapter 31 from "Licenses and Miscellaneous Business Regulations" to "Local Business Tax and Miscellaneous Business Regulations." 
City Code cross references— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; amusements, ch. 5; cable television, ch. 11; commercial waste collection, § 22-46 et seq.; ships, vessels and waterways, ch. 50. 
Law review reference— Municipal licenses in Florida, 8 Miami L.Q. 266. 
State Law reference— Local occupational license taxes, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 31-1—31-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX (BTR) [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of article II from "Local Business Tax" to "Local Business Tax (BTR)." 
 
Sec. 31-26. - Required; separate locations to comply with BTR; doing business with the City of Miami or its agencies. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to engaging in or operating in the city any business, profession or occupation referred to expressly or otherwise in section 31-50 herein, whether as owner, agent, employee, manager or operator, a BTR shall be procured from the city as provided in this article, on or before October 1 of each year. Any individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity conducting any business, profession or occupation referred to in section 31-50 herein, whether as owner, agent, employee, manager or operator, who does not possess a valid and current BTR and display the same as required by section 31-27 herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. Each day the above-described violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Such conditions precedent shall apply, separately and severally, to each place or location where any such business, profession or occupation will be engaged in or operated regardless of the capacity in which the person or legal entity engaging in or operating such business, profession or occupation shall act, whether as owner, agent, manager or operator. 
(c)  Except where specifically contrary to general law, any person doing business with the City of Miami and/or any of its agencies shall obtain a City of Miami BTR for the type of business they are contracting. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-1; Ord. No. 11287, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-26 from "Required; separate locations licensed separately; doing business with the City of Miami and/or its agencies" to "Required; separate locations to comply with BTR; doing business with the City of Miami or its agencies." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Case Law reference— The owner of apartment houses who delegated all management duties in regard thereto to a corporation was not "engaged in or operating any business, profession or occupation" for which a license is required under this section. City of Miami v. Schonfeld, 197 So. 2d 559.  
Sec. 31-27. - Display. 
All BTR issued by the city, unless otherwise provided by law, shall be displayed in the office or some other conspicuous place within the complying establishment or on the premises thereof and shall be displayed to the general public or any police department personnel, BTR inspector, code enforcement inspector, or other official of the city upon request during normal business hours. If the business does possess a valid and current BTR but fails to display the same as required by this section, said BTR may be suspended by the city manager or designee upon notification of said refusal by the city attorney. Upon said notification, the city manager or designee shall schedule a hearing as mandated by subsection 31-49(b) herein. A suspension for failure to display shall extend for a period of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-2; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09)  
Sec. 31-28. - Definitions. 
Other definitions are contained within section 31-50 herein, pertaining to particular occupational classifications. For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) is the agency referred to in F.S. § 402.03 or its statuary successor, administrative department or division. 
Business, profession and occupation do not include customary religious, charitable or educational activities, or nonprofit religious, nonprofit charitable or nonprofit educational institutions. 
Charitable institutions shall mean only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in Florida at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which shall be without cost to those unable to pay. 
Department of Business and Professional Regulation (DBPR) is the state agency referred to in F.S. § 20.165 or its statutory successor, administrative department or division. 
Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services (HRS) is the state agency referred to in F.S. § 20.19 or its statutory successor, administrative department or division. 
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles (DMV) is the state agency referred to in F.S. § 20.24 or its statutory successor, administrative department or division. 
Educational institutions shall mean state tax-supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and secondary schools, department of education or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Non-profit libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption. 
Local business tax receipt (BTR) document shall mean the document that is issued by the city which bears the words "local business tax receipt" and evidences that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this article and F.S. ch. 205, relating to the business tax. 
Local business tax receipt (BTR) fee shall mean the fees charged and the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or managing a business, profession, or occupation within its jurisdiction. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registration, examination, or inspection. 
Merchandise shall mean goods, wares, articles, stock, and other things of value, including goods on consignment. 
Merchant retailer shall mean an individual, company, co-partnership, corporation, other business entity or agent who acquires for the purpose of sale, keeps for sale, offers or exposes for sale or sells individual units of merchandise to an ultimate consumer and not for resale. 
Merchant wholesaler, distributor, jobber or consignment shall mean an individual, company, co-partnership, corporation, other business entity or agent who may or may not maintain a fixed place of business in the city who sells or offers to sell merchandise for resale to a merchant retailer or any other party for resale. A wholesale BTR does not cover anyone who sells directly to the consuming public. 
Religious institutions shall mean churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations, or established physical places for worship in this state at which non-profit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on and shall also mean church cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-3; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 205.022.  
Sec. 31-29. - Exemptions; motor vehicles. 
Vehicles used by any person in compliance with this article for the sale and delivery of tangible personal property at either wholesale or retail from his/her place of business on which a BTR is paid shall not be construed to be separate places of business, and no BTR may be levied on such vehicles or the operators thereof as sales associates. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-4; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.063.  
Sec. 31-30. - Exemption allowed certain disabled persons, the aged, and widows with minor dependents. 
(a)  All disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents, and persons 65 years of age or older, with not more than one employee or helper, and who use their own capital only, not in excess of $1,000.00, shall be allowed to engage in a business, profession or occupation without being required to pay for a BTR. The exemption provided by this section shall be allowed only upon the certification of a reputable physician, currently admitted to the practice of medicine in the State of Florida, that the applicant claiming the exemption is disabled, the nature and extent of the disability being specified therein; and in case the exemption is claimed by a widow with minor dependents or a person over 65 years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be made. Any person entitled to the exemption provided by this section shall, upon application and furnishing of the necessary proof as aforesaid, be issued a BTR which shall have plainly stamped or written across the face thereof the face that it is issued under this section, and the reason for the exemption shall be written thereon. 
(b)  In no event under this or any other law shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed any exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a BTR to sell intoxicating liquors or malt and vinous beverages. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-5; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.162.  
Sec. 31-31. - Exemptions allowed disabled veterans of any war or their unremarried spouses. 
(a)  Any bona fide, permanent resident elector of the state who served as an officer or enlisted person during any of the periods specified in F.S. § 1.01(15) in the armed forces of the United States, National Guard, or United States Coast Guard or Coast Guard Reserve, or any temporary member thereof, who has actually been, or may hereafter be, reassigned by the Air Force, Army, Navy, Coast Guard, or Marines to active duty during any war, declared or undeclared, armed conflicts, crises, etc., who was honorably discharged from the service of the United States, and who at the time of his or her application for a BTR as hereinafter mentioned shall be disabled from performing manual labor shall, upon sufficient identification, proof of being a permanent resident elector of the State of Florida, and production of an honorable discharge from the military service of the United States: 
(1)  Be granted a BTR to engage in any business, profession or occupation in the city which may be carried on mainly through the personal efforts of the complyee as a means of livelihood and for which the BTR does not exceed the sum of $50.00 for each without payment of any BTR otherwise provided for by law; 
(2)  Be entitled to an exemption to the extent of $50.00 on any BTR to engage in any business, profession or occupation in the state which may be carried on mainly through the personal efforts of the BTR holder as a means of livelihood when the state, county, or municipal BTR for such business, profession or occupation shall be more than $50.00. The exemption heretofore referred to shall extend to and include the right of BTR holder to operate an automobile for hire of not exceeding five-passenger capacity, including the driver, when it shall be made to appear that such automobile is bona fide owned or contracted to be purchased by the BTR holder and is being operated by him or her as a means of livelihood and that the proper BTR for the operation of such motor vehicle for private use has been applied for and attached to said motor vehicle and the proper fees therefore paid by the BTR Holder. 
(b)  When any such person shall apply for a BTR to conduct any business, profession or occupation for which the BTR shall exceed the sum of $50.00, the remainder of such BTR in excess of $50.00 shall be paid by him/her. 
(c)  Reasonable proof not inconsistent with F.S. § 205.171(3) shall be shown to establish the fact that the applicant is disabled. 
(d)  BTRs issued under this section shall be in the same general form as other BTR issued under this article and shall expire at the same time as such other BTR issued under this article. 
(e)  All BTRs obtained under the provisions of this section by the commission of fraud shall be deemed null and void. Any person who has fraudulently obtained any such BTR, or who has fraudulently received any transfer of a BTR issued to another, and has thereafter engaged in any business, profession or occupation requiring a BTR under color thereof shall be subject to prosecution as for engaging in a business, profession or occupation without having the required BTR under the laws of this state and of the city. Such BTR shall not be issued in any county other than the county wherein the veteran is a bona fide resident citizen elector, unless such veteran applying therefore shall produce to the tax collecting authority in such county a certificate of the tax collector of his or her home county to the effect that no exemption from BTR has been granted to such veteran in his or her home county under the authority of this section. 
(f)  In no event, under this or any other law, shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed any exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a BTR to sell intoxicating liquors or malt and vinous beverages. 
(g)  The unremarried spouse of the deceased disabled veteran of any war in which the United States armed forces participated will be entitled to the same exemptions as the disabled veteran. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-6; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.171.  
Sec. 31-32. - Charitable, etc., organizations; occasional sales, fundraising; exemption. 
No BTR shall be required of any charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service, or other such organization when the organization makes occasional sales or engages in fundraising projects when the projects are performed exclusively by the members thereof and when the proceeds derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and service activities of the organization. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-7; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.192.  
Sec. 31-33. - Religious tenets; exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a BTR for practicing the religious tenets of any church. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-8; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.191.  
Sec. 31-34. - Governmental agency, entity or employee; exemption. 
(a)  No federal, state, county or municipal governmental agency or entity shall be required to obtain a BTR. 
(b)  A member of one of the professions who is employed by the United States government, State of Florida, or one of its political subdivisions, and practices his/her profession solely as an employee thereof shall not be required to obtain a BTR. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-9; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
State Law reference— Exemptions and requirements, F.S. § 205.193 et seq.  
Sec. 31-35. - Application procedure; grounds for denial. 
(a)  Form. No BTR shall be issued or granted to any applicant to engage in any business or in the practice or pursuit of any profession or occupation coming within the categories mentioned in section 31-50 herein, unless the applicant shall first make application and complete an application form stating the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant. 
(2)  Where applicable, the business address where the applicant has obtained a valid and current certificate of use from the office of zoning for the business activity which the applicant seeks to engage in. 
(3)  The name of the business, including, without limitation any fictitious name issued under the fictitious name statute of the State of Florida. 
(4)  In the initial application state whether the applicant has ever had any BTR issued under this article revoked or suspended. 
(5)  The application form shall have the following language: 
STATEMENT: This information is given freely and voluntarily, and all the facts, figures, statements contained in this application are true and correct. 
(6)  The applicant shall sign the application. 
(7)  The application shall contain a section designated "emergency locator." The applicant shall fill out as part of the BTR application the resident address and resident phone number of the owner and manager or other local persons to be notified in case of fire or other emergencies. Any changes in such information during the period for which the BTR Holder is issued shall be made to the BTR division, in writing. 
(8)  The applicant shall furnish all other information requested by the city manager or designee as deemed necessary for its determination of the appropriate BTR and the amount of said BTR applicable thereto. 
(b)  Grounds for denial. Grounds for denial of the issuance of a BTR shall include: 
(1)  The applicant has materially misrepresented or failed to include the information mandated by this article in the application. 
(2)  The applicant, individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity desiring to engage in the business applied for in this application currently has that BTR under suspension or revocation. 
(3)  The applicant, individual, partnership or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity desiring to engage in the business as described in the application has not provided the city manager or designee with a valid and current certificate of use from the office of zoning. 
(4)  The applicant, individual, partnership or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity desiring to engage in the business as described in the application is the subject of code enforcement procedures, a state law or county violation, or a violation of the zoning ordinance or other city ordinance, where the applicant's business enterprise is located or is to be located. Said BTR shall be withheld by the city manager or designee until such time as said violation is corrected and all attendant fines are paid in full, or the code enforcement board, a special master, or a court of competent jurisdiction issues an order directing the issuance of the BTR. 
(c)  Any person whose application for a BTR has been denied by the city manager or designee under this section or under section 31-41 may, by appropriate written petition to the department of hearing boards, seek a hearing pursuant to section 31-49. The request for a hearing must be made within 30 days after the notice of denial by the city manager or designee, is submitted to the applicant. 
(d)  BTR issued. The BTR shall have the name of the city manager or designee imprinted thereon. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 11148, § 3, 5-5-94; Code 1980, § 31-10; Ord. No. 12499, § 2, 2-26-04; Ord. No. 12683, § 2, 5-12-05; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
State Law reference— Fictitious name, F.S. § 205.023; prerequisites for issuance, F.S. § 205.194 et seq.  
Sec. 31-36. - Application notarization required. 
Where the application is made for the following BTR local business tax receipts, the signature of the applicant shall be notarized: nonmotorized vehicles for hire, bankruptcy and closing-out-sales and automobile or vehicle towing from private property. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-11; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09)  
Sec. 31-37. - Duration. 
No BTR under this article shall be issued for more than one year. The city manager or designee shall not issue a BTR to any individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity whose local BTR for a specified business activity at a particular location has been suspended during such period nor to any individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity whose BTR for a specified business activity at a particular location has been revoked until the expiration of such revocation imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-12; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 31-38. - Due date and proration of BTR. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, BTR under this article shall be due and payable on September 30 of each year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be due on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, for each local business tax receipt obtained between October 1 and the succeeding March 31, the full tax for one year shall be paid. For each license obtained between April 1, and the succeeding September 30, one-half the full tax for one year shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, §§ 31-13, 31-14; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-38 from "Due date and proration of local business tax receipt" to "Due date and proration of BTR" The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
State Law reference— Authority, F.S. § 205.053(1).  
Sec. 31-39. - Penalty, late payment of local business tax or original local business tax receipt. 
(a)  BTR that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25 percent of the BTR for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  Any person engaging in, managing, or operating any business, profession, or occupation without first obtaining a BTR shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the amount due, in addition to the penalty provided by section 31-26 herein, and in addition to any penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required BTR within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required BTR is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-15; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12885, § 1, adopted February 8, 2007, changed the title of § 31-39 from "Penalty, late payment of occupational license tax or original license" to "Penalty, late payment of local business tax or original local business tax receipt." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053.  
Sec. 31-40. - Renewal of BTR. 
(a)  BTR renewals shall be due and payable and expire on September 30. Those BTR not renewed by September 30 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty as provided in subsection 31-39(a). 
(b)  The city manager or designee is authorized to renew BTR upon receipt of a substantially completed renewal application form, certificate of use issued by the office of zoning; with or without the applicant's signature, provided that payment of the necessary BTR accompanies the renewal form. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-16; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-40 from "Renewal of local business tax receipt" to "Renewal of BTR." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 31-41. - Grounds for nonrenewal. 
The following constitute adequate grounds for the city manager or designee to deny renewal of a BTR: 
(1)  The BTR holder has an unpaid balance for the previous year's or years' BTR; 
(2)  The BTR holder has materially misrepresented or failed to include the information required by this article to be included in the BTR application form; 
(3)  The BTR holder subsequent to being issued a has been convicted of, or has pled guilty to, a violation of a law of this state, or ordinance of the county or ordinance of the city, which violation occurred as a part of the main business activity approved and not merely incident thereto; 
(4)  The BTR holder is conducting business from premises which do not possess a valid and current certificate of occupancy issued by the planning, building and zoning department; 
(5)  The BTR holder is conducting business from premises which do not possess a valid and current certificate of use issued by the office of zoning; 
(6)  The BTR holder is conducting business from the proposed premises and is not in compliance with a zoning ordinance or other city ordinance. 
(7)  The BTR holder has obtained a permit, certificate or BTR, including a BTR issued pursuant to this article, by misleading, and/or deceptive information or making false statements that were relied upon by the city or an employee operating in an official capacity in issuing the above-mentioned permit(s), certificate(s) or BTR(s); or 
(8)  There is a pending judgment, order, injunction or decree entered by a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction against said from engaging in the activity for which he/she seeks a BTR renewal. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-17; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 31-42. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized and empowered to refund any money paid for a BTR under this article only when an overpayment is found to exist or there has been payment for a BTR. 
(b)  All requests for refunds must be in writing and may be granted upon presentation of the original BTR in question when applicable and documenting evidence supporting the request for refund as may be required by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  All refunds applied for pursuant to this section may be requested within one year from the date the original BTR became due and shall be barred if not so presented. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-18; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 31-43. - Transferability. 
(a)  Upon payment of a transfer fee up to ten percent of the annual BTR but less than $3.00 or not more than $25.00, all BTRs issued by the city shall be transferable with the approval of the city manager or designee, except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter, when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock in trade, and not otherwise; provided that the seller of the business shall present the local BTR to the city manager or designee with an endorsement assigning all right, title and interest to the purchaser, and the purchaser shall produce a properly executed bill of sale showing the transfer of stock from the person licensed to the purchaser. Upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual licensed tax, but not less than $3.00 or not more than $25.00, BTR may be transferred from one location to another, provided that a written request for such transfer and the BTR to be transferred shall first be presented to the city manager or designee for approval of such transfer along with a current and valid certificate of use for the complying activity at the new location. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to cabaret and nightclub BTRs, and such BTRs shall be issued as new or original BTR upon a change of complyee, without requiring payment of new BTR taxes. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-19; Ord. No. 11287, § 2, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
State Law reference— Authority, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3).  
Sec. 31-44. - Replacing lost or destroyed BTR. 
For the purpose of replacing any mutilated, destroyed or lost BTR granted by the city, the city manager or designee is hereby authorized to issue an appropriate duplicate BTR upon the submittal of evidence satisfactory to the director that the original BTR was mutilated, destroyed or lost and upon the payment to the city by the holder of the sum of $1.00 for each such duplicate BTR issued. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-20; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-44 from "Replacing lost or destroyed local business tax receipts" to "Replacing lost or destroyed BTR." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 31-45. - Authority to request proof of inventory; inspection; estimates. 
(a)  The city manager or designee, including BTR inspectors, is hereby allowed to request from a BTR holder or applicant proof of his/her inventory, including an affidavit or notarized statement from the BTR holder or applicant of the value of his/her inventory, for purposes of compliance by the BTR holder or applicant, as applicable, with this article. 
(b)  The city manager or designee, including BTR inspectors, is authorized to inspect the business premises and business books and records of a BTR holder or applicant in the event they determine, in their reasonable discretion, that they need to estimate the amount of inventory or determine its value for purposes of compliance with this article and to determine the type of business being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, §§ 31-21, 31-22; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18)  
Sec. 31-46. - Reciprocity between cities as to merchants and business firms located in the state. 
(a)  The provisions of this article and other BTR regulations of this city shall not apply to or operate against merchants and business firms located and complying to do business in other cities, villages and towns of this state and distributing goods and merchandise in the city, provided that such merchants and business firms shall have complied with the provisions of the laws or ordinances imposing BTR in the city, village or town in which same are located, and provided, further, that the provisions of this section shall be operative as to such merchants and business firms located and complying in other cities, villages and towns of this state only to the extent that, under the laws and ordinances of such other cities, villages and towns, like exemptions and privileges are granted to merchants and business firms located and complying in and by the city. 
(b)  Such exemption shall not apply to street or sidewalk vendors or to other businesses, professions or occupations not having an established place of business in any city, village or town in this state. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-23; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, repealed former § 31-46 which pertained to food establishments and derived from § 18-33 of the 1967 Code; § 20-48 of the 1980 Code; and Ord. No. 12885, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2007. Further, said ordinance renumbered §§ 31-47—31-49 as §§ 31-46—31-48 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 31-47. - Compliance with article required; effect of BTR obtained. 
No BTR shall be granted until there has been full compliance with the applicable provisions of this article, and no BTR receipt granted without full compliance shall be a protection to the applicant in any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-24; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-47 from "Reciprocity between cities as to merchants and business firms located in the state" to "Compliance with article required; effect of BTR obtained." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. See also the editor's note to § 31-46.  
Sec. 31-48. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall deny the application for a BTR, or revoke the BTR of any individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity holding a BTR under this article where it is determined by the city manager or designee that: 
(1)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property has materially misrepresented or failed to include the information required by this article to be included in the BTR application form; 
(2)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property, subsequent to being issued a BTR, has been convicted of or has pled guilty to a violation of a law of this state, or ordinance of the county or ordinance of the city, which violation occurred as a part of the main business activity of the BTR holder and/or owner of the property and not merely incident thereto; 
(3)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property is conducting business from premises which do not possess a valid and current certificate of occupancy issued by the department of planning, building and zoning; 
(4)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property is conducting business from premises which do not possess a valid and current certificate of use issued by the department of planning, building and zoning; 
(5)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property is conducting business from the proposed premises and is not in compliance with a zoning ordinance or other city ordinance; 
(6)  Conduct is occurring at the premises, which conduct constitutes a breach of the peace by threatening the safety and welfare of the patrons at said premises or the general public and which conduct is recurring; 
(7)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property has obtained a permit, certificate or BTR for the premises, including a BTR issued pursuant to this article, by misleading and/or deceptive information or making false statements that were relied upon by the city or an employee operating in an official capacity in issuing the above-mentioned permit(s), certificate(s), or BTR; or 
(8)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property, subsequent to being issued a BTR, has had a permanent injunction in the form of an order and final judgment entered against said BTR holder and/or owner of the property enjoining restraining or preventing the BTR holder and/or owner of the property from exhibiting, showing, selling, lending, or transmitting any motion picture film(s), book(s), magazine(s), videotape(s) or other material that has been found to be obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent pursuant to F.S. ch. 847, or construed, after said material(s) has undergone an adversary judicial hearing as required by law. 
(b)  (1)  Upon issuance of a code enforcement citation alleging a violation affecting the health and safety of the community, the code compliance director shall notify in writing the city manager or designee of any violation of the enumerated grounds for revocation of a BTR contained in the ordinance from which this section derives. Upon said notification, the city manager or designee shall schedule an appellate hearing for the BTR holder and/or owner of the property within ten days of the date of such notification to the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall notify in writing, at least five days in advance of the appellate hearing, the BTR holder and owner of the property of the date, time and place of said appellate hearing and the specific charges that have caused the said revocation notice to be sent. Said revocation notice and notice of appellate hearing shall be sent to the BTR holder and owner of the property by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner's address and the business address listed on the BTR, or said revocation notice and notice of appellate hearing may be perfected upon any employee of said business by any city police officer, BTR inspector or authorized process server at the business address listed on the BTR. At said appellate hearing, the BTR holder and/or owner of the property shall be given the opportunity to be represented by an attorney, to make a record of the hearing by the use of a court reporter, to call witnesses, to present documentary evidence, and to otherwise properly prove their appeal as to why the BTR should not remain in a revoked status. 
(2)  Upon the receipt of the registered mail notice of the appellate hearing as described in subsection (b)(1) to the BTR holder (or upon perfecting notice upon any employee of the BTR holder's business) and owner of the property, the BTR shall be considered revoked or suspended as designated in the notice from the city manager or designee. 
(c)  A revocation under this section shall extend for the BTR duration of the period, at which time a new application must be submitted. Said revocation shall begin to run from the date the revocation notice was sent by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  All appellate revocation hearings shall be conducted in the following manner before a special master: 
(1)  The proceedings shall be as informal as is compatible with the essential requirements of the law. 
(2)  The admission of evidence shall be governed by the special master. Evidence is to be admitted at the discretion of the special master consistent with generally accepted legal principles governing the admission of evidence in administrative proceedings. 
(3)  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property may be represented by counsel; the city may be represented by the city attorney or other counsel retained at the discretion of the city attorney. 
(4)  The burden of proof being on the BTR holder and/or owner of the property, the order of presentation of evidence shall be as follows: 
a.  The parties shall be entitled to present oral argument at the opening and at the closing of the hearing. 
b.  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property, as appellant, has the burden of proof and shall produce such evidence as it may wish to offer in opposition to the continued revocation of the BTR. 
c.  The city shall have the opportunity to present any evidence in support of maintaining the revocation of the BTR. 
d.  The BTR holder and/or owner of the property may offer rebuttal testimony. 
(5)  At the close of the hearing, the special master shall render the determination stating whether the BTR shall remain revoked or suspended or not. The decision must be based on competent substantial evidence and otherwise consistent with principles of law. 
(6)  Upon rendition of the determination in any appellate revocation or suspension hearing, the special master shall file the determination with the office of hearing boards and shall cause a true and correct copy of the order to be sent by regular mail to the business address listed on the BTR and the owner of the property. The order may also be served upon any employee of said business by any city police officer, BTR receipt inspector or authorized process server at the business address listed on the BTR. It may also be handed to the BTR holder and/or owner of the property at the hearing. 
(e)  If a BTR revocation or suspension is upheld under this section the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and any costs of the hearing such as court reporters and transcription charges expended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Code 1980, § 31-25; Ord. No. 12683, § 2, 5-12-05; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13611, § 2, 6-23-16; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 31-46. 
Case Law reference— License revocation proceeds directly from the finding that there has been a violation of city ordinances. The intent of the ordinances, read as a whole, is easily determined to be a violation by the licensee or his/her agent. Berman v. City of Miami, 17 Fla. Supp. 72; aff'd 127 So. 2d 683. 
The city may revoke a nightclub license on a more strict basis than the state can revoke a liquor license. Sawyer v. City of Miami, 172 So. 2d 481; cert. den'd 177 So. 2d 476. 
Revocation of the license of an adult theater for one year under paragraph (a)(8) is incompatible with the First Amendment because it imposes a prior restraint on presumptively protected expression. Gayety Theatres, Inc., v. City of Miami, 719 F.2d 1559 (1983).  
Sec. 31-49. - BTR enforcement. 
(a)  Any entity who has not strictly complied with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement procedures as set forth herein: 
Enforcement may be made in accordance with City Code chapter 2, article X, Code enforcement and any other remedies as provided by law, including but not limited to, an action in the circuit court. 
(b)  Obstructing a revenue collections inspector in the performance of duties. 
(1)  Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists the BTR inspector or other person authorized by the city manager or designee, in the discharge of his or her duty, as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(2)  BTR inspectors may notify the city police department immediately when in their judgment they feel threatened. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or any other city ordinance, the city manager or designee shall have judicial remedies available for violations of this chapter or any other lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder as enumerated below but not limited to: 
(1)  Institution of a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any costs incurred by the city in conjunction with the abatement of any condition prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Institution of a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, to enjoin and prohibit said violation or to compel the performance of actions which will result in compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  These remedies are cumulative and the use of any appropriate remedy shall not constitute an election of remedies by the city manager or designee. The use of one remedy shall not preclude the use of any others. 
(Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13611, § 2, 6-23-16; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
See the editor's note to § 31-46.  
Sec. 31-50. - Schedule of established BTRs. 
The assessments of BTRs are hereby fixed as follows: 
Code 	BTR Category: Name, Description and Requirement(s) 	Rate ($) 
0010 	Abstract and/or title company. Requires License from the Florida Department of Financial Services if selling insurance. 	236.00 
0040 	Accountant, certified public (CPA). Requires License from DBPR. 	116.00 
0030 	Accounting and/or bookkeeping service. Does not apply to BTR Codes: "0040" and "0020." 	116.00 
0020 	Accounting professional association (PA), corporation (Corp) or firm. 	116.00 
0050 	Acupuncturist. Requires License from DOH. 	116.00 
0060 	Addressing, mailing, and sorting services. 	99.00 
0070 	Administrative office. When sole functions are administrative in nature and not applicable to any other BTR category. 	131.00 
0080 	Adult care facility. License from AHCA is required. 	99.00 
0090 	Adult congregate living facility. License from AHCA is required. 	99.00 
0100 	Advertising agency or trade inducement company. Each company or individual as provided. 	667.00 
0110 	Advertising, aircraft (per aircraft). 	120.00 
0160 	Advertising, outdoors: 	
	 Not exceeding 50 displays. 	236.00 
	 More than 50 displays, each display thereafter. 	2.00 
0120 	Advertising, street. Each person advertising on the streets with banners, floats or by other means: Where no vehicle is used. 	120.00 
0130 	Advertising, street. Each person advertising on the streets with banners, floats or by other means: Where vehicle is used, each vehicle. 	120.00 
0140 	Advertising, street. Each person advertising on the streets with banners, floats or by other means: Contracting advertising in/or on buses and other motor vehicles. 	120.00 
0150 	Advertising, street. Each person advertising on the streets with banners, floats or by other means: distributing circulars, pamphlets and other advertising matter (not to apply to merchants in compliance, advertising their own goods and merchandise). 	120.00 
0170 	Advertising, theater screens. Per screen on which advertising is shown. 	120.00 
0180 	Aircraft brokers or dealers. 	120.00 
1820 	Air guns dealers. A separate BTR is not required of dealers who have a firearms ammunition dealer's BTR. Requires Federal License from Department of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fire Arms for Firearms. 	296.00 
0190 	Ambulance service or business. Not operating as an undertaker, operating ambulances as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding one ambulance. 	42.00 
	 For each additional ambulance. 	27.00 
0210 	Amusement park. 	1,332.00 
0220 	Answering service. 	120.00 
0230 	Apartment houses. An apartment house BTR does not permit a public dining room without a restaurant BTR. Requires license from DBPR for five or more units. Tax based on number of rooms, not including: bathrooms, kitchen or closets. An apartment house is defined as three or more dwelling under same roof units: 	
	 Up to ten rooms. 	27.00 
	 More than ten rooms, for each additional room. 	2.00 
0240 	Appraiser. Other than for real property. 	116.00 
0250 	Architect. 	116.00 
2330 	Architect, landscape. 	116.00 
0260 	Architectural firm, partnership, PA or Corp. 	116.00 
0270 	Armored car service. 	99.00 
0280 	Artist, all types. Commercial, graphic, or noncommercial, each. 	116.00 
0290 	Art galleries. When only displaying. If selling; and not incidental, as outlined in the Certificate of Use issued by the City of Miami Zoning Department, a Merchant Retail BTR is required. 	99.00 
0310 	Attorney who is not a PA or Corp. Requires membership in Florida BAR. BTR is not prorated. 	116.00 
0300 	Attorney; Firm, PA, Corp. or Partnership. BTR is not prorated. 	116.00 
0350 	Auction business. Requires license from DBPR. 	1,826.00 
0360 	Auctioneer. Requires license from DBPR. 	667.00 
0370 	Auctioneer, apprentice. Apprentice means any person who is being trained as an Auctioneer by a State of Florida licensed Auctioneer. Requires License from DBPR. 	667.00 
0380 	Auction: in addition, for each day or fraction thereof, at each location where an auction is held of goods, wares, merchandise, or real estate vehicles. 	45.00 
0390 	Audio visual production services. 	120.00 
0395 	Automated teller machines (ATM). Not required if in same location or building structure as Banking Institution, that is owner thereof. 	99.00 
0400 	Automobile, new motorized vehicles dealers. Dealers, agencies or persons engaged in the sale of automobiles, trucks or tractors or other motor driven vehicles may be permitted to deal in secondhand vehicles taken in exchange on sales of new vehicles without securing a Secondhand Dealers BTR; provided that the entire operation is conducted from one location. Requires License from (DMV). A BTR is required for each location as follows: 	
	 First location. 	525.00 
	 Each location thereafter. 	215.00 
0410 	Automobile, auctioneer. Requires License from DBPR. 	220.00 
0490 	Automobile battery and charging station. Alone or in connection with any other business. Requires Registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. 	44.00 
0420 	Automobile body shop. Requires Registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15 persons. 	400.00 
0430 	Automobile/car wash, by hand. Alone or in connection with any other business. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
0440 	Automobile/car wash, by machine or power tools. Alone or in connection with any other business. Where one or more power machines are used. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten persons, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15 persons. 	400.00 
0445 	Automobile car wash—Mobile. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
0500 	Automobile driving school. Requires license from DMV. 	99.00 
0595 	Automobile immobilization. As regulated in Chapter 42 of City Code. 	116.00 
0460 	Automobile mechanical repairs. Alone or in connection with any other business. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15 persons. 	400.00 
0470 	Automobile mobile repair units. Requires Registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. Each person engaged in or operating mobile repair units, for each truck so operated and within the corporate limits of the city. 	220.00 
0450 	Automobile paint shop. Alone or in connection with another business. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15 persons. 	400.00 
0530 	Auto/motorized vehicle rental and leasing. Each location. 	195.00 
0480 	Automobile service station. Alone or in connection with any other business: 	
	 Not exceeding four gasoline metered nozzles. 	68.00 
	 For each additional gasoline metered nozzle. 	16.00 
0520 	Automobile parking garage or parking space. Per space. 	2.00 
0540 	Automobile storage garage. For storing, cleaning, and/or caring for motor driven vehicles or equipment: 	
	 Not exceeding 25 cars. 	42.00 
	 More than 25, not exceeding 50 cars. 	68.00 
	 More than 50 cars. 	135.00 
0550 	Automobile storage or parking lot. 	
	 For each storage or parking place where the areas do not exceed 10,000 square feet. 	64.00 
	 For each additional 5,000 square feet or a fractional are thereof. 	33.00 
0560 	Auto tag and tax collection agency. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	215.00 
0570 	Automobile tire. Recapping, vulcanizing, rethreading, or repairing shop. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. 	99.00 
0580 	Automobile towing. 	116.00 
0590 	Automobile towing from private property. As regulated in Chapter 42 of this Code. 	116.00 
0610 	Automobile valet parking service. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
0620 	Automobile vehicle wrecking company. 	99.00 
3640 	Baggage or transfer companies. With no established place of business in the city. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR for a moving company. 	215.00 
1000 	Bail bondsmen, professional bondsmen, or surety bondsmen, each type. Requires State of Florida License from the Department of Financial Services. 	99.00 
0640 	Bakery, retail selling without delivery service, each retail place of business. If consumption of food on premises, a Registration from the Department of Agriculture is required. 	44.00 
0650 	Bakery, retail selling with delivery service, each retail place of business. If consumption of food on premises, a registration from the Department of Agriculture is required. For the first two vehicles. 	44.00 
	 In addition, for each delivery vehicle in excess of two. 	88.00 
0660 	Bakery, wholesale selling, or delivering with less than six delivery vehicles. 	68.00 
0670 	Bakery, wholesale selling, or delivering with six or more delivery vehicles. 	400.00 
0680 	Bakery products distributors. Selling or distributing bakery products not manufactured within corporate limits of the city, each distributor. 	480.00 
0715 	Banks including domestic, foreign, international, Edge Act banks, savings and loan associations, savings company, trust company and building and loan associations. Every person, partnership or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity, firm or corporation engaged in business as a bank, trust company, savings company, building and loan association, savings and loan association, whether as owner, agent, broker or otherwise, shall pay a BTR for each place of business. Requires copy of Charter (state or national). 	727.00 
0690 	Bankruptcy and closing out sales. As regulated in Chapter 32 of this Code: Engaging in, managing or conducting at retail any sale of goods, wares, merchandise under the circumstances stated in Chapter 32 of this Code. See section 32-29 of this Code for the nonrefundable investigation fee of $25.00. Initial BTR and supplemental BTR of same term: 	
	 For a period not exceeding 15 days. 	61.00 
	 For a period not exceeding 30 days. 	122.00 
	 For a period not exceeding 60 days. 	184.00 
0692 	Bankruptcy. A further tax of $2.00 per $1,000.00 of the price set forth on the inventory provided for in Chapter 32 of this Code; provided that no such BTR shall be issued for more than 60 days. 	2.00 
0700 	Bankruptcy. Supplemental BTR extending time of sale as provided in section 32-31 of the City Code per day for the time during which such supplemental BTR is granted. 	99.00 
0710 	Bankruptcy. As regulated in chapter 32 of this Code. Purchasing at sale under assignment for benefit of creditors or for trustee in bankruptcy and advertising as bankrupt or distressed stock in resale, for each and every day during the continuance of the sale. 	293.00 
0750 	Barber or beauty school. Requires license from DBPR. 	210.00 
0740 	Barbers/cosmetologists assistants. Requires license from DBPR. 	13.00 
0720 	Barbers, hair stylists, hair designers. Requires license from DBPR. 	13.00 
0780 	Barbershops, hair styling studios and hair styling salons. Requires license from DBPR. 	
	 First chair. 	20.00 
	 Each additional chair (whether operated or not). 	15.00 
0790 	Beauty parlors, hair styling studios and hair styling salons. Requires license from DBPR. For beauty parlor or barber chairs set up in such place of business (whether operated or not): 	
	 First chair. 	20.00 
	 Each additional chair (whether operated or not). 	15.00 
0794 	Beauty parlor, each manicuring or pedicuring table. 	14.00 
0792 	Beauty parlor, each permanent wave machine. 	14.00 
0796 	Beauty parlor, each waxing or acrylic nail machine or table. 	14.00 
0800 	Bicycle repair and rental. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	120.00 
0810 	Billiard, pool or bagatelle tables. 	42.00 
0820 	Bingo or guest games. 	58.00 
0830 	Blueprinting map and plot makers. Requires license form the DBPR for map maker. 	99.00 
0840 	Boarding houses. BTR based on number of rooms not including: bathrooms, kitchen and closets. Requires license from DBPR if five or more rooms. A boardinghouse BTR permits the serving of meals. 	
	 Not exceeding ten rooms. 	42.00 
	 More than ten rooms, for each additional room. 	2.00 
0880 	Boat, brokers; ships yachts. Requires license from DBPR. 	215.00 
0890 	Boat, charter fishing (as reg. in section 50-301 et seq. of this Code). Each boat. 	30.00 
0900 	Boat, designers and builders, not operating as a boat and ship yard. 	120.00 
0910 	Boat, excursion, sight seeing, and deep sea fishing (as regulated in section 50-301 et seq. of this Code). Each boat. 	30.00 
0920 	Boat, ferry and sightseeing. Owners, operators or managers of boats used wholly or in part as ferry or sight seeing boats, each host with passenger capacity as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding ten passengers. 	27.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 50 passengers. 	42.00 
	 More than 50 passengers. 	68.00 
0970 	Boat, marine towing and lightering. Owners, operators or managers of boats used wholly or in part for towing or lightering (permits one barge or lighter free with each towboat operating hereunder this BTR as follows), alone or in connection with any other business: 	
	 Not exceeding two towboats. 	68.00 
	 More than two towboats. 	135.00 
0980 	Boat, marine towing and lightering. Or each barge or lighter in excess of the number of towboats operating hereunder this BTR, or for each barge or lighter not permitted in connection with a towboat. 	15.00 
0850 	Boat, marine ways and dry docks. Not licensed as a boat and ship yard, with capacity for hauling boats as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding three-foot draft. 	42.00 
	 More than three, not exceeding five-foot draft. 	68.00 
	 More than five-foot draft. 	135.00 
0960 	Boats, service or fuel supply. Owners, operators or managers of boats used wholly or in part as gasoline or oil or other fuel or supply service boats, alone or in connection with any other business, each boat. 	99.00 
0870 	Boat and ship yard. Having capital investment as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding $10,000.00. 	68.00 
	 More than $10,000.00, not exceeding $25,000.00. 	135.00 
	 More than $25,000.00, not exceeding $50,000.00. 	200.00 
	 More than $50,000.00, not exceeding $100,000.00. 	267.00 
	 More than $100,000.00. 	400.00 
0860 	Boat storage, basins, and sheds. Alone or in connection with any other business, with storage space as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding 7,500 square feet. 	68.00 
	 More than 7,500, not exceeding 15,000 square feet. 	135.00 
	 More than 15,000 square feet. 	267.00 
0930 	Boat, party and touring. Owners, operators or managers of boats used wholly on in part as livery, party or touring boats, each boat with accommodations as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	27.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	42.00 
	 More than ten persons. 	68.00 
0950 	Boats, peddling. Owners, operators or managers of boats used wholly or in part for peddling: 	
	 Not exceeding 40 feet in length. 	42.00 
	 More than 40 feet in length. 	68.00 
0940 	Boats type: Canoes, rowboats and sailboats for hire, or similar business. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	
	 Not exceeding ten boats. 	27.00 
	 More than ten boats. 	68.00 
0990 	Bonding companies or individual bond agents. Criminal or appeal bonds, any person or firm operating for the purpose of furnishing or writing and executing criminal bonds or appeal bonds (not to apply to bond agents furnishing insurance, who are subject to the insurance companies provisions) 	320.00 
1010 	Book bindery service or agent. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
1020 	Botanica. 	99.00 
1030 	Botanical or zoological garden or other similar establishments. 	330.00 
1040 	Bottlingworks. 	320.00 
1050 	Bowling alley: 	
	 One alley: 	68.00 
	 Each additional alley: 	40.00 
1060 	Business opportunity broker. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
1070 	Butcher, wholesale. Meat and packinghouse products, wholesale, dealing in their own products (except those covered by "Merchants," subheading, "Jobbers and distributors") 	480.00 
1080 	Butcher, retail. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture. Employing meat cutters as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding two cutters. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five cutters. 	68.00 
	 More than five cutters. 	135.00 
1090 	Cabarets or nightclub. If liquor is served, a current and valid License from DBPR is required for new and renewal BTR's. In addition, a completed and notarized affidavit is required for new and renewal BTR's. 	1,826.00 
3190-02 	Cafe/coffee shops/sandwich shop. Every person engaged in the business of operating a cafe/coffee shop/sandwich shop, or any other public eating place whether operated in conjunction with some other line of business or not, shall pay a BTR based on the number of people for which he/she has seats or accommodations for the service or consumption of food at any time, in accordance with the following schedule: 	
	 Zero to ten seats. 	27.00 
	 More than ten seats, each seat. 	2.00 
	 When tables and chairs are shared with the other eating establishments in a common eating area and/or do not own such tables and chairs will be assessed a BTR by dividing the number of chairs by the number of restaurants in accordance with the above schedule. Depending on the situation, either a license from the DBPR or a License from the Florida Department of Agriculture will be required. 	
3190-03 	Cafeteria. Every person engaged in the business of operating a cafeteria or other public eating place whether operated in conjunction with some other line of business or not, shall pay a BTR based on the number of people for which he/she has seats or accommodations for the service or consumption of food at any time, in accordance with the following schedule: 	
	 Zero to ten seats. 	27.00 
	 More than ten seats, each seat. 	2.00 
	 Cafeterias that share tables and chairs with the other eating establishments in a common eating area and/or do not own such tables and chairs will be assessed a BTR by dividing the number of chairs by the number of restaurants in accordance with the above schedule. Depending on the situation, either a license from the DBPR or the Florida Department of Agriculture is required. 	
1100 	Calculating and statistical service. 	99.00 
1110 	Carnivals, circuses street shows, exposition companies or shows or performance given in any temporary enclosure. 	
	 For the first day. 	366.00 
	 For each day thereafter. 	183.00 
1120 	Carnivals or circuses held in a facility owned and operated by the city where a fee has been charged for the use of the facility. 	
	 For the first day. 	183.00 
	 For each day thereafter. 	88.00 
1130 	Carpets, rugs, and furniture cleaning. Cleaning, by hand or vacuum process alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
1140 	Carpets and rugs, installation. When not operating as a merchant retail carpet or rug dealer. 	99.00 
1150 	Caterer and/or catering. Requires Registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture. 	99.00 
1180 	Check cashing service and currency exchange. Alone or in connection with any other business. Requires license from the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. Does not apply to banks. State license is not required when check cashing is incidental to retail business and if, proceeds from check cashing operation do not exceed five percent of total gross income from retail sales of goods and services. 	99.00 
1170 	Chemist. 	116.00 
1190 	Chiropractic physician. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1200 	Cigars and tobacco products retail dealers. Alone or in connection with any other business (except drugstores), carrying stocks as follows: 	
	 Not more than $100.00. 	40.00 
	 More than $100.00, not more than $250.00. 	75.00 
	 More than $250.00, not more than $500.00. 	185.00 
	 More than $500.00. 	367.00 
1210 	Cigars and tobacco products manufacturer. Employing persons, including owners and workmen: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	27.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding 15 persons. 	68.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	94.00 
	 More than 25 persons. 	135.00 
1220 	Circus parades. 	99.00 
1230 	Clinical social worker. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1240 	Clothing, alterations. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
1250 	Clothing, custom tailor, retail. Requires merchant retail BTR for sale of stock not manufactured on the premises. 	68.00 
1330 	Coin operated; amusement machine. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Requires yearly submission of city affidavit and list of location(s). 	
	 First machine. 	183.00 
	 Each additional machine up to nine machines. 	34.00 
1480 	Coin operated; beverage machine, dispensing. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	23.00 
1370 	Coin operated; car wash. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
1430 	Coin operated; laundry equipment. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Includes washers, dryers, pressing, ironing and dispensing machines. First machine. 	69.00 
	 Each additional machine. 	1.00 
1460 	Coin operated; merchandise vending machine. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Each machine. 	15.00 
1340 	Coin operated; mechanical rides of all types, non-operator. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	
	 First machine. 	183.00 
	 Each additional machine up to 13. 	34.00 
1350 	Coin operated; mechanical rides of all types, operator. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	458.00 
1380 	Coin operated; music machine, non-operator. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	
	 First machine. 	183.00 
	 Each additional machine up to 13 machines. 	22.00 
1390 	Coin operated; music machine, operator. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	458.00 
1360 	Coin operated; photographing, photocopying, and laminating machines. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. 	27.00 
1470 	Coin operated; penny in the slot (one cent to 25 cents). As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Vending merchandise only, mechanically (operated), each machine. 	2.00 
1450 	Coin operated; service machine, other. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. Any other service machine not specifically mentioned. 	27.00 
1440 	Coin operated; weighing machine. As regulated in chapter 12 of this Code. The person securing such BTR owns and operates: 	
	 More than one, and not exceeding five machines, each machine. 	15.00 
	 More than five, and not exceeding 50 machines. 	400.00 
	 More than 50, and not exceeding 100 machines. 	533.00 
	 More than 150, each machine. 	2.00 
1490 	Cold storage or food locker rental. Renting cold storage space to the public. 	99.00 
1500 	Collection agency. Alone or in connection with any business. Engaged in collecting claims and accounts, collecting rents and not operating as a real estate agency. Each agency. 	99.00 
1510 	Community based residential facility. License from AHCA is required. Covers drug rehabilitation, elderly and halfway houses. 	99.00 
1520 	Computer or data processing service. 	99.00 
1530 	Consultant business or professional of a not specifically mentioned herein, State of Florida licensed professional. 	116.00 
1720 	Copy/duplicating service. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
0730 	Cosmetologists. Requires license from DBPR. 	13.00 
1540 	Court reporter or public stenographer. BTR required when office is located in the city and/or when an individual is registered with an agency located in the city; BTR required for each person registered with agency. 	116.00 
1550 	Credit bureau. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	
	 Not exceeding five persons, each agency. 	68.00 
	 More than five persons, each agency. 	135.00 
1560 	Customhouse brokers. 	99.00 
1570 	Dancehalls and ballrooms. 	320.00 
1580 	Dance studio. Teaching students under 18 years old. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. 	68.00 
1590 	Dance studio. Teaching students over 18 years old. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. 	183.00 
3550 	Data exchange service. Includes computer exchange service. 	606.00 
1600 	Delicatessen. Alone or in connection with any other business. If stock carried exceeds $200.00 in value, a merchant retail BTR is required. Requires State of Florida registration from the Department of Agriculture. 	99.00 
1610 	Dental hygienist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1620 	Dental laboratory. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1630 	Dentist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1640 	Dietician. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
1660 	Disc jockey. 	99.00 
1670 	Display room for hire. 	120.00 
1680 	Dog or small animal exhibit. 	296.00 
1700 	Draft artist. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	116.00 
1690 	Dramatic or theatrical troupes or companies. 	99.00 
1710 	Drugstore retail dealer. State license required from DOH. Includes the right to sell ice cream and cigars and tobacco without an additional BTR. 	
	 Not exceeding $1,000.00. 	55.00 
	 For each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. 	6.00 
1750 	Editors. 	296.00 
1730 	Electric light and power companies. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	2,324.00 
1755 	Electrolysis. Includes removal, replacement, and weaving of hair. Requires license from DOH. 	99.00 
1940 	Embalmers. State license required from the DBPR. 	116.00 
1740 	Employment agencies. Each location. Requires license from DBPR. 	215.00 
1765 	Engineer, professional, as per state. Operating in any capacity thereof. 	116.00 
1760 	Entertainers, professional. Includes actors, actresses, bands, musicians, vocalists, and similar professions and companies. 	99.00 
1770 	Exhibitors. General exhibitor is hereby defined as any individual, partnership, or other incorporated or unincorporated business entity, or promoter using public facilities for the purpose of exhibiting or displaying products for sale or to take orders to sell their products. The exhibitor's BTR shall be charged for each day of operation of the event, display or exhibition. One BTR may be issued to cover more than one day of operation, with the BTR terminating on the last day of such event, display or exhibition. Per day. 	87.00 
1780 	Fashion designer. 	116.00 
1790 	Film development service. Alone or in connection with another business. 	99.00 
1800 	Finance company or loan agent. Requires State of Florida license from Department of Financial Services. 	480.00 
1810 	Firearms and ammunition dealer. Requires federal license from Department of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fire Arms. Includes ammunition, pistols, rifles, shotguns and other firearms and weapons. 	296.00 
1830 	Fire extinguisher service. 	99.00 
1840 	Fish market, retail. Requires State of Florida registration from Department of Agriculture. 	99.00 
1850 	Fish commission merchant or wholesale dealer. Packers or shippers. See "Packers and shippers." 	236.00 
1860 	Flea market, on private property. In addition to "operator," a separate BTR is required for individual vendors. 	
	 One day. 	183.00 
	 Two—20 days, each day. 	92.00 
	 21—40 days, each day. 	46.00 
	 For each day thereafter. 	23.00 
1870 	Flea market, when held in a facility owned and operated by the city where a fee has been charged for the use of the facility and does not apply to individual vendors that require a separate BTR: 	
	 One day. 	183.00 
	 Two—20 days, each day. 	92.00 
	 21—40 days, each day. 	46.00 
	 For each day thereafter. 	23.00 
1880 	Florists. 	62.00 
1890 	Flowers, cut. Applies to wholesale flower dealers only. 	99.00 
1900 	Fortunetellers, astrologists, card readers, character readers, spiritualists, clairvoyants, crystal gazers, graphologists, hypnotists, palmists, phrenologists, and every person engaged in a similar occupation. Requires an active BTR from Miami-Dade County within the previous two years for each person. Each person. 	891.00 
3200 	Food, retail (not a restaurant). Such as sandwiches, peanut butter crackers, potato chips, hard boiled eggs. etc. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture. When sold or served in any place other than in a dining room, cafe, cafeteria or restaurant, as defined by city zoning ordinance, with seating capacity: 	
	 Not to exceed ten seats. 	27.00 
	 For each additional seat over ten. 	2.00 
1910 	Franchise broker and/or dealer. Selling or leasing of business franchise. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
1920 	Freight forwarding and claims bureau. Alone or in connection with any other business. Engaged in furnishing shipping information, acting or agent for freight and cargo shipments and collecting transportation claims. 	99.00 
1930 	Funeral home and/or funeral director. Also covers crematories and direct disposal establishments. Requires license from the DBPR for the director and the firm. A separate BTR is required for embalmers. 	296.00 
1950 	Game room. Additionally, each coin-operated machine requires its own BTR sticker. 	99.00 
1960 	Gas company. Alone or in connection with any other business. Covers liquefied, natural or manufactured gas at retail or wholesale. 	2,324.00 
1970 	Golf driving range or course. 	99.00 
1980 	Grocery, retail. Requires license from the Florida Department of Agriculture. When the average value of stocks of goods carried is as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding $1,000.00. 	27.00 
	 Each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 	6.00 
2000 	Gun ranges, target cabinet or similar facilities. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	236.00 
2010 	Gymnasium only. Not a health club or studio. Additional BTR required for masseur or masseuse when permitted by city ordinance. If membership-type gym, registration with the State of Florida Department of Agriculture is required for new and renewal BTR. 	99.00 
2020 	Halls or banquet rooms for hire. Not a dancehall. 	99.00 
2030 	Handwriting analyst. 	116.00 
2040 	Healing art—Magnetic. 	99.00 
2050 	Health studio or health club, each location. If membership-type club; registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture is required for new and renewal BTR. 	99.00 
2065 	Health testing service (lab related). Requires license from the DOH. 	131.00 
2060 	Hearing aid specialist. Requires licenses from DBPR. 	99.00 
2070 	Helicopter service. Each helicopter. 	99.00 
2075 	Home healthcare agency. License from AHCA required. 	116.00 
2080 	Homeopathic or drugless physician. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2090 	Hospitals, sanitariums, medical centers and similar institutions privately owned and operated for a profit. This BTR will be required when there is more than one health care professional working for the same firm. Requires license from AHCA for locations where invasive procedures are conducted. 	296.00 
2100 	Hotel or motel. Requires license from DBPR. A hotel BTR does not permit a dining room without a restaurant BTR. Tax based on number of rooms, not including bathrooms, kitchens or closets, as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding ten rooms. 	27.00 
	 More than ten rooms, for each additional room. 	2.00 
2110 	Hotel service representative. 	236.00 
2120 	Hypnotherapist. DOH license required in one of the following categories: medicine, surgery, psychiatry, dentistry, osteopathic medicine, chiropractic, naturopath, podiatry, chiropody, or optometry. 	116.00 
2160 	Ice cream retail. Applies only when it is the main business activity. Requires license from the Florida Department of Agriculture. 	67.00 
2130 	Ice distributors. Does not apply to ice manufacturers, who engage in the distribution or sale of ice, either by contract, commission or bonus agreement, buying ice direct for resale and using trucks or vehicles not owned by the manufacturer: 	
	 Not exceeding two vehicles. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding four vehicles. 	46.00 
	 More than four, not exceeding seven vehicles. 	68.00 
	 Each additional vehicle. 	9.00 
2140 	Ice manufacturers. Ice manufacturers are permitted to sell at wholesale or retail from their factory platforms, to distribute or deliver from vehicles owned or leased by the manufacturer. For each daily ton of capacity. 	6.00 
2150 	Ice, retail dealers. Applies only when it is main business activity. 	99.00 
2170 	Immigration and naturalization services. Alone or in connection with any other business including passport or visa services. 	99.00 
2180 	Import and export business. 	131.00 
2190 	Inspection services. Alone or in connection with any other business. State License required when activity requires State of Florida licensing. 	99.00 
2195 	Installation services (non contractor and non rug). 	108.00 
2200 	Insurance adjusters. Requires license from the Florida Department of Financial Services. Covers provision for insurance adjusters applies to those who hold themselves out as independent contractors, and not to an employee of licensed company whose business is limited to adjusting claims of his/her employer. 	99.00 
2210 	Insurance agency, general agency, or brokerage. Requires license from the Florida Department of Financial Services. 	
	 One person. 	68.00 
	 For each additional person working for the agency who is licensed by the Florida Department of Financial Services. 	9.00 
2220 	Insurance agent or solicitor. Traveling, soliciting insurance of any kind. Does not apply to those working for an insurance agency, general agency or brokerage. Requires license from the Florida Department of Financial Services. 	99.00 
2230 	Insurance companies names or associations. Requires license from the Florida Department of Financial Services. 	483.00 
2240 	Interior decorator or designer. Interior decorator means any person who for compensation plans the arrangement of furnishings for any building. Such person may also operate as a mercantile broker without obtaining a mercantile broker license. Requires license from DBPR. 	236.00 
3350 	Investment banker. Not working in capacity of securities broker. 	320.00 
2250 	Jai alai or pelota, per day. Conducting frontons for exhibition, for each day such fronton is actually operated for the exhibition of jai alai or pelota under the license granted by the State Division of Pari-Mutual Wagering of the DBPR. 	12.00 
2260 	Janitorial services. 	108.00 
2270 	Jewelers, professional or diamond cutters. 	99.00 
2280 	Jewelry and watch repair. If only hand tools are used: 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
2285 	Jewelry and watch repair. If any power tools are used: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 Not more than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15 persons. 	400.00 
2290 	Key duplicating machines. Alone or in connection with any other business. Manually or power operated, which require a key from which to produce a duplicate. Not applicable to locksmiths. Each. 	23.00 
2300 	Laboratory. Includes chemical, medical, optical x-ray or others. Does not include dental. See "Dental laboratory." Requires license from the AHCA. Operated entirely by hand workers, employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
2310 	Laboratory. Includes chemical, medical, optical x-ray or others. Does not include dental. See "Dental laboratory." Requires license from AHCA. Operated by one or more power machines, employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
	 More than 25 persons. 	533.00 
2320 	Land development and sales company. 	99.00 
2340 	Landscaping. Includes designing, installation, planting and care of trees and grounds. 	215.00 
2350 	Land surveyor. Requires license from DBPR. 	116.00 
1290 	Laundry and/or dry cleaning agency, retail, as defined by the certificate of use issued by the city's zoning department. Where articles are received for laundry or dry cleaning and no work is done on the premises. 	99.00 
1270 	Laundry, plant, retail, as defined by the certificate of use issued by the city's zoning department. Persons who perform laundry work for their own individual customers, but not for other persons or businesses shall pay in accordance with the following schedule of taxes: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
	 More than 25 persons. 	533.00 
1260 	Laundry and/or dry cleaning plant, wholesale, as defined by the certificate of use issued by the city's zoning department. Persons engaged in the laundry and/or dry cleaning business who perform work for any other persons or businesses. Includes diaper, linen, towel and uniform supply service. 	476.00 
1280 	Laundry; dry cleaning, retail, as defined by the certificate of use issued by the city's zoning department. Persons engaged in such business, who shall perform dry cleaning, laundering, pressing or dyeing work for their own individual customers, but not for other persons or businesses. 	215.00 
2360 	Lawn maintenance business. Permits grass cutting and minor yard work. 	99.00 
2380 	Loan agent, loans secured by real estate. Requires State of Florida License from the Department of Financial Services. The BTR required hereunder for making loans secured by real estate is not to apply to bankers. Each agent. 	215.00 
2370 	Loan agent, unsecured or personal property. Negotiating unsecured loans or loans secured by personal property, where the personal property is not taken into possession by the lender. Where personal property is taken into possession, a secondhand dealer's BTR is required. Requires State of Florida license from the Department of Financial Services. 	480.00 
2390 	Locksmiths and tool grinders—By hand. Requires registration with Miami-Dade County Consumer Services Department. Operated entirely by hand workers without power machinery, including owners and a operators: 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
2400 	Locksmiths and tool grinders—Power tools. Requires registration with Miami-Dade County Consumer Services Department. Where one or more power machines are used (not to include power tool sharpeners), employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
2410 	Lumberyard. Merchants or dealers operating a lumberyard, alone or in connection with any other business requires a merchants retail BTR for any stock other than lumber, lath, or shingles. In the application of this BTR, where lumber, lath or shingles are accumulated in quantities for export shipment, or for any other purpose, such lumber, lath or shingles so accumulated shall be considered as stock carried by the agent for which a lumber yard BTR shall be required. The lumberyard BTR tax is based on the average stock of lumber carried as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding 200,000 feet, board measure. 	135.00 
	 More than 200,000, not exceeding 500,000 feet, board measure. 	267.00 
	 More than 500,000 feet, board measure. 	400.00 
0760 	Manicurist. Requires license from DBPR. 	13.00 
2420 	Manufacturers—Operator by hand workers. Each person engaged in the business of manufacturing or similar process where goods are sold at wholesale. When operated entirely by hand workers, employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 More than two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
2430 	Manufacturers—Operator power machines. Each person engaged in the business of manufacturing or similar process where goods are sold at wholesale. When one or more power machines (not to include power tool sharpeners) are used, employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
	 More than 25 persons. 	533.00 
	 Where manufactured goods are sold at retail, a merchant retail BTR is also required. 	
2440 	Manufacturer's representative. Does not permit a stock of goods for which a merchants retail or wholesale BTR would be required and represents only one manufacture and/or supplier. When dealing in medical equipment, a license from AHCA is required. 	215.00 
2450 	Marriage and family therapist. Requires license from DBPR. 	116.00 
2460 	Massage establishment or similar business or occupation. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
2465 	Massage therapist. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
2480 	Mental health counselor requires license from DBPR. 	116.00 
2490 	Mercantile broker. A mercantile broker BTR does not permit a stock of goods for which an additional BTR is required as provided herein. Broker in this classification paragraph is defined as one who buys from or represents more than one manufacturer, producer or other seller, who does not carry stock on hand, and who sells to the jobber, wholesaler, retailer or others acting as intermediary between buyer and seller for the consideration of a brokerage fee or commission from either the buyer or seller. Each person handling materials and supplies or other goods, wares or merchandise, alone or in connection with any other business provided that merchants retail or wholesale dealers paying BTR fees, totaling $100.00 or more are permitted to do a mercantile brokerage business without additional BTR. When dealing in medical equipment, a license from AHCA is required. 	291.00 
2500 	Merchants, retail. (Except those businesses specifically listed.) When the average value of merchandise carried, including merchandise on consignment is as follows (for businesses that have both, retail and wholesale; the inventory amount used for both BTR, will not be a percentage there of—same inventory for both BTR's): 	
	 Not exceeding $1,000.00 of merchandise. 	63.00 
	 More than $1,000.00, for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. 	6.00 
2510 	Merchants, wholesale, distributors or jobbers. Having inventory amounts as follows (for businesses that have both, retail and wholesale; the inventory amount used for both BTR, will not be a percentage there of—same inventory for both BTR's): 	
	 Not exceeding $10,000.00 of merchandise. 	135.00 
	 More than $10,000.00 not exceeding $25,000.00. 	200.00 
	 More than $25,000.00 not exceeding $50,000.00. 	267.00 
	 More than $50,000.00 not exceeding $100,000.00. 	400.00 
	 More than $100,000.00. 	533.00 
2520 	Merchants, wholesale, selling outside city limits without place of business. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the producer of farm and grove products where the same are being offered for sale or sold by the farmer or grower producing the products. 	135.00 
2530 	Milk. Distributing, alone or in connection with any other business, utilizing delivery vehicles as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding two vehicles. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding four vehicles. 	55.00 
	 More than four vehicles. 	68.00 
2535 	Mortgage broker. Requires State of Florida license from the Department of Financial Services. 	116.00 
2536 	Mortgage broker business. Requires State of Florida License from the Department of Financial Services. 	116.00 
2540 	Motion picture or television production company. 	99.00 
0510 	Motorcycle agencies and dealers. Requires license from DMV. 	99.00 
2560 	Music service. Businesses furnishing background music. Includes installation of music systems. 	99.00 
2570 	News dealers. (Except drugstores.) Permitting the sale of books, magazines, periodicals and newspapers. Not permitting the sale of merchandise for which merchant retail BTR is required. 	
	 Not exceeding $500.00. 	27.00 
	 More than $500.00. 	68.00 
2580 	News service companies. Providing news to newspapers, television, radio stations or others. 	99.00 
2590 	Non-motorized vehicle for hire. As regulated in chapter 57 of this Code. 	99.00 
2600 	Nurse. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2610 	Nursing home. Requires license from AHCA. 	99.00 
2620 	Nursing home administrator. Requires license from DBPR. 	116.00 
2630 	Occupational therapist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2640 	Optician. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2650 	Optometrist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2660 	Osteopathic physician. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
3780 	Other BTR: Every business, or exhibition, substantial, fixed or temporary, engaged in by any person whether in a building or tent, or upon the street, vacant lot or anywhere in the open air in the city, not herein specifically designated, shall pay a BTR. 	99.00 
2670 	Packers and shippers. Any person taking orders for the shipment of fruit, nuts, crystal candies or dried or candied fruits, coconut lamps or any other coconut or fruit novelties. 	99.00 
2680 	Packers and shippers; fish, fruit, vegetables or produce. A BTR for packers or shippers of fish. Fruit, vegetables or produce is required of persons engaged in buying, packing, selling, shipping or soliciting on consignment, shipments of fish, fruit, vegetables or produce; provided that this BTR shall not be required where packers and shippers are located in their own packinghouse, for which the packinghouse BTR fee has been paid. 	99.00 
2690 	Packinghouse. When operated entirely by hand workers, employing persons, including owners and operators: Each person engaged in the business where goods are sold at wholesale. 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
2700 	Packinghouse. When one or more power machines (not to include power tool sharpeners) are used employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons 	400.00 
	 More than 25 persons 	533.00 
	 Where goods are sold at retail and wholesale, a packinghouse and a merchant's retail license is required. 	
3560 	Paging and beeper service. Includes paging and beepers or any mobile radio, telephone or portable communication service. Does not apply to cellular phone company owned stores. 	99.00 
2720 	Paralegals. 	116.00 
2730 	Paramedic. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2740 	Parcel deliver and/or messenger service. 	38.00 
2760 	Peddlers, confection. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. 	58.00 
2761 	Peddlers, confection stand. Candy, ice cream, popcorn, or peanuts, on the streets. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. 	58.00 
2762 	Peddlers, confection vehicle. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Each vehicle. 	99.00 
2770 	Peddlers, meat or fish from motor driven or other vehicles. Requires registration with the Florida Department of Agriculture. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Each vehicle. 	99.00 
2780 	Peddlers, fruits, vegetables and produce. Requires registration with the Florida Department of Agriculture. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Each vehicle or stand: 	99.00 
2790 	Peddlers, rubber balloons. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. 	16.00 
2800 	Peddlers on foot, merchandise. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. 	436.00 
2810 	Peddlers by vehicle, merchandise. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Each vehicle. 	473.00 
2820 	Peddlers on foot, food. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Requires State of Florida license from either DBPR or Department of Agriculture. 	436.00 
2830 	Peddlers by vehicle, food. As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Requires State of Florida license from either the DBPR or Department of Agriculture. Each vehicle. 	473.00 
2840 	Peddlers, wholesale. Traveling stores or vendors of food (not to apply to peddlers or vendors otherwise provided for in the schedule, selling at retail). As regulated in chapter 39 of this Code. Each vehicle. 	630.00 
0770 	Pedicurist. Requires license from DBPR. 	13.00 
2850 	Pest control business. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture prior to issuance of BTR for each location also for new and renewal of BTR. License is not transferable including change of ownership, name or address. 	198.00 
2860 	Pet grooming or styling salon. 	99.00 
2870 	Photoengravers and similar professions. 	99.00 
2880 	Photographer or photo finisher. Alone or in connection with any other business. As regulated in chapter 41 of this Code. Does not permit the selling of cameras and photographic supplies without merchant retail BTR. 	99.00 
2890 	Photo studios. As regulated in chapter 41 of this Code. 	99.00 
2900 	Photo transient, itinerant, canvassing or soliciting. 	320.00 
2910 	Physical therapist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2920 	Physicians, surgeons, medical doctors. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2930 	Podiatrist. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
2940 	Polygraph operator. Requires license from the Florida Department of State. 	116.00 
2960 	Popcorn machines or stands. Applies only when it is main business activity. 	99.00 
2970 	Printing and/or publishing company. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
	 More than 25 persons. 	533.00 
2980 	Private club. Alone or in connection with any other business activity. Private club is defined as any association, partnership, firm or any other incorporated or unincorporated business entity or any kind of club which excludes the general public from its premises. 	296.00 
2990 	Private investigative agency. State of Florida license required from the Department of State. 	99.00 
3000 	Produce commission merchant or wholesale dealer. Produce packers and shippers. See "Packers and shippers." 	215.00 
3010 	Produce, retail dealer. Requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture. 	99.00 
3020 	Professional association, firms, companies partnerships, and corporations. This classification is separate from the classification of attorneys at law; see "Attorneys at law." Including, but not limited, professional corporations defined in F.S. § 621.03(2), as amended. A professional associations or corporations BTR shall be paid for only one location. Requires State of Florida licensed professional. 	116.00 
3040 	Professionals, other professions not specifically listed. The professional license from the State of Florida must be presented before issuance. 	116.00 
3050 	Promoter entertainment, parades, and similar events. Not covered elsewhere. The event requires the applicable BTR or permit. 	99.00 
3060 	Property management service. Does not apply to real estate firms, brokers and/agents. License from DBPR required when applicable. 	99.00 
3070 	Psychologist. Requires State of Florida License from the DOH. 	116.00 
2501 	Pushcart—Merchant retail. 	63.00 
3080 	Racing, dog track. Persons conducting, for each day races are conducted under license granted by the Florida State Racing Commission each day. License from DBPR required. 	58.00 
3090 	Racing pamphlets. Displaying, selling or offering for sale sheets, papers or pamphlets predicting outcome of horse or dog races. 	533.00 
3115 	Real estate appraiser. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
3110 	Real estate broker. This applies to the qualifying broker of the firm. Requires license from DBPR. 	9.00 
3125 	Real estate broker business. Requires license from DBPR. 	68.00 
3130 	Recording studios, audio and visual. 	99.00 
3140 	Rental and leasing business. Does not apply to automobiles or real property. Personal property of all types. For automobiles see automobiles rental and leasing business. When dealing in medical equipment, a License from AHCA is required. 	296.00 
3150 	Repair service or machine shop. Alone or in connection with any other business. Handworkers, operating entirely without power machinery or tools employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding two persons. 	27.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding five persons. 	42.00 
	 More than five persons. 	68.00 
3160 	Repair service or machine shop. Alone or in connection with any other business. Power machines or power tools, operating one or more machines, power tool sharpeners are not included. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten, not exceeding 15 persons. 	267.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 persons. 	400.00 
	 Permitted to carry a stock of parts to be used only in making repairs in the shop. If any portion of said stock is sold in any other manner, a merchant's license is required. 	
3170 	Research companies or services. 	108.00 
3180 	Respiratory therapists. Requires license from DOH. 	116.00 
3190-01 	Restaurants. Every person engaged in the business of operating a restaurant whether operated in conjunction with some other line of business or not, shall pay a BTR based on the number of people for which he/she has seats or accommodations for the service or consumption of food at any time, in accordance with the following schedule Requires license from DBPR: 	
	 Zero to ten seats. 	27.00 
	 More than ten seats, each seat. 	2.00 
	 Restaurants that share tables and chairs with the other restaurants in a common eating area and/or do not own such tables and chairs will be assessed a BTR by dividing the number of chairs by the number of restaurants in accordance with the above schedule. 	
3210 	Retail installment sales contracts and revolving accounts. Alone or in connection with any other business. Requires State of Florida license from Department of Financial Services. 	320.00 
3220 	Rinks. Roller skating, ice skating and similar activities. 	108.00 
3230 	Rooming houses. License from the DBPR is required if five or more rooms. In determining the number of rooms in any building used as a rooming house, only bedrooms, sleeping quarters or sleeping porches are to be counted, of which two rooms may be exempt, when used by owner or operator: 	
	 More than two, not exceeding five rooms. 	15.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten rooms. 	27.00 
	 More than ten, for each additional room. 	2.00 
	 Does not permit serving meals without boarding house license. 	
3240 	School; private, adult, operated for profit. This license applies where all students are 17 years of age or older. The only requirement for this license is a current certificate of use. License from any higher level governmental agency required when applicable. 	99.00 
3250 	School; private school or nursery, operated for profit. Requires State of Florida license from the Department of Children and Families and license from State of Florida DOH if food is served, for new and renewal. 	131.00 
3260 	School; private school or nursery, nonprofit. Requires State of Florida license from the Department of Children and Families and license from DOH, if food is served, for new and renewal BTR. A school or nursery operated by a duly established church or a nonprofit corporation duly charted under the laws of the state shall not be required to pay the usual tax for such BTR, but in lieu thereof shall a the sum of $6.00 annually. 	6.00 
3270 	Secondhand dealers, automobiles and other motorized vehicles. Requires license from DMV. 	320.00 
3280 	Secondhand dealers, jewelry or precious metals. This license only allows the buying, selling and trading of used jewelry and other precious metals. 	320.00 
3290 	Secondhand dealers, used merchandise. 	320.00 
3300 	Secretarial services. 	99.00 
3360 	Security guards, patrol agency or sentry. Principal or employer. State license required from the Department of Agriculture. 	
	 Ten additional employees or guards. 	68.00 
	 Each additional employee over ten. 	1.00 
3370 	Shoe repair shop and/or agents. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	67.00 
3380 	Shoeshine stand. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	10.00 
3390 	Skin care services. Stock over $1,000.00 requires merchant's license. Requires license from DBPR. 	99.00 
1955 	Slot machine. Each machine. 	250.00 
3400 	Small loan companies. Requires State of Florida license from the Department of Financial Services. 	480.00 
3410 	Social worker. Requires license from DBPR. 	116.00 
3440 	Special events: Exhibition and sale, per day, one to 50 spaces. 	58.00 
3442 	Special events: Exhibition and sale, per day, 51—100 spaces. 	116.00 
3444 	Special events: Exhibition and sale, per day, over 101 spaces. 	173.00 
3450 	Special events. When held in a facility owned and operated by the city where a fee has been charged for the use of the facility; These taxes are due and a able prior to the event occurring. Per day, one to 50 spaces. 	30.00 
3452 	Special events. When held in a facility owned and operated by the city where a fee has been charged for the use of the facility; These taxes are due and a able prior to the event occurring. Per day, 51—100 spaces. 	58.00 
3454 	Special events. When held in a facility owned and operated by the city where a fee has been charged for the use of the facility; These taxes are due and a able prior to the event occurring. Over 101 spaces. 	87.00 
3460 	Special events: Concerts and other similar activities. 	99.00 
3470 	Sports promoter and/or professional sports organization. 	
	 Up to 3,000 seats. 	183.00 
	 From 3,000 to 5,000 seats. 	457.00 
	 Over 5,000 seats. 	881.00 
3480 	Stevedores, contracting. 	67.00 
3310 	Stock/securities brokers. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	420.00 
3320 	Stock/security dealers. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	420.00 
3500 	Storage warehouses: 	
	 Not exceeding 5,000 square feet. 	68.00 
	 More than 5,000, not exceeding 10,000 square feet. 	123.00 
	 More than 10,000, not exceeding 15,000 square feet. 	200.00 
	 More than 15,000, not exceeding 25,000 square feet. 	267.00 
	 More than 25,000, not exceeding 50,000 square feet. 	400.00 
	 More than 50,000 square feet. 	533.00 
3490 	Studios for teaching (not dance studios). 	99.00 
3510 	Supper clubs. If liquor is served, a current and valid License from DBPR is required for new and renewal BTR's. In addition, a completed and notarized affidavit is required for new and renewal BTR's. 	1,328.00 
3520 	Tax reporting permits, tax preparation. Does not apply to BTR Codes: "0040," "0030," and "0020." 	99.00 
3530 	Taxidermist. Each taxidermist. 	116.00 
3540 	Teacher. 	116.00 
3570 	Telegraph service. Includes telegraph, telegram or teletypewriter service. 	667.00 
3580 	Telephone service. 	534.00 
3590 	Theater or playhouse. All types. Includes motion picture theaters. 	286.00 
	 In addition, per seat. 	1.00 
3600 	Ticket broker. Each agent. 	330.00 
3610 	Ticket office. This license applies to carriers who sell directly to the public. 	99.00 
3620 	Trading stamp company or redemption center. Any person conducting. 	667.00 
0600 	Trailer park, recreational vehicle park, tourist park or camp. 	
	 Not exceeding five spaces. 	27.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding 15 spaces. 	55.00 
	 More than 15, not exceeding 25 spaces. 	68.00 
	 More than 25 spaces, for each additional space. 	2.00 
3630 	Transportation of freight or general hauling. 	
	 Not exceeding one vehicle. 	27.00 
	 More than one, not exceeding three vehicles. 	55.00 
	 More than three, not exceeding five vehicles. 	82.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten vehicles. 	135.00 
	 More than ten vehicles. 	200.00 
3650 	Travel bureaus. Requires State of Florida registration from Department of Agriculture for new and renewal BTR. No travel bureau license shall be transferable. 	336.00 
3660 	Translation services. 	99.00 
3670 	Tree surgeon. Requires certification from International Society of Arboriculture. 	99.00 
3680 	Upholstery repair services. Recovering and repairing. If automobile, requires registration from the Florida Department of Agriculture. 	99.00 
3690 	Veterinarian. Requires license from DPBR. 	116.00 
3700 	Veterinary establishment, kennel or hospital. Requires license from DPBR. 	99.00 
3710 	Videotape duplication service. 	99.00 
3720 	Video, television, high fidelity intercommunication and other similar systems. Alone or in connection with any other business. Permits installation and service. Merchant's retail BTR is required for stock. 	108.00 
3730 	Waste collection, commercial. As regulated in section 22-46 et seq. of this Code. No BTR shall be issued until the applicant furnishes the finance department with a permit to operate from the Department of Solid Waste. 	268.00 
3740 	Water manufacturers. Manufacturers of aerated or distilled, drinking water. Permitted to distribute without distributor's license. Employing persons, including owners and operators: 	
	 Not exceeding five persons. 	68.00 
	 More than five, not exceeding ten persons. 	135.00 
	 More than ten persons. 	267.00 
3750 	Water distributors. Distributors of bottled, aerated, distilled or mineral, drinking water. Utilizing vehicles, as follows: 	
	 Not exceeding two vehicles. 	99.00 
	 More than two, not exceeding four vehicles. 	215.00 
	 More than four vehicles. 	241.00 
3760 	Window or glass tinting. Alone or in connection with any other business. 	99.00 
3770 	Window or house cleaning company. 	40.00 
 
(Ord. No. 10303, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 10387, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 10991, § 1, 6-11-92; Ord. No. 11086, § 1, 9-27-93; Code 1980, § 31-35; Ord. No. 11287, § 3, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 11825, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13106, § 2, 10-8-09; Ord. No. 13140, § 2, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 13213, § 3, 10-14-10; Ord. No. 13230, § 2, 11-18-10; Ord. No. 13336, § 2, 7-26-12; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13106, § 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, changed the title of § 31-50 from "Schedule of established local business taxes established" to "Schedule of established BTRs." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Case Law reference— Imposition of large penalty upon nonpayment of tax constitutes conditions that would render payment of unfairly assessed taxes under Ord. No. 9188 (predecessor to 10303) involuntary, thus rendering the necessity to protest unfair taxes unnecessary, thereby allowing grounds for suit to reimburse merchants for amount of excess tax and attorneys' fees. City of Miami v. Florida Retail Federation, Inc., 423 So. 2d 991. 
_____ 
Sec. 31-51. - Food trucks operating on private land. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate the use of food trucks and their gatherings throughout the city as it pertains to private land. This section does not supplant or replace the requirements of chapter 39, article II, titled, "Sidewalk and Street Vendors." 
(b)  Definitions. 
Food truck means the preparing, cooking, serving, or selling of food performed from a movable stand, cart, vehicle, truck, van, or trailer. Each movable stand, cart, vehicle, truck, van, or trailer shall be considered a food truck for purposes of this section. 
Food truck gatherings means events consisting of a gathering of three or more food trucks. 
Patron means a person purchasing food from a food truck. 
Truck means any of the various forms of vehicles used for carrying goods and materials, usually consisting of a single self-propelled unit, but also often composed of a trailer vehicle hauled by a tractor unit. A vehicle much larger than a cart or a car. 
Van means a boxlike vehicle that resembles a panel truck, often has double doors both at the rear and along the curb side, and that can be used as a truck. 
(c)  Requirements for food trucks. 
(1)  In addition to all other city, county, and state requirements, food trucks shall receive a business tax receipt ("BTR") as listed in chapter 31 of the City Code upon the showing of: 
a.  A certificate of inspection by the Miami-Dade County Department of Health; 
b.  A certificate of inspection by the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Hotels and Restaurants; 
c.  Proof of valid insurance; 
d.  Vehicle identification number; and 
e.  A valid Peddler's BTR from Miami-Dade County. 
(2)  Food trucks must have a peddler's type BTR pursuant to chapter 31 of the City Code approved by the city manager or designee and must comply with the requirements of that BTR. 
(3)  Food trucks are not permitted to operate within a 500-foot radius of a food service, gasoline, natural gas, or other combustible energy source establishment, nor in T3 and T4-R transect zones. 
(4)  The property in which a food truck is parked must have an active certificate of use ("CU"). If there are no more than two food trucks present, such activities will be considered ancillary to the current CU if the food truck use is allowed in the transect zone as long as the food trucks are not present more than three times per week and do not park on-site overnight. 
(5)  If parked on property that is vacant, the property owner must follow the temporary use of vacant land process and obtain a temporary use permit ("TUP") as delineated in chapter 62 of the City Code, if a TUP is allowed in the district. 
(6)  A site map for location and/or placement of food truck(s), occupied or vacant, showing the property is outside the 500-foot radius as required by subsection (c)(3) of this Code. 
(7)  All food trucks must provide waste disposal for patrons and must keep the area surrounding the food truck(s) clear of waste and debris resulting from their services. 
(8)  All food trucks must display, at all times, a copy of their city affidavit attesting to the operating requirements issued by the regulating department of the city as approved by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  Requirements for food truck gatherings. Food truck gatherings shall be permitted without the need for a public hearing and by a temporary event permit for food truck gatherings issued by the city manager or designee pursuant to chapter 62, article XIII, division 1 of the City Code, provided the food truck gatherings shall: 
(1)  Be limited to one food truck gathering at the same location only once per calendar month, for a maximum of three consecutive days; 
(2)  Be strictly prohibited in T3 and T4-R Transect Zones; 
(3)  Not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages from any food truck; and 
(4)  Acquire a building permit from the building department in the event of the erection of temporary structures or stages. All fire safety code requirements must be similarly met. 
(e)  A temporary event permit for food truck gatherings shall be obtained for each temporary event site on an annual basis. A temporary event permit for food truck gatherings application shall be obtained, completed, and submitted to the city manager or designee prior to operating a food truck gathering. The completed package shall include all documents pursuant to chapter 62, article XII, division 1 of the City Code and in addition, all of the following: 
(1)  A notarized letter from the property owner of record authorizing the food truck gathering indicating the amount of food trucks and the date and time(s) of the food truck gathering as described in the application package. 
(2)  A schedule of events for the food truck gathering. 
(3)  Notification and sign-off from the Miami Police Department and solid waste department. 
(4)  A traffic safety and security plan. 
(5)  A narrative from the applicant describing the hours of operation, estimated public attendance, amount of food trucks, and a description of any other amenities or services provided. 
(6)  Copies of all state and county licenses of each of the individual food trucks participating. 
(7)  The maximum number of individual food trucks which may be present at the food truck gathering at any one time. This maximum number shall be indicated on the temporary permit if granted by the city. 
(8)  A site plan or survey indicating the following information, which shall consider the food truck gathering's estimated public attendees and the maximum number of individual food trucks on the site: 
a.  General placement of the individual food trucks (i.e. a map drawing of food trucks as they would be situated on the site). 
b.  Location of refuse and recycling facilities or receptacles. 
c.  Location of sanitation facilities. 
d.  Handling and disposal plans for fats, oils, and grease ("FOG"). 
e.  Location of on-site and off-site parking areas. 
f.  Location of any lighting fixtures, if applicable. 
g.  Location of rights-of-way, internal circulation of vehicles and people, and of ingress and egress areas. 
(f)  Exemptions; waivers; prohibitions. 
(1)  Exemptions. Private property with over 250,000 square feet of usable land shall be exempt from subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Waivers. City property shall not be subject to this section; however, food truck gatherings on city property shall be limited to one time per month unless waived by the city commission at a duly noticed public meeting. 
(3)  Prohibitions. Food truck usage is prohibited in district 3. 
(g)  Enforcement. Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine of $250.00 for a first offense and $500.00 for each offense thereafter under the provisions of chapter 2, article X of the City Code, and any other remedies as provided by law, jointly and severally, including, but not limited to, suspension or revocation of a CU, BTR, permit, or any other legal remedy as deemed appropriate by the city. The use of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. 
(Ord. No. 13796, § 2, 10-11-18)  
Secs. 31-52—31-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONVENIENCE STORE SECURITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Convenience store security, F.S. § 812.171 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-76. - Definitions. 
The city adopts by reference the definitions provided in F.S. § 812.171, as if fully set forth herein, as that statute may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 10817, § 1, 12-6-90; Code 1980, § 12.1-1; Ord. No. 13256, § 1, 3-10-11) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, F.S. § 817.171.  
Sec. 31-77. - Security requirements. 
The city adopts by reference the convenience business security requirements provided in F.S. § 812.173, as if fully set forth herein, as that statute may be amended from time to time. All code compliance inspectors, as defined in this Code, may act as BTR inspectors and are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of said statute and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10817, § 2, 12-6-90; Code 1980, § 12.1-2; Ord. No. 13256, § 1, 3-10-11; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 812.173.  
Sec. 31-78. - Training of employees. 
The city adopts by reference the training requirements provided in F.S. § 812.174, as if fully set forth herein, as that statute may be amended from time to time. All code compliance inspectors, as defined in this Code, may act as BTR inspectors and are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of said statute and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10817, § 3, 12-6-90; Code 1980, § 12.1-3; Ord. No. 13256, § 1, 3-10-11; Ord. No. 13745, § 2, 2-22-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 812.174.  
Sec. 31-79. - Noncompliance fees. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be cited by the city and the violator shall be given 30 days after receipt of the citation within which to correct the violation. If the violation continues beyond the time specified for correction, the violator shall be notified to appear before the code enforcement board. If the violator is found to have violated this article, the code enforcement board may impose a fine not to exceed $250.00 per day per violation for a first occurrence. The code enforcement board may impose a fine not to exceed $500.00 per day, per violation for each repeated violation. Such fines shall continue to accrue so long as the violation continues to exist on the property as per the provisions of sections 2-811 through 2-820 of this Code, but shall not exceed a total of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 10817, § 4, 12-6-90; Code 1980, § 12.1-4) 
State Law reference— Enforcement, F.S. § 812.715.  
Sec. 31-80. - Civil fines. 
Any owner or principal operator of a convenience store, as defined in section 31-76, and located within the city who willfully and deliberately violates the requirements of this article or who deliberately fails to initially implement the requirements of this article shall be required to pay to the city, upon complaint filed by the city, a civil fine of up to $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 10817, § 5, 12-6-90; Code 1980, § 12.1-5) 
State Law reference— Enforcement, civil fine, F.S. § 812.715.  
ARTICLE IV. - SHOPPING CARTS 
 
Sec. 31-81. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as set forth below: 
Cart means a shopping cart or basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally provided by a commercial establishment for use by a customer or an employee of said establishment for the purposes of transporting goods of any kind for any purpose. 
Owner means any individual or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, possesses, or makes any cart available to customers or the public. For purposes of this article, owner shall also include the owner's on-site or designated store manager or agent that provides the carts for use to its customers. 
Premises means the entire area owned and utilized by the commercial establishment that provides carts for use by customers, including any parking lot or other property provided by the owner for customer parking. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-82. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the city's code compliance department and neighborhood enhancement team ("NET"). However, in enforcing the provisions of this article, any employee of the city may remove, or cause the removal of a cart, or parts thereof, from public property. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-83. - Methods of compliance. 
(a)  An owner may comply with this article by creating and carrying out a plan to address the retention or collection of carts ("plan") using any one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  An electronic wheel locking mechanism; 
(2)  A physical barrier to prevent the removal of carts from the premises; 
(3)  An alarm mechanism attached to each cart to prevent removal from the premises; 
(4)  Implementation of a policy of not allowing the customer to exit the store with a cart; 
(5)  Providing an employee to carry or wheel the customer merchandise to the customer's vehicle; 
(6)  Implementation of a daily program for the collection of carts that are illegally removed; and/or 
(7)  Any other measure approved by the city as a means of preventing carts from being removed from the premises. 
(b)  In addition, the owner shall provide a sign in a visible location on the premises notifying cart users of the retention system and how it works. Such sign shall state the following in English, Spanish, and Creole: 
Warning 
Any person who removes a shopping cart from the premises without the written consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer shall be presumed to be in possession of stolen property and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to (1) year as provided by Sections 506.509 and 506.513, Florida Statutes. 
Advertencia 
Se presupondrá que cualquier persona que retire un carro de compras de las instalaciones sin el consentimiento escrito del propietario del carro de compras o el minorista está en posesión de propiedad robada, y es culpable de un delito menor de primer grado punible con una pena de hasta (1) año en prisión, según lo dispuesto en las Secciones 506.509 y 506.513 de los Estatutos de Florida. 
Avètisman 
Depi yon moun wete charyo sou pwopriyete a san l pa gen pèmisyon alekri pwopriyetè charyo a oubyen magazen an, l ap rekonèt kòm yon moun ki gen nan men l atik ki vòlè e alò l ap koupab yon deli nan premye degre e l ap pini avèk yon pèn nan prizon pou jouk yon (1) lane konfòm ak Atik 506.509 ak 506.513 lalwa Florida. 
(c)  Such language shall be visible in the public area where carts are stored and legible from a distance of not less than five feet. 
(d)  A copy of the plan shall be submitted to the assigned NET office of the premises for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-84. - Identification markings on carts. 
Any owner that utilizes carts shall place readily identifiable markings on the carts which include the name and address or store number of the particular commercial establishment which owns the cart. Contact information including the manager's name, phone number, mailing address, and electronic mail address shall be provided to the city in the plan and the owner shall update the contact information within ten business days of any changes to such information. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-85. - Violations. 
Any owner failing to submit a plan or failing to properly install and maintain an approved on-site cart retention system pursuant to the plan is in violation of this article. Notwithstanding the provisions of F.S. § 506.5131, any owner violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a $250.00 fine per day for failure to sustain a cart retention system and subject to enforcement proceedings in accordance with chapter 2 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-86. - Uncollected carts. 
(a)  The city may collect any cart found off the premises and on public property. The city shall notify the owner of a cart, as designated on the shopping cart's identification markings, in writing when the city has secured an uncollected cart. After notice has been provided, any uncollected carts may be held by the city for a period of up to 90 days. If the cart is not claimed by the owner within the time specified in this article or if the city cannot contact the owner due to the owner's failure to provide identification markings on the cart under subsection 31-84(a) of the City Code within 15 days, then such carts shall be considered abandoned and may be disposed or declared surplus and sold if still uncollected in accordance with the City Code and/or F.S. ch. 705. All proceeds of the sale of such carts shall be the sole property of the city. 
(b)  If the owner is not identified on the cart, then before collecting the cart, an agent or employee of the city will place notice on the cart stating: 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY 
This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon public property known as (setting forth brief description of location) and must be removed within eighteen (18) hours. Failure to remove this property will result in disposal pursuant to the City Code and/or Chapter 705, Florida Statutes. 
Dated this: (setting forth the date of posting of notice) at (setting forth time). Signed (setting forth name, title, address, and telephone number of the City official to contact). 
(c)  The owner of a cart without identification markings shall have 18 hours from the date and time of the notice to retrieve the cart. 
(d)  A cart without identification markings and which has been noticed pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be considered abandoned after 18 hours from the date and time of the notice to retrieve the cart and the abandoned cart may be sold if still uncollected in accordance with the City Code and F.S. ch. 705, or may be disposed of in any manner (including discarded) as determined by the code compliance department or NET. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-87. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any owner desiring an exemption from the identification markings requirements of subsection 31-84(a) shall file a petition for exemption with the director of the code compliance department or designee. The filing fee for a petition for exemption shall be $500.00 per year for each premises and due on or before October 1 of each year. A petition for exemption shall be valid for a period of no more than one year. 
(b)  Upon such filing, the director of the code compliance department or designee shall issue the owner an exemption from the requirements of subsection 31-84(a) if: 
(1)  Physical barriers exist to prevent the removal of the cart(s) from the premises or the parking lot where utilized, which conform to all applicable building code requirements; 
(2)  Electronic wheel locking mechanism, alarms, or other security devices (such as wheel locking mechanisms to be used in conjunction with an electronic barrier or protruding arms or similar devices prohibiting the cart from being removed from the interior of the premises) are attached to the carts to prevent its removal from the premises or the parking lot where utilized; 
(3)  A system has been established, which may be mechanical in nature, requiring a deposit to use the cart in an amount which would not deter the use of the cart but would encourage the return of the cart; or 
(4)  Similar methods have been adopted that would prevent the removal of a cart from the premises where utilized. 
(c)  Any exemption granted under this article shall expire if the grounds for the exemption cease to be maintained or used. 
(d)  Any owner with a commercial establishment who provide carts for use by a customer prior to the effective date of this article, shall have a period of one year from the effective date of this article to come into compliance with this article. 
(e)  The owners of a premises of under 5,000 square feet with a maximum of 15 carts or less for use by a customer of the premises shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Sec. 31-88. - Removal, storage, and disposal of carts found on public property. 
(a)  The city may remove and place into storage all carts found on public property. 
(b)  After the city has removed identifiable carts from public property, the code compliance department or NET shall promptly provide written notice by regular mail to the owner at the address designated on the cart's identification markings. If the cart has no identification markings but the owner can otherwise be readily determined by other distinguishing characteristics or notice to the city, the code compliance department or NET shall mail the notice to the determined owner. The notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing and posting by the code compliance department or NET and receipt of the notice by the owner is not required. 
(Ord. No. 13788, § 2, 9-27-18)  
Chapter 32 - MERCHANDISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
City Code cross references— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; city purchases and contracts, § 18-71 et seq.; fire protection, ch. 19; local business tax and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 31; parking upon streets for purpose of selling merchandise, § 35-10; peddling, vending and merchandising in city parks, § 38-65; peddlers, itinerant vendors, ch. 39; weapons, ch. 61. 
State Law reference— Registration of trademarks and service marks, F.S. ch. 495; consumer protection generally, F.S. § 501.011 et seq.; deceptive and unfair trade practices law, F.S. § 501.201 et seq.; stamped or marked bottles and boxes, F.S. ch. 506; consumer finance act, F.S. ch. 516; retail installment sales, F.S. ch. 520; weights, measures and standards, F.S. ch. 531; commercial discrimination, F.S. ch. 540; trading stamps, F.S. § 559.01 et seq.; fire and going-out-of-business sales, F.S. § 559.20 et seq.; consumer collection practices, F.S. § 559.55 et seq.; uniform commercial codes, F.S. chs. 671—680; interest and usury, F.S. ch. 687; false pretenses and frauds generally, F.S. § 817.02 et seq.; state credit card crime act, § F.S. 817.57 et seq.; merchandising of dogs, F.S. § 877.14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 32-1—32-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BANKRUPTCY AND CLOSING-OUT SALES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fire and going-out-of-business sales, F.S. § 559.20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-26. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Director of finance: The term "director of finance" shall include his/her authorized deputy, assistant or agent. 
Publish, advertisement, etc.: The words "publish," "publishing," "advertising," and "advertisement" shall include all means of conveying to the public notice of a sale or notice or intention to conduct a sale whether by word of mouth, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written notice, printed display, billboard display, poster, radio announcement and all means, including oral, written or printed. 
Sale, sales: The words "sale" and "sales" are defined to be the sale, or an offer to sell, to the public goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the part of the seller and anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, winding-up, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. They shall also include any sale advertised to be a "bankruptcy sale" or any sale in which the terms "bankrupt" or "bankruptcy" are used in connection with advertising pertaining to such sale. They shall also include "adjustment sale," "creditor's sale," "liquidation sale," "reorganization sale," "alteration sale," "executor's sale," "administrator's sale," "insolvency sale," "fire sale," "insurance salvage sale," "mortgage sale," "assignee's sale," "adjuster's sale," "receiver's sale," "loss-of-lease sale," "closing-out sale," "wholesaler's closing-out sale," "creditor's committee sale," "forced-out-of-business sale" and all sales advertised in such a manner as reasonably to convey to the public that, upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued. 
(Code 1967, § 31-9; Code 1980, § 32-29; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 32-27. - License—Required. 
No person shall publish or conduct any sale of the type defined in section 32-26 without first having obtained a license as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 31-10; Code 1980, § 32-30)  
Sec. 32-28. - Same—Application; inventory of stock. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license to conduct any sale of the type defined in section 32-26 shall make a written application in a form approved by the director of finance and verified by the person or, if a corporation, an officer thereof who intends to conduct the sale. Such application shall contain a description of the place where such sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy, the means to be employed in publishing such sale, together with the proposed language to be contained in any advertisements. 
(b)  Such application shall further contain, as part thereof, an inventory containing a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise upon the premises to be sold at such sale. Such verified application shall include the names and addresses of the persons, such as the partners, officers and directors, and the principal stockholders and owners of the business and the inventoried merchandise. 
(c)  The mentioned inventory shall contain the cost price of the respective articles enumerated therein, together with the date of such purchase and the identity of the seller. If the goods, wares and merchandise were purchased by the applicant or the person for whom he/she is acting as agent for a lump sum, or if there are other circumstances that make the listing of the cost price for each article impracticable, such inventory shall state the lump sum paid for such goods, wares and merchandise, and the circumstances of the purchase of the same. 
(d)  The application shall further state the effective date of the beginning of such sale. 
(Code 1967, § 31-11; Code 1980, § 32-31; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 32-29. - Same—Investigation fee. 
Upon filing an original application or renewal application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale or special sale, as defined in section 32-26, the applicant shall pay to the director of finance a fee of $26.25. If an application or renewal application is disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited to the city for the cost of investigating the statements contained in such application or renewal application. 
(Code 1967, § 31-12; Code 1980, § 32-32; Ord. No. 13142, § 11, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 32-30. - Same—Inspection of application; issuance; surrender of existing local business tax receipt. 
Upon receipt of the application required by section 32-28 and the payment of the fee prescribed in section 32-29, the director of finance shall cause the same to be examined and inspected. If, after such inspection, the director of finance is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in such application and as to the form and content of the advertising to be used in connection with such sale, he/she shall issue a license permitting the publication and conduct of such sale; provided that, prior to or at the time of the issuance of such license, the applicant therefor shall surrender for cancellation his/her existing local business tax receipt for the business involved without refund of the fee or any portion thereof paid for the local business tax receipt. 
(Code 1967, § 31-13; Code 1980, § 32-33; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12885, § 1, adopted February 8, 2007, changed the title of § 32-30 from "Same—Inspection of application; issuance; surrender of existing license" to "Same—Inspection of application; issuance; surrender of existing local business tax receipt." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 32-31. - Same—Term; supplemental licenses. 
(a)  The license provided for in this article shall be for a period of time not exceeding 30 calendar days. The period of time during which a sale may be conducted under a license issued under the provisions of this article may be extended by the director of finance if, at any time during the term of the license, a written application for such extension, duly verified by affidavit of the applicant, shall be filed by such licensee with the director of finance. The application for an extension of such license shall state the amount of the goods, wares and merchandise listed in the original inventory, which shall have been sold since the issuance of the license, and the amount of goods, wares and merchandise contained in such original inventory which still remain in the possession of the applicant for sale. No extension of the license shall be granted if any goods, wares or merchandise shall have been added to the stock of merchandise listed in the inventory filed as required by section 32-28 since the date of the issuance of the license, and the applicant shall satisfy the director of finance by affidavit or otherwise, as directed by him/her, that no goods, wares or merchandise have been added to such stock since the date of issuance of the license. The director of finance may, in consideration of the facts, upon hearing such petition, grant or deny a supplemental license, and, if such supplemental license is granted, the period of the extension shall not exceed 15 calendar days from the expiration of the original license and only one supplemental license shall be granted. 
(b)  The fee to be collected by the director of finance for the issuance of such supplemental license shall be the same as the fee collected for a "closing-out sale" license. 
(Code 1967, § 31-14; Code 1980, § 32-34; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 32-32. - Same—Display; inspection of duplicate of application and stock list. 
Upon commencement of any sale, as defined in section 32-26, the license issued by the director of finance shall be prominently displayed in its original form near the entrance to the premises. No copy of such license shall be otherwise displayed or utilized in any advertisement. A duplicate original of the application and stock list, pursuant to which such license was issued, shall at all times be available to the director of finance and to inspectors of the division of trade standards, and the licensee shall permit such officers to examine all merchandise in the premises for a comparison with such stock list. 
(Code 1967, § 31-15; Code 1980, § 32-35)  
Sec. 32-33. - Supervision and rules and regulations of director of finance. 
The director of finance is authorized and empowered to supervise all sales or special sales defined in section 32-26. He/she is further empowered to make such rules and regulations for the conduct and advertisement of such sales as in his/her opinion will serve to prohibit deception and to protect the public. In this connection, inspectors of the division of trade standards shall be deemed to be the duly authorized agents of the director of finance. 
(Code 1967, § 31-16; Code 1980, § 32-36; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 32-34. - Advertising—Generally. 
All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein, in reference to a sale conducted under the provisions of this article, shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which a license was issued, and the wording of such advertisements shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the application. 
(Code 1967, § 31-17; Code 1980, § 32-37)  
Sec. 32-35. - Same—Not to imply city sanction or approval. 
No advertising of any sale pursuant to this article shall be so worded or drafted as to indicate that such sale is being conducted under the sanction or with the approval of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 31-18; Code 1980, § 32-38)  
Sec. 32-36. - Books and records; revision of stock list. 
Suitable books and records, as prescribed by the director of finance, shall be kept by the licensee and shall at all times be available to his/her inspection. At the close of business each day, the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and those items disposed of during such day shall be so marked thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 31-19; Code 1980, § 32-39; Ord. No. 13676, § 2, 4-27-17)  
Sec. 32-37. - Increase of stock prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this article to bring upon or cause to be brought upon the premises for which the mentioned license is issued any goods, wares or merchandise not shown or otherwise accounted for in the application for such license with intent to advertise, sell or offer for sale such goods, wares or merchandise to the public. 
(Code 1967, § 31-20; Code 1980, § 32-40) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.22.  
Sec. 32-38. - Inventory. 
For identification and checking purposes, all goods, wares and merchandise suitable for tagging or labeling shall be serially numbered and such numbers be recorded in the inventory. Small items or group items may be identified by lot or group number. 
(Code 1967, § 31-21; Code 1980, § 32-41)  
Sec. 32-39. - Sales slip. 
Except for inexpensive group items, a sales slip shall be issued to the purchaser and contain thereon the name and address of the business or firm, the date of purchase, and the list of items with prices and corresponding inventory identification numbers. Also, when delivery or shipment is made, the sales slip shall contain the name and address of the purchaser and the name of the salesperson. 
(Code 1967, § 31-22; Code 1980, § 32-42)  
Sec. 32-40. - Certain persons exempt from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs and marshals. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(Code 1967, § 31-23; Code 1980, § 32-43)  
Secs. 32-41—32-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REFUNDS AND EXCHANGES 
 
Sec. 32-66. - Statement of purpose. 
This article is designed to protect city consumers, residents and visitors alike, from unfair practices by retail merchants. The primary purpose of this measure is to ensure that establishments which provide for no refund or exchange policy, conspicuously disclose such restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 10533, § 1, 1-12-89; Code 1980, § 32-81)  
Sec. 32-67. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
Legal name means the true corporate name of a corporation, or the name of at least one partner of a partnership, or the name of at least one owner of a business that is not a corporation or a partnership. 
Point of sale means all cash registers in a retail establishment. 
Retail establishment means any store, merchant or organization, excluding not-for-profit organizations, selling merchandise at retail to the general public, but shall not include restaurants. 
Sale of merchandise includes the sale, lease or other disposition for profit of goods or products of any type, but shall not include the sale, lease or other disposition of food, perishable goods, goods which are custom made or custom altered at the request of the customer or goods which cannot be resold by the merchant because of any law, rule or regulation adopted by a governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 10533, § 2, 1-12-89; Code 1980, § 32-82)  
Sec. 32-68. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Civil enforcement. To the extent permitted by law and in addition to the provisions of subsection (b) below, the following civil actions may be brought by the city and/or the injured consumer, and shall not be mutually exclusive: 
(1)  By city. Upon recommendation from the city manager that a retail establishment has violated this article, the city attorney may initiate an equity or other action against the owners and/or principal officers of the retail establishment to compel its compliance with this article. In the event there is found to be a violation of this article, the city may recover court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. In any civil action based on this article, if the city proves that the violation occurred after one or more written warnings or notices of violation to the defendant(s), or that the violation was especially offensive or egregious, the court may award punitive damages not exceeding $1,050.00 per violation or three times the price of the merchandise that is the subject of the sale in question, whichever is greater. 
(2)  By consumers. Any person injured by a violation of this article shall have the right to bring a civil action and if he or she prevails shall be awarded compensatory damages and reimbursements of attorney fees and costs. In any civil action based on this article, if the injured consumer proves that the violation occurred after one or more written warnings or notices of violation to the defendant(s), or that the violation was especially offensive or egregious, the court may award punitive damages not exceeding $1,050.00 per violation or three times the price of the merchandise that is the subject of the sale in question, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Penalties. A person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $105.00 for the first offense and not more than $525.00 for the second and each subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, at its discretion, impose on the owner or principal officers of the offending retail establishment a term of imprisonment for up to 60 days for the second or subsequent offense. 
(c)  License may be affected. In addition to the enforcement measures and penalties set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above which are cumulative, the city may take such measures as are lawfully permitted under chapter 31 of the Code of the City of Miami, as amended, dealing with the issuance, renewal, revocation, or suspension of local business tax receipts. 
(Ord. No. 10533, § 4, 1-12-89; Code 1980, § 32-83; Ord. No. 12885, § 1, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 13142, § 11, 2-11-10)  
Sec. 32-69. - Requirements. 
(a)  Signs required. Every retail sales establishment within the city offering goods for sale to the general public that offers no cash refund, credit refund, or exchange or merchandise, must post a sign so stating, at the point of sale. 
(b)  Specifications for sign. The lettering on the posted sign must be at least three-fourths inch in height and three-fourths inch in width. The sign must be posted in a visible and conspicuous place near the point of sale. 
(c)  Failure to post sign. Failure of a retail sales establishment to exhibit a "no refund" sign under such circumstances at the point of sale shall mean that a refund or exchange policy exists, and the policy shall be presented in writing to the consumer upon request. 
(d)  Failure to comply. Any retail establishment failing to comply with the provisions of this article shall grant to the consumer, upon request and proof of purchase, a cash refund, credit refund or exchange of merchandise for the merchandise that is the subject of the sale in question, within seven days of the date of purchase, provided the merchandise is unused and in the original carton, if one was furnished. Nothing herein shall prohibit a retail sales establishment from having a refund policy which exceeds the number of days specified herein. 
(e)  When establishment grants refunds or exchanges. Any retail establishment which has disclosed a policy of offering refunds or exchanges shall promptly grant refunds or exchanges to customers in accordance with said disclosed policies, and no additional conditions shall be imposed on such refunds or exchanges except as disclosed to the customer. 
(f)  Sales slips. 
(1)  All sales of merchandise in excess of $1.00 but not exceeding $50.00 by a retail establishment shall be accompanied by a receipt disclosing the date of sale, sales price, and the legal name and address of the seller. 
(2)  Merchandise sold for over $50.00 by a retail establishment shall be accompanied by a written invoice or receipt containing the date of sale, the purchase price, the identification number or description of the merchandise sold, including the model and the manufacturer thereof, the name of the salesperson and the legal name and address of the seller. 
(3)  A retail establishment using cash registers producing automated sales receipts furnished to the customer simultaneously with the receiving and recording of the consideration involved in the sale or transaction shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of subsection (f)(2), provided that such sales receipt bears a printed legend or symbols which will enable the customer, upon request made of the retail establishment, to be furnished the information in identifiable form that is required to be furnished as set forth in the preceding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection (f). 
(Ord. No. 10533, § 3, 1-12-89; Code 1980, § 32-84) 

MIAMI 21 CODE Volume I
January 2018
Volume I is amended as of January 31, 2018
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE
ADOPTED LOCATION DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13165 04-22-2010 Article 4, Table 3 Marine Related and Childcare Uses in CS
Transect
10-00285zt
13164 04-22-2010 Article 4, Table 3 Alcohol Uses by Exception 10-00287zt
13159 04-22-2010 Article 7, Section
7.1.1.4
Requirements for PZAB members 10-00290zt
13166 04-22-2010 Article 3, Section 3.5.2 Measurement of Height (T6-36 and
above)
10-00291zt-b
13173 05-13-2010 Article 3, Section 3.5.2 D1 height and mezzanine 10-00374zt
13176 05-13-2010 Article 4, Table 2, Table
3 and Table 4; Article
5, Illustration 5.9; Article
6, Table 13
D1 Density 10-00361zt
13177 05-23-2010 Article 1, Section 1.4;
Article 3, Section
3.6.10, Section 3.13.2;
Article 6, Table 13;
Article 9
“Green” ordinance carried into Miami 21 10-00519
13235 11-18-2010 Article 1, Section 1.1.d,
Section 1.2; Article 2,
Section 2.1.3; Article 3,
Section 3.3.6, Section
3.4.1, Section 3.6.1,
Section 3.11; Article 4,
Table 2, Table 3, Table
4; Article 5, Section
5.3.2, Section 5.3.6,
Illustration 5.3, Section
5.4.5, Section 5.4.6,
Section 5.5.5, Section
5.6.2, Section 5.6.5;
Article 6, Table 13; Article
7, Section 7.1.2.4,
Section 7.1.2.6, Section
7.1.3.4, Section
7.1.4.5, Section 7.2.2;
Article 8, Section 8.1;
Article 9, Section 9.5.5;
Appendix A, Section
2.4, Section 3.6; Appendix
B, Bulkheads
and Seawalls; Appendix
C
Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE
ADOPTED LOCATION DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13238 12-16-2010 Article 4, Table 4 and
Table 5; Article 5,
Section 5.3.1, Section
5.3.2, Section 5.4.1,
Section 5.4.2; Article
6, Section 6.1, Table
13; Article 7, Section
7.1.2.5
Requirements for sheds and other structures;
loading berth substitutions; requirements
for child care facilities; requirements
for public and commercial storage
facilities;distance separation requirements
for ALF’s; distance separation requirements
for uses and structures
10-00963zt
13239 12-16-2010 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 4, Table 4
Parking ratios for Educational facilities 10-00964zt
13240 12-16-2010 Article 5, Section 5.5.1,
Section 5.6.1; Article 7,
Section 7.1.2.5
Modification of door spacing requirements
and removal of public easement requirements
10-00968zt
13241 12-16-2010 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 6, Section 6.3.1
Required process for large-scale commercial
establishments
10-00969zt
13242 12-16-2010 Article 5, Section 5.4.2,
Section 5.5.2, Section
5.6.2
Establish limits and procedures for extensions
above maximum height for stairs,
elevators, mechanical equip., etc.
10-00970zt
13243 12-16-2010 Article 6, Section
6.5.1.5, Section
6.5.2.5, Section 6.5.3
Requirements and limitations for freestanding
signs, painted wall signs, established
regulations for CI-HD and D3
10-00971zt
13251 01-27-2011 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 7, Section 7.1.7
(new)
To add procedures for Unity of Title 10-01335zt
13254 02-24-2011 Article 5, Section 5.4.2,
Illustration 5.4
Modify story height for T4 Transect to 40
feet max
10-01454zt
13259 03-24-2011 Article 5, Section 5.3.2,
Section 5.4.2, Section
5.7.1.4, Section 5.8.2
Regulations for fences and walls in certain
Transects
10-01461zt
13260 03-24-2011 Article 6, Table 13 Adding an exception process for extensions
of docks or piers
11-00018zt
13265 05-12-2011 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 3, Section
3.13.1, Section 3.15
(new); Article 7, Section
7.1.1.5; Section
7.1.2.8
Incentives for construction of Affordable
Housing
11-00022zt
13269 05-26-2011 Article 7, Section 7.2.3 Modification to non-conformities 11-00151zt
13271 05-26-2011 Article 3, Section
3.13.1
Modification to Sustainability requirements
and process
11-00195zt
13282 07-28-2011 Article 6, Table 13 Modification to drive-in and drive through
regulations in T4
11-00584zt
13281 07-28-2011 Article 1, Section 1.1;
Article 4, Table 3; Article
6, Table 13; Article
6, Section 6.5
Regional Activity Complex permissibility
and sign regulations for same
11-00588zt
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE
ADOPTED LOCATION DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13290 10-27-2011 Article 4, Table 2, Table
4, Table 6, Table 7,
Table 12, Diagram 9
Minor modifications to Article 4 11-00585zt
13307 01-26-2012 Article 4, Table 4;
Article 6, Table 13,
Section 6.3.1
Public Storage Facilities modifications 11-00875zt
13314 02-23-2012 Article 3, Section 3.3.5;
Article 5, Section 5.5.1,
Section 5.6.1, Section
5.8.1
Added “Structures other than signs” to
dominant setback waivers
11-00791zt
13326 06-28-2012 Article 5, Section 5.6.4 Additional flexibility for parking garages 12-00563zt
13334 07-26-2017 Appendix F Special Area Plan for Design District 11-01196ap
13359 01-10-2013 Article 3, Section 3.3.1,
Section 3.6.1
Accessory Parking 12-00942zt
13358 01-10-2013 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 3, Section 3.6.3
Added watercraft stationing regulations 11-00806zt
13354 01-10-2013 Article 3, Section 3.3.6 Tigertail Setback Area 12-01180zt
13362 02-28-2013 Article 7, Section
7.1.2.8
Atlas amendment dates 12-01296zt
13373 03-28-2013 Article 3, Section
3.15.3
Affordable Housing Setback Requirement
Waiver
13-00002zt
13406 09-26-2013 Chapter 13 Update Residential Density Increase Area
map
13-00763zt
13452 04-24-2014 Article 3, Section
3.14.4.b.(1), Section
3.14.4.b.(3)
Article 4, Table 7
Amend Public Benefts for Park Improvements
13-01088zt
13425 12-12-2013 Article 5, Section 5.6.2. Text Amendment to T6-12 13-01089zt
13436 02-27-2014 Article 3, Section
3.15.1
Affordable Housing Amendment 13-01348zt
13465 05-22-2014 Article 3, Section
3.15.1, Section 3.15.2,
Section 3.15.3
Affordable Housing Amendment 14-00109zt
13464 05-22-2014 Article 1, Section 1.3;
Article 4, Table 12;
Article 6, Deletion of
Section 6.5.1, Section
6.5.2, Section 6.5.3;
Article 7, Section
7.1.2.9, Section 7.2.9;
addition of Article 10
Sign Regulations Amendment 12-00941zt1
13485 09-29-2014 Article 1, Section 1.1;
Article 6, Section 6.6.1,
Table 13
Regional Activity Complex Amendment 14-00664zt
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE
ADOPTED LOCATION DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13494 01-22-2015 Article 3, Section
3.13.1, Article 6, Table
13; Appendix A, A-3.
Amended Articles 3 and 6 to allow substitution
of “and” for “or”; and amended
Apendix A to clarify Setback requirements
for Single Family Lots
14-01074zt
13499 02-26-2015 Article 7, Section
7.1.1.4(d)(4)
Amended voting requirements 14-00515zt
13501 02-26-2015 Article 1, Section 1.2 Amended Animal Clinic definition 14-01216zt
13507 03-12-2015 Article 3, Section
3.14.1; Article 4, Table
2; Article 5, Illustration
5.6; Article 7, Section
7.1.2.8
Established T6-24b Transect Zone 14-01198zt
13516 03-26-2015 Article 5, Section
5.6.2(c)
Modification of Balcony and Facade encroachment
allowances
14-01215zt
13114 09-24-2015 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 3, Section 3.3.6
Added definition of Extensive Green Roof,
Intensive Green Roof, Legacy Structure,
Paseo, and Neighborhood Revitalization
District (NRD). Updated definitions of
Open Space, Pedestrian Passage, and
Roof Terrace.
15-00678zt
13114 09-24-2015 Article 3, Section
3.12.3
Modification of Article 3.12 to include
3.12.3 Neighborhood Revitalization
District (NRD)
15-00678zt1
13541 07-23-2015 Article 1, Section 1.3;
Article 6, Section 6.1,
Section 6.5
Deleting, Striking, and Repealing Media
Tower Language
15-00778zt
13561 09-24-2015 Appendix J Creation of Neighborhood Revitalization
District (NRD-1) and Appendix
15-00678zt2
13566 09-24-2015 Article 7, Section 7.2.6 Amend Time Extensions for Nonconforming
Uses
14-01304zt1
13565 10-22-2015 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 4, Table 4
Amend Transit Corridor Definition and
Standards for Parking Reductions
14-01076zt1
13570 10-22-2015 Special Area Plan for Miami River 15-00624ap
13577 11-19-2015 Article 7, Section 7.7.2 Modification of Adaptive Use Parking
Requirements
14-01075zt
13594 01-28-2016 Article 7, Section
7.1.1.5, and 7.1.5
Updates PZAB to Hear Appeals of CU
Revocation
15-01249zt
13596 02-25-2016 Article 3, Section
3.3.6(g)
Article 3 Section 3.3.6(g)1 an existing
Established Setback Area to include an
established Side Setback for the entire
Height of a building.
15-01496zt
13603 04-28-2016 Appendix F including
Exhibit C, D and E
Removal of specific parcels in the Miami
Design District Retail Street SAP.
11-01196ap3
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE
ADOPTED LOCATION DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13636 09-22-2016 Article 3, Section 3.3.1 Density transfer across transect
boundaries.
16-00659zt
13641 10-13-2016 Article 1, Section 1.1;
Article 6, Table 13
Creation of concrete batching
supplemental regulations.
1058
13642 10-27-2016 Appendix J: NRD-1 Appendix J amendments and
reformatting.
1127
13665 10-27-2016 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 3, Section 3.15
Attainable Mixed Income Housing
definition and supplemental regulations.
1177
13653 12-08-2016 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 6, Section 6.3
Microbrewery definition and supplemental
regulations.
1231
13656 01-12-2017 Article 1, Section 1.5;
Article 3, Section 3.16;
Article 11
Art in Public Places definitions,
requirements and administration.
1222
13669 03-09-2017 Article 5, Section
5.6.1(g)
T6 building disposition setback
requirements.
1690
13672 03-23-2017 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 3, Section 3.16
Attainable Workforce Housing definition
requirements and application eligibility
pre-requisites.
1677
13673 03-23-2017 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 6, Table 13
Crew Quarters definition and
supplemental regulations.
1233
13674 03-23-2017 Article 6, Table 13 Public storage facility regulations for T5 -
Urban Center Zone and T6 - Urban Core
Zone.
1131
13690 06-22-2017 Article 7, Section
7.1.2.8(c)
Joining of persons with entities when
submitting applications for rezoning.
2192
13695 07-13-2017 Article 4, Table 4;
Article 5, Section 5.7
Civic Space Transect Zones conforming
to master plans.
2289
13728 12-14-2017 Article 5, Section 5.5.4;
Article 7, Section
7.1.2.5
Parking standards and placement for
frontages and underground parking.
3003
13729 12-14-2017 Article 1, Section 1.2;
Article 4, Table 4;
Article 6, Table 13
Micro dwelling units definitions, and
residential density intensity and parking
requirements.
3108
13721 12-14-2017 Special Area Plan for Miami Jewish
Health Systems.
2843
13743 01-25-2018 Article 4, Table 3;
Article 6, Table 13
Alcohol Service Establishment, Food
Service Establishment, and supplemental
regulations.
1972
1
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS AND USES
1.1 DEFINITIONS OF BUILDING FUNCTION: USES (Article 4, Table 3)
1.2 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
1.3 DEFINITIONS OF SIGNS
1.4 DEFINITIONS OF LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
1.5 DEFINITIONS OF ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.A MIAMI 21 ATLAS
2.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
2.2 APPLICABILITY
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.1 TRANSECT ZONES
3.2 PHASING
3.3 LOTS AND FRONTAGES
3.4 DENSITY AND INTENSITY CALCULATIONS
3.5 MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT
3.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
3.7 FENCES AND WALLS
3.8 THOROUGHFARES
3.9 SPECIAL AREA PLANS
3.10 HISTORIC PRESERVATION STANDARDS
3.11 WATERFRONT STANDARDS
3.12 DESIGN GUIDELINES AND NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
3.13 SUSTAINABILITY
3.14 PUBLIC BENEFITS PROGRAM
3.15 AFFORDABLE AND ATTAINABLE MIXED-INCOME HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT PROGRAM
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
3.16 PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS
3.16 WORKFORCE HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT PROGRAM SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4. STANDARDS AND TABLES
TABLE 1 TRANSECT ZONE DESCRIPTIONS
2
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
TABLE 2 MIAMI 21 SUMMARY
TABLE 3 BUILDING FUNCTION: USES
TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING
TABLE 5 BUILDING FUNCTION: PARKING AND LOADING
TABLE 6 FRONTAGES
TABLE 7 CIVIC SPACE TYPES
TABLE 8 DEFINITIONS ILLUSTRATED
DIAGRAM 9 RESIDENTIAL DESNTIY INCREASE AREAS
DIAGRAM 10 AREA SPECIFIC ILLUSTRATION
DIAGRAM 11 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT - TOD
TABLE 12 DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.1 GENERALLY
5.2 NATURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T1) AND RURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T2)
5.3 SUB-URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T3)
5.4 GENERAL URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T4)
5.5 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5)
5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6)
5.7 CIVIC SPACE ZONES (CS) AND CIVIC INSTITUTION ZONES (CI)
5.9 DISTRICT ZONES (D1 and D2)
5.10 WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ZONES (D3)
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.1 INTENT AND EXCLUSIONS
TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.2 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND SIMILAR HOMES/FACILITIES
6.3 COMMERCIAL USES
6.4 INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES
6.5 INDUSTRIAL
ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
7.1 PROCEDURES
7.2 NONCONFORMITIES: STRUCTURES; USES; LOTS; SITE IMPROVEMENTS; AND SIGNS
3
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
8.1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
8.2 ILLUSTRATION: THE THOROUGHFARE ACROSS THE TRANSECT
8.3 PUBLIC FRONTAGES
8.4 ILLUSTRATION: SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
9.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE
9.2 SHORT TITLE AND APPLICABILITY
9.3 PLANS REQUIRED
9.4 TREE REMOVAL AND PRESERVATION
9.5 MINIMUM STANDARDS
9.6 PLANT QUALITY
9.7 BUFFERS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR LAND USES
9.8 LANDSCAPED AREAS IN PARKING LOTS
9.9 STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION AREAS
9.10 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA
9.11 PREPARER’S CERTIFICATION OF LANDSCAPE COMPLIANCE AT TIME OF FINAL
INSPECTION
9.12 LANDSCAPE ADJUSTMENT
9.13 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE
9.14 PROHIBITIONS
9.15 ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
10.1 GENERAL
10.2 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
TABLE 15 SPECIFIC SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
10.3 SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 11. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM
11.1 ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM
11.2 REFERENCES
11.3 PUBLIC ART MASTER PLAN AND PUBLIC ART PROGRAM GUIDELINES
11.4 APPLICABILITY
11.5 RESERVED
11.6 RESERVED
11.7 GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS - PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
5
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
PREAMBLE
HOW TO USE THE MIAMI 21 CODE
The following information explains how the Miami 21 Code (“Miami 21 Code” or “the Code”) is organized and
may best be used. This “how to” information is advisory only, and is not part of the Code adopted by the City
Commission.
Organization
The Miami 21 Code establishes standards and procedures for new development or redevelopment in the City. It
also adopts the Miami 21 Atlas, which acts as the official Zoning Atlas of the City and is filed in the City Clerk’s
office. The Miami 21 Atlas designates a Transect Zone for all lands within the City.
The Code is organized such that the parts interrelate and often must be reviewed together. The list of Articles
and sections in the Table of Contents shows the main topics and overall organization of the Code.
Article 1. Definitions of Terms and Uses defines key terms in the Code in three sections: definitions of building
function uses, definitions of terms and definitions of signs.
Article 2. General Provisions contains information on the legal framework of the Code, including its intent
and purpose and the Miami 21 Transect principles for settlement patterns that guide the Code. It also contains
information on the applicability of the Code which specifies rules of construction, calculations, and Transect
Zone boundaries.
Article 3. General to Zones introduces the Transect Zones as the structure for requirements related to Density
and Intensity, provides guidance for phasing, Lots and Frontages, Density Calculations, Height, off-street Parking
and Loading, Sustainability, public Thoroughfares and Frontages, Special Area Plans, Historic Preservation,
Waterfront Standards and the Public Benefits Program.
Article 4. Standards & Tables illustrates the components of the Code such as Intensity and parking requirements
per Transect Zone. Article 4 Table 3 sets out the Uses allowed in the various Transect Zones, and the
type of permit required for the Use, whether administrative (Warrant) or by public hearing (Exception). It also
includes corresponding definitions, as well as descriptions of different Frontage types and Civic Space types
by Transect Zone.
Article 5. Specific to Zones establishes the Transect Zones and the regulations that apply within each Transect
Zone. Uses and development standards for each Transect are specified including Building Disposition, Building
Configuration, Building Function and Density, parking and architectural, landscape and ambient standards.
Diagrams and tables accompany the text in this Article.
Article 6. Supplemental Regulations sets forth regulations that apply to specific Uses in addition to the general
regulations and Transect regulations set forth in other Articles. These uses include, for example, Piers, docks,
and boats; Home Office; Ancillary Units, Community Residences; Adult Daycare; Child Daycare; Auto-Related
Uses; helicopter landing sites; Open Air Retail; and Adult Entertainment . Sign standards are also included here.
6
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Article 7. Procedures and Nonconformities sets out the rules for applying the Code and addressing conflicts.
This Article contains the regulations for the further development of Nonconforming Uses and structures – those
existing Uses and structures that upon passage of the Code will not conform to the new regulations. It details the
zoning processes by which Development and redevelopment will be permitted by the City, including administrative
permits and permits requiring public hearings. It also establishes general criteria by which administrative
permits and public hearing permits will be reviewed.
Article 8. Thoroughfares sets forth guidelines and definitions for public Thoroughfares, as well as a catalogue
of Thoroughfares appropriate to various Transect Zones.
Article 9. Landscape Requirements establishes minimum landscape standards that enhance, improve and
maintain the quality of the City’s landscape.
Instructions for Navigating the Articles
To determine the regulations of the Code applicable to a site, one must consult both the Miami 21 Code and
the Miami 21 Atlas. The Miami 21 Atlas designates the Transect Zones for all properties in the City. The Miami
21 Code sets forth the standards for each Transect Zone.
The first step is to refer to the Miami 21 Atlas to find the location of the site. The Atlas will show the Transect Zone
that is applied to the site. The Atlas can be found in the office of the City Clerk and the Planning Department.
The second step is to refer to the Miami 21 Code for the relevant regulations associated with the Transect Zone
for the site. Begin by referring to the general Transect Zone regulations set forth in Article 3. Next, use Article
4 to determine the building function uses and other requirements allowed by each Transect and determine
whether the application is allowed By Right, by administrative review or by public hearing process. Article 5
will then determine the Building Disposition and Configuration of Structures on the property in each particular
Transect Zone, as well as other standards such as architectural and environmental standards. Finally, consult
the Supplemental Regulations in Article 6 for additional requirements which may be applicable to certain Uses.
Determining which Procedures Apply
In order to build or redevelop property, a City zoning approval is required. Article 7, Section 7.1, describes the
various types of permits that may apply to the application and the process that will be required in order to obtain
the particular permit. Consult the subsections in this Article that describe how an application is initiated, how an
application is processed, the criteria for review, and what other parts of the Code apply.
I.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.1 DEFINITIONS OF BUILDING FUNCTION: USES (Article 4, Table 3) I.5
1.2 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS I.12
1.3 DEFINITIONS OF SIGNS I.37
1.4 DEFINITIONS OF LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS I.42
1.5 DEFINITIONS OF ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM I.47
I.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
I.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Amendments to Article 1
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13177 05-23-2010 “Green” ordinance carried into Miami 21 10-00519
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
13239 12-16-2010 Parking ratios for Educational facilities 10-00964zt
13241 12-16-2010 Required process for large-scale commercial
establishments
10-00969zt
13251 01-27-2011 To add procedures for Unity of Title 10-01335zt
13265 05-12-2011 Incentives for construction of Affordable Housing 11-00022zt
13281 07-28-2011 Regional Activity Complex permissibility and sign
regulations for same
11-00588zt
13358 01-10-2013 Added watercraft stationing regulations 11-00806zt
13464 05-22-2014 Sign Regulations Amendment 12-00941zt1
13485 09-29-2014 Updated definition of Regional Activity Complex 14-00664zt
13501 02-26-2015 Updated definition of Animal Clinic 14-01216zt
13114 07-06-2015 Added definition of Extensive Green Roof,
Intensive Green Roof, Legacy Structure, Paseo,
and Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD).
Updated definitions of Open Space, Pedestrian
Passage, and Roof Terrace.
15-00678zt
13541 07-23-2015 Deleting, Striking and Repealing Media Tower
Language.
15-00778zt
13565 10-22-2015 Amend Transit Corridor Definition and Standards
for Parking Reductions.
14-01076zt1
13641 10-13-2016 Creation of concrete batching supplemental
regulations.
1058
13665 10-27-2016 Attainable Mixed Income Housing definition and
supplemental regulations.
1177
13653 12-08-2016 Microbrewery definition and supplemental
regulations.
1231
13656 01-12-2017 Art in Public Places definition. 1222
13672 03-23-2017 Attainable Workforce Housing definition requirements
and application eligibility pre-requisites.
1677
13673 03-23-2017 Crew Quarters definition and supplemental
regulations.
1233
13729 12-14-2017 Micro dwelling units definitions, and residential
density intensity and parking requirements.
3108
I.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
I.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
1.1 DEFINITIONS OF BUILDING FUNCTION: USES (Article 4, Table 3)
a. RESIDENTIAL
This category is intended to encompass land use functions predominantly of permanent housing.
Single-Family Residence: Detached Building used as permanent residence by a single housekeeping
unit. The term is general, applying to all detached house types. Also known as Principal Dwelling Unit.
Community Residence: A “resident”, for the purpose of a Community Residence, may include any
persons as defined in the following statutes:
• A disabled adult or frail elder as defined in section 429.65 (8) and (9), Florida Statutes
• A physically disabled or handicapped person as defined in section 760.22(7), Florida Statutes
• A developmentally disabled person as defined in section 393.063(9), Florida Statutes
• A non-dangerous mentally ill person as defined in section 394.455(18), Florida Statutes; or
• A child as defined in section 39.01(12), Florida Statutes
(a) A Dwelling Unit of six or fewer residents that meet the definition in section 419.001, Florida Statutes
for a “community residential home” of such size; or
(b) A Dwelling Unit licensed to serve clients of the State Department of Children and Families, which
provides a living environment for seven to fourteen unrelated residents who operate as the functional
equivalent of family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary
to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents, as defined in section 419.001,
Florida Statutes; or
(c) An adult family-care home as defined in section 429.65, Florida Statutes, which provides a full-time,
family-type living arrangement, in a private home, under which a person who owns or rents the home
provides room, board, and personal care on a 24-hour basis, for no more than five disabled adults
or frail elders who are not relatives.
See Article 6.
Ancillary Unit: A Dwelling Unit sharing ownership and utility connections with a Principal Building and
contained on the same Lot. An Ancillary Unit may be attached by a Backbuilding or detached from the
Principal Building, and unit shall not count towards maximum Density calculations. Also known as an
Accessory Unit or Ancillary Dwelling Unit.
Two Family-Housing: Two (2) Dwelling Units sharing a detached Building, each Dwelling Unit of which
provides a residence for a single housekeeping unit. Also known as a duplex.
Multi-Family Housing: A Building or portion thereof, containing three or more Dwelling Units where
each unit has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. A multifamily Structure where Dwelling
Units are available for lease or rent for less than one month shall be considered Lodging.
I.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Dormitory: A Building used principally for sleeping accommodations for students or staff related to an
educational institution or place of employment.
Home Office: A space within a Dwelling Unit devoted to a non-retail business activity belonging to the
resident thereof that is clearly secondary in Use to the residence, that does not alter the exterior of the
property or affect the residential character of the Neighborhood, and that meets all legal requirements
of the business. See Article 6.
Live-Work: A Dwelling Unit that contains a commercial or office component which is limited to a maximum
fifty percent (50%) of the Dwelling Unit area. See Article 6.
Work-Live: A mixed-Use unit that contains a commercial, office or light industrial component. The work
component exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the Dwelling Unit area. See Article 6.
b. LODGING
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions predominantly of sleeping accommodations
occupied on a rental basis for limited periods of time. These are measured in terms of lodging units:
a lodging unit is a furnished room of a minimum two hundred (200) square feet that includes sanitary
facilities, and that may include limited kitchen facilities.
Bed & Breakfast: A group of lodging units not to exceed ten (10) units that may provide services for
dining, meeting and recreation.
Inn: A group of lodging units not to exceed twenty-five (25) units that may provide services for dining,
meeting and recreation.
Hotel: A group of lodging units exceeding twenty-five (25) units that may provide services for dining,
meeting and recreation.
c. OFFICE
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions predominantly related to business, professions,
service or government.
Office: A Building or portion thereof used for conducting a business, profession, service, or government.
Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, offices of attorneys, engineers, architects, physicians,
dentists, accountants, financial institutions, real estate companies, insurance companies, financial planners,
or corporate offices, and exclude manufacturing activities.
I.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
d. COMMERCIAL
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions of retail, service, entertainment or recreational
establishments and supporting office.
Auto-Related Commercial Establishment: A place of business serving auto-related needs including,
but not limited to: car rental, car wash, gas station, mechanic offering minor repairs, retail sales such as
auto parts, tire store, indoor car sales. Uses not included: major mechanical work; body work; painting;
steam cleaning; welding; outdoor car sales; storage of automobiles not in operating condition; commercial
parking Lot or commercial garage; or any work involving undue noise, glare, fumes or smoke,
all of which are considered auto-related industrial activities. See Article 6.
Entertainment Establishment: A place of business serving the amusement and recreational needs of
the community. Such facilities may include, but not limited to: cinemas, billiard parlors, teen clubs, dance
halls, or video arcades. Uses not included: Entertainment Establishment, adult.
Entertainment Establishment, Adult; Adult entertainment, in general; adult entertainment services
or adult entertainment services establishment (hereinafter referred to throughout the code
as “Adult entertainment”): Any establishment which sells, rents, leases, trades, barters, operates
on commission or fee, purveys, displays, or offers only to or for adults, products, goods of any nature,
images, reproductions, activities, opportunities for experiences or encounters, moving or still pictures,
entertainment, and/or amusement, distinguished by purpose and emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating by any means of communication, from one (1) person to another, to “Specified
Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” as herein defined in Section 1.2 of this Code. Such
establishment may or may not be open or available to the public generally, but shall exclude any person
under eighteen (18) years of age. It is the intent of this definition that determination as to whether or not
a specific establishment or activity falls within the context of regulation hereunder shall be based upon
the activity therein conducted or proposed to be conducted as set out above and in these regulations.
Such establishment shall not depend upon the name or title of the establishment used or proposed, and
it shall be irrespective of whether or not members of the public are invited to enter such establishment.
Thus, the terms “adult bookstore,” “adult massage parlor,” “adult motion picture theater,” “adult private
dancing,” and “adult escort service” are encompassed within this definition of “Adult entertainment”,
but the term “Adult entertainment” is not to be deemed limited by the enunciation of specific activities
listed before. Adult entertainment establishments are allowed in D2 industrial, subject to the limitations
set forth in Article 6, Table 13.
Adult entertainment- Legislative Intent.
As intended in previous zoning ordinances, most particularly, Zoning ordinances 11000 and 9500, this
ordinance intends to regulate Adult entertainment as herein defined, to minimize deleterious effects
on the neighborhood. These deleterious effects have been presented as evidence and relied upon for
adoption in previous adult entertainment legislation in zoning ordinances 9500 and 11000, and are also
relied upon herein. Such deleterious effects may include, but not be limited to, depreciation of values
of nearby and adjacent properties, deterioration in appearance of the areas in which they are located,
production of a skid row type of atmosphere, discouragement of residential uses in the area, and creation
of an erotically suggestive atmosphere on public ways used by minors. Moreover, in the development
and enforcement of restrictions on Adult entertainment in this code, this section and in Article 6, it is
I.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
acknowledged that adult entertainment have been found to have serious objectionable characteristics,
and to have a deleterious effect on adjacent businesses and residential areas. In making this finding, the
Commission has reasonably relied upon evidence of conditions within the City itself, evidence gathered
by other localities and communities, and evidence described in judicial opinions. For the protection and
welfare of the community, it is necessary, to locate Adult entertainment away from residential areas and
commercial areas, and particularly away from public facilities that are used frequently by minors, such
as schools, churches, parks, libraries, day care centers or nurseries, and to restrict Adult entertainment
to industrial areas.
Food Service Establishment: A place of business dedicated to the preparation and sale of food and
beverage for immediate consumption on or off site.
Alcohol Service Establishment: A place of business selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises, and where the sale of food may be incidental to the sale of such beverages. This includes
any establishment in receipt of a valid alcoholic beverage license from the state which permits the sale
for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages as a Use. Alcohol beverage service establishments
may include, but are not limited to: bars, taverns, cocktail lounges, nightclubs or supper clubs.
General Commercial: A place of business providing the sale and display of goods or sale of services
directly to the consumer, with goods available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises
by the purchaser. General commercial goods include, but are not limited to, clothing, food, furniture,
pharmaceuticals, books, art objects and the like. General commercial services include, but are not limited
to, barber shops; beauty salons; travel agencies; fortune tellers; retail dry cleaning; express delivery
service; health spas and fitness studios; photo studios; Funeral Homes; Animal Clinics; repair service
establishments, Employment Office; Public Storage Facilities, and the like. General Commercial services
exclude: Auto-Related or Marine-Related Establishments; Commercial Storage Facilities, Pawn
Shops, and the like.
Marine-Related Commercial Establishment: A place of business serving marine-related needs including
but not limited to: boat repairs, boat storage, boat servicing, boat rentals; or a place of business
provides marine-related retail including but not limited to: bait and tackle stores, boat sales, and marine
supplies stores. Uses not included are all industrial vessel paint and body work; and industrial major
engine work or overhaul, all of which are considered marine-related industrial activities.
Open Air Retail: A retail sales establishment operated substantially in the open air including, but not
limited to: farmers market, Flea Markets, and the like. Uses not included are: car sales, equipment
sales, boats sales, and home and garden supplies and equipment. See Article 6.
Place of Assembly: A commercial facility for public assembly including, but not limited to: arenas,
auditoriums, conference facilities, convention centers, exhibition halls, major sports facilities, theaters
and performing arts centers, and the like.
Recreational Establishment: A place of business providing group leisure activities, often requiring
equipment and open to the public with or without entry or activity fees. This may include, but is not limited
to: game courts, skating rinks, bowling alleys, commercial golf facility, gyms or sports rooms.
I.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
e. CIVIC
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions predominantly of community-oriented purposes
or objectives including those of not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts and culture, education,
recreation, religion, government, and the like.
Community Facility: A non-commercial facility established primarily for the benefit and service of
the general public of the community in which it is located. Such facilities include, but are not limited to:
community centers; City of Miami NET offices; and cultural facilities, such as libraries and museums.
Recreational Facility: A non-commercial facility, primarily an open space, serving the recreation needs
of the general public. This may include but is not limited to: golf courses, parks, camping facilities, playfields
and playgrounds.
Religious Facility: A facility used for regular organized religious worship and related activities.
Regional Activity Complex: A large facility encompassing at least one Principal Building with possible
Accessory Structures designed and outfitted as a venue for large assemblies, performance or events
intended to serve as a regional destination. Regional Activity Complexes shall be located in parcels
larger than (4) acres; shall be equipped to provide permanent seating for more than 4,000 patrons or
provide more than 100,000 square feet of exhibition space and shall provide Off-Street Parking for more
than 1,000 vehicles.
f. CIVIL SUPPORT
This category is intended to encompass land uses predominantly supportive of other urban Uses and
functions.
Community Support Facility: A facility providing basic services, for the benefit and service of the
population of the community in which it is located. Such facilities may include but are not limited to:
police and Fire Stations, Extended Care Facilities, Nursing Homes, convalescent homes, Continuing
Care Facility, and Assisted Living Facility or Adult Daycare Center as defined by Chapter 429, Florida
Statutes. See Article 6.
Infrastructure and Utilities: A facility or Structure related to the provision of roads, water and sewer
lines, electrical, telephone and cable transmission, and all other utilities and communication systems
necessary to the functioning of a community. See Article 6.
Major Facility: A large facility of an institutional nature including but not limited to Hospitals, public health
and social service facilities, research facilities, shelters, judicial Buildings, Jails, Detention Facilities,
work camps, cemeteries, mausoleums, Ambulance Services, Pharmaceutical Laboratories, or the like.
I.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Marina: A facility for storage, servicing, fueling, berthing, or securing of boats. The Use does not include
marine-related industrial activities.
Public Parking: A parking facility available to the general public for parking motor vehicles, including
parking lots or garages.
Rescue Mission: A facility providing personal assistance to individuals in need; such assistance to
individuals may include temporary shelter, food services provisions, counseling, instruction, medical
services, and other incidental services.
Transit Facility: A facility providing accommodations by public, private, or nonprofit entities for the conveyance
of persons from one place to another by means of a transportation system, including but not
limited to: bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal, airport, helistop or seaport.
g. EDUCATIONAL
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions connected with providing education, training,
or care of children and students of all ages.
Childcare: A facility where six (6) or more children are cared for on a part-time basis by day or by night
including after-school care. The term does not include community based residential facilities, Family Care
Homes, foster homes, group homes, rehabilitation or detention centers, orphanages, or other places
operating primarily for remedial care. See Article 6.
College / University: A facility for post-secondary education that grants associate, bachelor, master or
doctoral degrees, and may include research functions or professional schools.
Elementary School: A facility offering instruction at the elementary school level.
Learning Center: A facility offering to students training, tutoring or instruction in subjects such as languages,
music, fine arts or dance. This may include provision of electronic testing and distance learning.
Middle / High School: A facility offering instruction at the middle or high school level.
Pre-School: A facility offering care and instruction of children who are pre-elementary school age.
Research Facility: A facility for research and development that does not involve the use of human
testing, animal husbandry, incinerators, heavy equipment, mass manufacturing, fabrication, processing,
or sale of products. Any facility involving human testing, animal husbandry, and the use of incinerators
shall be considered a Major Facility.
Special Training / Vocational: A facility offering instruction or training in trades or occupations such
as secretarial, paralegal, business, beauty, barber, bartender, acupuncture, massage, design, fine arts,
I.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
music and dance or other similar vocations. This classification excludes training and education in any
activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone.
h. INDUSTRIAL
This category is intended to encompass land Use functions connected with a business or activity involving
manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, distribution, disposal, warehousing or bulk storage, trucking
and equipment facilities, and other business serving primarily industrial needs. Residential Uses are not
permitted except for live-aboard in commercial marinas, and limited work-live Uses.
Auto-Related Industrial Establishment: A facility conducting activities associated with the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical equipment; paint and body work;
major overhaul of engine or engine parts; vehicle impound or wrecking yard; outdoor vehicle sales,
storage or repair; and government vehicle maintenance facilities. This includes auto related Uses not
otherwise allowed within the commercial auto related establishment category.
Manufacturing and Processing: A facility primarily engaged in the manufacturing, processing, repair
or assembly of goods. Premises may include retail or wholesale sales.
Marine-Related Industrial Establishment: A facility conducting activities associated with the construction,
repair, and operation, storage, loading and unloading of boats, and other activities the primary
purpose of which is to facilitate the maritime industry. All work on vessels which exceed eight (8) feet
in width; all vessel paint and body work; and major engine work or overhaul, shall all be considered
marine-related industrial activity including but not limited to shipping, boatyards, marinas commercial
fishing, container yards and tug boat basins.
Products and Services: A public or private facility providing industrial and other services to individuals
or businesses. This includes but is not limited to Laundry / Dry Cleaning Plants; metal, machine or
welding shops. This also includes special services such as Pawn Shops, Pharmaceutical Laboratories,
Animal Kennels, Government Maintenance Facilities, Hiring Halls / Labor Pools, and Solid Waste Facilities.
See Article 6.
Storage and Distribution: A facility providing long-term or short-term storage, selling or distribution of
merchandise. This includes but is not limited to: container yards; crating, packing and shipping service;
heavy equipment sales, service and storage; storage, warehousing or distribution establishments; Public
Storage Facilities or Commercial Storage Facilities; outdoor storage of building materials; or Concrete
Batching Plants. See Article 6.
I.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
1.2 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
This section provides definitions for terms in this Code that are technical in nature or that might not be
otherwise reflect a common usage of the word. If a term is not defined in this Article, then the Zoning
Administrator shall determine the correct definition of the term.
Abutting: To reach or touch; to touch at the end or be contiguous with; join at a border or boundary;
terminate on. Abutting properties include properties across a street or alley.
Accessory Unit: See Ancillary Unit, in Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Accessory Structure: An Accessory Structure is a Structure customarily incidental and subordinate to
the Principal Structure and, unless otherwise specifically provided, located on the same premises. “On
the same premises” shall be construed as meaning on the same Lot or on a contiguous Lot in the same
ownership. Where a Building is attached to the Principal Building, it shall be considered part thereof,
and not an Accessory Structure.
Adaptive Use: Rehabilitation or renovation of existing Building(s) for any Use(s) other than the present
Use.
Adult: An adult is a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
Adult Daycare: A facility which provides limited supervision and basic services on a part-time basis by
day or evening, but not overnight, to three (3) or more adults other than the family/employee occupying
the premises. The term does not include community residential homes, nursing home facilities or institutions
for the aged. See Section 1.1 (Civil Support, Community Support Facility) and Article 6.
Affordable / Workforce Housing: Housing priced up to 120% of the area median income as certified
by the City’s Community Development Department.
Affordable Housing: Affordable Housing shall mean a Dwelling Unit, owner-occupied and/or rental
housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts
established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is at or below 60 percent of
Area Median Income as published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
and certified by the Department of Community and Economic Development.
Albedo: The ratio of light reflected by a surface.
Alcohol Service Establishment: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Allée: A regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along a Thoroughfare or Pedestrian
Passage.
I.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Alley: A Thoroughfare (not officially designated as a street) designated by a recorded plat, deed, or legal
instrument, to be a secondary means of vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise
Abutting a street; an Alley may connect to a vehicular driveway located to the rear of Lots providing
access to outbuildings, service areas and parking, and containing utility Easements.
Alterations, Structural: Structural alterations are any change, removal, replacement, reinforcement
or addition of beams, ceiling and floor joists, reinforced concrete floor slabs (except those on fill), load
bearing partitions, columns, exterior walls, stairways, roofs, corridors or other structural materials used in
a Building that support the said beams, ceiling and floor joists, load bearing partitions, columns, exterior
walls, stairways, roofs, or structural materials used in the Building or Structure. The term is applicable
to any Building or Structure or any part thereof, whether or not permanent or temporary shoring is used
during construction and whether or not additions to or rebuilding of the major portion of an existing
building are being accomplished.
Ambulance Service: A facility which provides emergency medical transportation or paramedical emergency
or trauma care en route to an extended care or medical facility. See Section 1.1 (Civil Support,
Major Facility).
Animal Clinic: A facility which provides medical and surgical care for sick animals, including overnight
boarding, and may include overnight boarding for seven (7) or less healthy animals, all within a completely
enclosed building. See Section 1.1 (Commercial, General Commercial).
Animal Kennel: A facility which provides boarding services for eight (8) or more animals. See Section
1.1 (Industrial, Products and Services).
Antennas, miscellaneous: Any roof-mounted Structure intended for the transmission or reception
of radar, radio, television, or telephone communications, excluding traditional single-family residential
television antennas, amateur radio antennas, satellite earth stations and microwave antennas.
Arcade: A covered pedestrian way within a building or along the side of a Building at the first floor, which
may provide access to shops along one (1) or more sides. See Article 4, Table 6.
Architectural Features: Prominent or significant parts or elements of a Building or Structure.
Architectural Style: The characteristic form and detail of Buildings from a particular historical period
or school of architecture.
Atlas, Miami 21: The atlas adopted under the Miami 21 Code.
Atrium: An indoor, roofed space whose height exceeds one Story and which does not contain a Function
or Use and is utilized primarily as a circulation or informal gathering space serving all occupants of
the Building.
I.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Attainable Mixed-Income Housing: Attainable Mixed-Income Housing shall mean a development
completely comprised of Extremely Low Income Housing, Affordable Housing, and Workforce Housing;
and may be subject to Density bonuses.
Attainable Workforce Housing: Attainable Workforce Housing shall mean a Development completely
comprised of Workforce Housing, servicing multiple income ranges between 60% of the Area Median
Income and 140% of the Area Median Income, as described in Section 3.16 of this Code.
Auto-Related Commercial Establishment: See Section 1.1. Commercial Use
Auto-Related Industrial Establishment: See Section 1.1, Industrial Use
Average Sidewalk Elevation: The average of the record profile grade elevation of each of the streets
Abutting a development, as determined and on file with the City of Miami Public Works Department.
Awning: A movable roof-like Structure, cantilevered or otherwise entirely supported from a Building,
used to shade or screen windows or doors.
Backbuilding: A single-story Structure with a maximum width of twelve (12) feet connecting a Principal
Building to an Outbuilding. See Article 4, Table 8, Diagram C.
Balcony: An unenclosed habitable Structure cantilevered from a Facade or Building Elevation.
Base Building Line: The officially mapped street lines. Lines so established may fall within the boundaries
of Lots and shall be used instead of the Lot lines adjacent to the streets in determining the Layers
and Setbacks.
Bed and Breakfast: See Section 1.1, Lodging Use.
Bicycle Lane: A lane dedicated for bicycle use demarcated by striping or otherwise separated from
vehicle lanes.
Bicycle Rack Space: Parking space for any two wheel alternative mode of transportation including:
bicycle, scooter, motorcycle, Segway®, etc.
Bicycle Route: A Thoroughfare designated for shared use of bicycles and automobiles.
Block: The aggregate of private Lots, passages, rear lanes and Alleys, the perimeter of which abuts
Thoroughfares.
Block Face: The aggregate of all the Building Facades on one side of a block. The Block Face provides
I.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
the context for establishing architectural harmony.
Botanical Garden: A garden of collected growing plants established for the benefit of the Public to serve
as an educational, recreational or scientific center.
Bonus Capacity: The additional Building Capacity awarded for participation in the Public Benefits Program,
as defined in Article 3. Section 3.14.
Brownfield: An area having been used primarily as an industrial or commercial site with perceived or
actual presence of environmentally hazardous substance.
Buffer: An area of land, including landscaping, berms, walls, Fences, and Building Setbacks, which is
located between land Uses of different characters and is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the
one intense Use on a residential or vacant parcel.
Buildable Area: The portion of a Lot remaining after required Setbacks have been provided. Buildings
may be placed in any part of the Buildable area, but limitations on percent of the Lot which may be
covered by Buildings may require Open Space within the buildable area.
Building: Any Structure having a solid roof intended for shelter or enclosing of persons, animals, chattels,
property, equipment or a process of any kind or nature, excluding freestanding tents, freestanding
awnings, and cabanas and screened enclosures.
Building Capacity: See Floor Area.
Building Code: The State of Florida Building Code.
Building Configuration: The form of a Building, based on its massing, Private Frontage, and Height.
Building Disposition: The placement of a Building on its Lot.
Building Function: The Uses accommodated by a Building and its Lot. Functions are categorized as
Restricted, Limited, or Open, according to the Intensity of the Use.
Building Height: The vertical extent of a Building measured in Stories.
Building Permit: The permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to the City Code.
Build-to line: A line established within a given Lot indicating where the outer edge of a Structure must
be located.
I.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
By Right: A use allowed pursuant to zoning review and approval of a Building Permit or issuance of a
Certificate of Use under Article 7, Section 7.1.2.1. Permitted Uses.
Canopy: A fixed-roofed Structure which provides shade or protection and is in whole or in part selfsupporting
with open sides.
Capacity: See Floor Area.
Car Shelter: A Structure made of canvas, aluminum, or similar materials, or any combination thereof,
on movable framing for the shade and shelter of one (1) or two (2) private passenger vehicles.
Carport: A portion of a Principal residential Building or a Building accessory to a residential Use designed
to be used for shelter of motor vehicles, unenclosed at the vehicular entry side and for an area
at least equal to twenty percent (20%) of the area of the outer surface of walls, which might otherwise
be constructed along its entire remaining perimeter. Where enclosure exceeds this amount, the shelter
shall be construed to be a garage.
Certificate of Occupancy: As defined by the Florida Building Code.
Certificate of Use: An official City document verifying that a particular Use is in compliance with applicable
sections of this Miami 21 Code pursuant to the requirements of Article IV, Section 2-207 of the
City Code and Section 7.1.2.1 of this Code.
City: The City of Miami, Florida.
City Code: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Miami.
City Commission: The City Commission of the City of Miami.
Civic: Uses held in private or public ownership but functioning for community purposes such as religious,
cultural, environmental, or educational uses. See Section 1.1.
Civic Building: A Building designed specifically for a Civic Function.
Civic Institution (CI): A zone with uses primarily dedicated to Functioning for community purposes
such as, cultural, educational, environmental, governmental, public transit, public parking and religious
facilities. See Section 1.1.
Civic Space (CS): A zone with mainly outdoor area dedicated for functioning for community purposes.
Civic Space Types: Open Space defined by the combination of certain physical constants including
the relationship between their intended Use, their size, their landscaping and their enfronting Buildings.
I.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
See Article 4, Table 7.
Civic Zone: See Article 4, Table 1
Civil Support Uses: See Section 1.1
Code: The Miami 21 Code. May also be referred to herein as this Code.
College / University: See Section 1.1, Education Use
Commercial Storage Facility: A facility providing for the storage of office furnishings, archive records
and general personal property of businesses, agencies and professionals. Such personal property is
limited to furniture and other household goods and retail merchandise to be sold at nearby establishments.
Storage of heavy equipment or any property that may be deemed hazardous, such as property
which is inflammable, combustible, explosive or dangerous is prohibited. See Section 1.1 (Commercial,
Storage and Distribution).
Commercial Vehicle: A Commercial Vehicle is any vehicle designed, intended or used for transportation
of people, goods, or things, not including private passenger vehicles and trailers for private nonprofit
transport of goods or boats.
Common Lawn: See Article 4, Table 7.
Community Facility: See Section 1.1, Civic Use.
Community Garden: A grouping of garden plots available for small-scale cultivation, generally to
residents of apartments and other dwelling types without private gardens. Community gardens should
accommodate individual storage sheds.
Community Residence: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Community Support Facility: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Comprehensive Plan: The Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan.
Configuration: The form of a building based on its massing, Private Frontage and Height.
Construction, Actual: The placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in
a permanent manner; except that, where demolition, excavation, or removal of an existing Structure
has been substantially begun preparatory to new construction, such excavation, demolition, or removal
shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be Continuously carried on without
interruption, except for just cause, until the completion of the new construction involved.
I.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Content, Adult: see Adult Entertainment; Specified Anatomical Areas; Specified Sexual Activities; see
section 1.1 Commercial Use.
Context: Surroundings made up of the particular combination of elements that create specific character
in the area.
Continuously: As defined with reference to Actual Construction defined herein, continuously shall
mean that work is underway for at least fifty percent (50%) of the working days (Monday through Friday,
national holidays excluded) since construction began. See also Construction, Actual.
Cool Roof: A roof that reflects the sun’s heat and emits absorbed radiation back into the atmosphere.
Corridor: A lineal geographic system incorporating transportation or Greenways.
Courtyard: Open Space, partially defined by walls or Buildings as regulated by this Code. See Article
4, Table 7.
CPTED: Crime Prevention through Environmental Design.
Crew Quarters: Accommodations designed and outfitted to accommodate on a non-permanent basis
the crew of vessels being serviced or temporarily stored at established Marinas or Marine Related Industrial
Establishments allowed, in an incidental capacity, on the same property where the primary use
which they support is established. Crew Quarters’ facilities shall be commensurate to the facilities they
serve. See Article 6.
Curb: The edge of the vehicular pavement detailed as a raised concrete or stone element, or flush
with a swale.
Density: The number of Dwelling Units within a standard measure of land area, usually given as units
per acre.
Design Speed: The velocity at which a Thoroughfare is designed for vehicular use.
Development: Development shall have the meaning given it in section 380.04, Florida Statutes.
Development Capacity: see Floor Area.
Director: Unless otherwise specified, the term “Director” shall mean the Director of the Department of
Planning for the City.
I.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Disposition: The placement of a Building on its Lot. See Article 4, Table 8.
District (D): A zone intended to accommodate Uses which because of their specialized performance,
Scale or impact should not be incorporated into the Neighborhood structure.
Dock: See Pier.
Dormitory: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Drive-through / Drive-in Facility: A place of business including drive-through banks or teller windows,
drive-through eating and drinking establishments, drive-through windows at liquor or other stores, or at
laundry and dry cleaning agencies, car washes, and similar facilities, but excludes automotive service
stations. See Article 6.
Driveway: A vehicular lane within a Lot, usually leading to a garage or carport. A Driveway in the First
Layer may be used for parking if it is less than the width allowed in the applicable transect, above which
dimension it becomes subject to the constraints of a parking lot.
Dwelling Unit: Residence of a single housekeeping unit. See Article 6.
Easement: A legal instrument, in a form approved by the City Attorney and recorded in the county records,
that allows access through real property of the conveyor.
Educational Use: See Section 1.1.
Elementary School: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
Elevation, Building: An exterior wall of a Building not along a Frontage Line (See Facade).
Elevation, Floor: Height of floor level.
Eligible Historic Resource: Archeological sites, individual historic resources, contributing Buildings
within a historic district, as qualified under Chapter 23 of the City Code.
Employment Office: A place of business, other than a hiring hall or labor pool, offering individual job
recruitment by specification of job qualifications and conduct of individual interviews by placement specialists
onsite to meet those job specifications. See Section 1.1 (Commercial, General Commercial).
Encroachment: Building element permissible within required Setback.
Enfront: To place an element along a Frontage Line, as in “Porches enfront the street.”
I.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Entertainment Establishment: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Entertainment Establishment, Adult: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Entrance, Principal: The main point of access of pedestrians into a Building.
Established Setback Area: A defined area wherein the Setbacks provided by the Transect designation
are superseded by those originally adopted for a special district under Ordinance 11000, and which
continue and are listed in Article 3, Section 3.3.6 of this Miami 21 Code. The boundaries of Established
Setback Areas are illustrated on Article 4, Diagram 10.
Exception: Permit approved pursuant to the requirements of Article 7.
Extended Care Facility or Nursing Home: An institution which is licensed by the State of Florida to
provide health care or medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours for three (3)
or more persons not related to the governing authority by blood, marriage or adoption. See Section 1.1
(Civil Support, Community Support Facility) and Article 6.
Extensive Green Roof: An area atop a roof surface of a Building surfaced with soil and Florida Friendly
Landscaping that are appropriate for South Florida green roof systems, including ground cover, grasses,
herbs, and flowering herbaceous plants, which require little or no maintenance and no permanent irrigation
system. This area will serve to retain stormwater runoff and to mitigate the Heat Island Effect. The
depth of the growing medium shall be a minimum of two (2) inches and a maximum of six (6) inches.
Extremely Low Income Housing: Extremely Low Income Housing shall mean a Dwelling Unit, owneroccupied
and/or rental housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or
less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is at
or below 30 percent of Area Median Income as published by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and certified by the Department of Community and Economic Development.
Facade: The exterior wall of a Building that is set along a Frontage Line. (See Elevation, Building).
Family Care Home: A family care home is an occupied residence, registered and licensed by the State
of Florida, where five (5) or fewer preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family receive
care on a regular part-time basis by day or by night and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any
of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. See Section 1.1 (Residential, Community
Residence) and Article 6.
Fence: A permeable metal or wooden wall, independent of a Building, located along a Frontage line.
See Article 4, Table 6.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
I.21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Fire Station: A Building housing fire equipment and firefighters. See Section 1.1 (Civil Support, Community
Support Facility).
Flea Market: An Open Area or Building used for occasional or periodic sale of goods by individual sellers
for limited periods of time. See Section 1.1 (Commercial, Open Air Retail).
Floating Structure: A floating barge-like entity, with or without accommodations built thereon, which
is not primarily used as a means of transportation on water, but serves purposes or provides services
typically associated with a Structure or other improvement to real property. The term “Floating Structure”
includes, but is not limited to, each entity used as a residence, place of business, office, hotel or motel,
restaurant or lounge, clubhouse, meeting facility, storage or parking facility, mining platform, dredge,
dragline, or similar facility or entity represented as such. Floating Structures, as defined herein, are expressly
excluded from the definition of the term “vessel” provided in section 327.02(27), Florida Statutes
(1989), and is also excluded from the definition of “private pleasure craft.” Incidental movement upon
water shall not, in and of itself, preclude an entity from classification as a Floating Structure. A Floating
Structure is expressly included as a type of tangible personal property (from section 192.001 (17),
Florida Statutes (1989)). See illustration included with Ordinance No. 10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Floorplate: The total indoor and outdoor Floor Area of any given Story of a Building, measured to the
exterior of the wall or balcony.
Floor Area: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the outside walls of the Building including hallways,
stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns and other features, and parking and loading areas,
and excluding only interior Atria and open air spaces such as exterior corridors, Porches, balconies and
roof areas. Also means Building or Development Capacity.
Floor Lot Ratio (FLR): The multiplier applied to the Lot Area that determines the maximum Floor Area
allowed above grade in a given Transect Zone.
Food Service Establishment: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Forecourt: See Article 4, Table 6.
Frontage: The area between a Building Facade and the vehicular lanes of a Thoroughfare or the pavement
of a Pedestrian Passage.
Frontage, Principal: That Frontage facing the public space such as a Thoroughfare of higher pedestrian
importance (i.e., traffic volume, number of lanes, etc.).
Frontage, Private: The Layer between the Frontage Line and the Principal Building Facade. The
Structures and landscaping within the Private Frontage may be held to specific standards regarding the
depth of the setback and the combination of architectural elements such as Fences, Stoops, Porches
I.22
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
and Galleries.
Frontage, Public: The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the Frontage Line. Elements
of the Public Frontage include the curb, Sidewalk, planter, street tree, streetlight, street furniture, etc.
Frontage, Secondary: That Frontage facing the public space such as a Thoroughfare that is of lesser
pedestrian importance (i.e., traffic volume, number of lanes, etc.).
Frontage Line: Property Line or Base Building Line Abutting a public space, such as a Plaza or Thoroughfare,
whether at the front, rear, or side of a Lot. Facades parallel to Frontage Lines define the
public realm and are therefore more regulated than the Elevations that coincide with other Lot Lines.
Function: The land Use allowed on property according to this Code.
Funeral Home: A facility licensed by the state and containing suitable storage room for the dead including
embalming facilities, and may also provide rooms for the display of the dead or ceremonies connected
with burial or cremation. See Section 1.1 (General Commercial).
Gallery: A covered pedestrian area adjoining the side of a Building on any floor, which may provide
access along one or more sides. See Article 4, Table 7.
Garden: See Article 4, Table 7.
General Commercial: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
General Urban Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Government Maintenance Facilities: Building, land, or Structure designed and intended to be used
in the routine upkeep and repair of government owned or leased equipment. See Section 1.1 (Civil
Support, Products and Services).
Green: See Article 4, Table 7.
Green Corridor: See Greenway.
Green Space: An Open Space outdoors, at grade, unroofed, landscaped and free of impervious surfaces.
See Article 4, Table 7.
Greenway: An Open Space Corridor in largely natural condition which may include paths for bicycles
and pedestrians.
I.23
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Habitable Rooms: Rooms designed and used for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or working or combinations
thereof. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage rooms, laundry and utility
spaces, basement recreation rooms, and similar areas are not considered Habitable Rooms.
Habitable Space: Building space which Use involves human presence with direct view of the enfronting
streets or public or private Open Space, excluding Parking Garages, self-service storage facilities,
warehouses, and display windows separated from retail activity.
Hardscape: The nonliving portions of a building’s landscaping, such as roads, sidewalks, courtyards
and parking lots.
Heat Island Effect: An elevated temperature in an urban area when compared to rural areas, typically
caused by the increased presence of dark, heat absorbing materials, such as asphalt and dark roofs,
in urban areas.
Height: See Building Height.
Hiring Hall / Labor Pool: A place of business providing employment services for laborers. Such services
generally involve short term hiring of unskilled manual help, with little or no qualifications required, or
the need of individual interviews by placement specialists. See Section 1.1 (Industrial, Products and
Services).
Historic Preservation Ordinance: An Ordinance codified in Chapter 23 of the City Code dedicated to
the preservation of the City of Miami’s Historic Property and historic resources as a significant goal in
the City’s overall vision for its future.
Historic Property: See Eligible Historic Resource.
Home Occupation: See Home Office.
Home Office: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Hospital: An institution having an appropriate license or certificate of need issued by the State of Florida
and providing primary health, medical, or surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity or abnormal mental conditions; and may include related accessory facilities such as laboratories,
outpatient or training facilities. See Section 1.1 (Civil Support, Major Facilities).
Hotel: See Section 1.1, Lodging Use.
House Barge / Houseboat: A Floating Structure used as a residence. A vessel, a private pleasure craft,
consisting of a hull and superstructure supported in the water by integral flotation devices, not suitable
for rough water, and designed and manufactured to be self-propelled. See Article 6.
I.24
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Housing for the Elderly: Housing development for residents aged fifty five (55) and over.
Industrial Use: See Section 1.1.
Infill: A development project within existing urban fabric, on a vacant site within a built-up area.
Infrastructure and Utilities: See Section 1.1, Civil Support.
Inn: See Section 1.1, Lodging Use.
Inside Turning Radius: The curved edge of a Thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside
edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the Turning Radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing
distance and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn.
Intensity: The magnitude of development measured by Floor Lot Ratio permitted in the Restricted,
Limited and Open categories of a Transect Zone.
Intensive Green Roof: An area atop a roof surface of a Building surfaced with soil and a variety of
Florida-Friendly plants that are appropriate for South Florida green roof systems, including herbaceous
plants and shrubs, and small trees, which require professional maintenance and an advanced green
roof irrigation system. This area will serve the purpose of retaining stormwater runoff and mitigating the
Heat Island Effect. The depth of the growing medium shall be a minimum of six (6) inches. Rooftop
farms, urban roof farms or vegetable farms on roofs are considered Intensive Green Roofs, requiring
higher nutrient applications and focused maintenance. Rooftop farming areas of an Intensive Green
Roof must be planted with appropriate plan material during non-farming periods.
Jail / Detention Facilities: A Building designated by law or regularly used for the confinement of persons
held in lawful custody. See Section 1.1 (Civil Support, Major Facility).
Large Scale Commercial: A commercial business occupying more than 55,000 square feet of Floor
Area with a regional market area, including but not limited to retail or wholesale sales, membership
warehouse clubs, discount stores and department stores. See Article 6.
Laundry / Dry Cleaning Plant: An establishment providing washing, dry cleaning, dyeing, pressing,
or special similar services, not open to or for the direct use of the general public. See Section 1.1 (Industrial,
Products and Services).
Layer: A range of depth of a Lot within which certain elements are permitted as regulated in this Code.
See Article 4, Table 8, Diagram D.
Layer, First: The area of a Lot comprised of the distance between the Base Building Line and the
I.25
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
required Setback including the Private Frontage.
Layer, Second: That portion of the Lot behind the First Layer which includes that portion of the Building
which Enfronts the Thoroughfare.
Layer, Third: That portion of the Lot that is not within the First and Second Layer and is least visible
from the Thoroughfare.
Learning Center: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
LEED: Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design.
Legacy Structure: An existing Structure within an NRD area which is maintained or re-purposed by the
property owner that contributes to the character of the District. The Structure must maintain its physical
integrity so that it sufficiently conveys its original character, possess integrity of design, setting, material,
workmanship, feeling and association, and meets specific criteria of the District.
Light Court: See Article 4, Table 6.
Liner: A Building or part of a Building with Habitable Space specifically designed to enfront a public
space, masking a function without capacity to monitor public space, such as a parking lot, Parking Garage
or storage facility.
Live-Work: See Section 1.1, Residential Uses
Loading Space: An area in which goods and products are moved on and off a vehicle, including the
stall or berth and the apron or maneuvering room incidental thereto.
Lodging Use: See Section 1.1
Lodging Unit: Attached or semidetached living quarters comprised of furnished room(s) of approximately
two hundred (200) gross square feet or more in area, including sanitary facilities but with only limited
kitchen facilities, if any; not qualifying as a Dwelling Unit or efficiency apartment; occupied by transients
on a rental or lease basis for limited periods of time.
Lot: A Lot is any individual Lot, tract or parcel of land, intended as a single Building site or unit, having
an assigned number or numbers, letter or letters, or other name through which it may be identified for
development purposes. A Lot may also be any combination of Lots, tracts, parcels or other areas of land
established by acceptable legal joinder, delineated by a closed boundary and assigned a number, letter
or other name through which it may be identified, intended as a single unit for development purposes.
Lot Area: Lot area shall be the area within the Lot Property Lines, excluding any portions of street
I.26
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
rights-of-way or other required dedications.
Lot, Conforming: A parcel of land meeting the requirements of this Code as to dimensions (width,
depth, or area) and access.
Lot, Corner: A Lot or parcel of land Abutting two (2) or more Thoroughfares at their intersection, or two
(2) parts of the same Thoroughfare forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees.
Lot Coverage: The area of the Lot occupied by all Buildings, excluding Structures such as decks,
pools, and trellises.
Lot, Interior: A Lot Abutting only one (1) Thoroughfare.
Lot, Nonconforming: A parcel of land with dimensions or access not meeting minimum requirements
of this Code. See Article 7, Section 7.2.1.
Lot, Through: A Lot other than a Corner Lot, and with Frontage on more than one (1) Thoroughfare;
Alleys shall not be considered for purposes of this definition.
Lot Line: The boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a Lot.
Lot Width: The length of the narrowest dimension Frontage Line of a Lot.
Low Income Housing: As established by the City’s Community Development Department.
Major Facility: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Major Recreational Equipment: Vehicles including travel trailers, pickup campers, converted trucks
or buses, motorized homes, tent campers, tents, or other short-term housing or shelter arrangements
and devices, boats and boat trailers, combinations thereof, and other similar equipment, and trailers,
cases, and boxes for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
Manufacturing and Processing: See Section 1.1, Industrial Use.
Marina: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Marine-related Industrial Facility: See Section 1.1, Industrial Use.
Marine-related Commercial Establishment: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Market Rate Housing: As established by the City’s Community Development Department.
I.27
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Microbrewery: An establishment that is primarily a manufacturing facility, where beer is produced for
wider distribution and consumption on premises, with a maximum production of 15,000 barrels of beer
per year. The establishment shall include retail sales, a tasting room, and/or a restaurant where beer
manufactured onsite is served. See Article 6.
Micro Dwelling Unit: A small Multi-Family Residential Dwelling Unit type that shall include sanitary
facilities and kitchen facilities. See Article 6. Table 13.
Middle / High-School: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
Minor Accessories: An optional part fitted to perform an additional function or enhance performance.
For Recreational Watercraft these include masts, antennae vent stacks and windshields.
Mitigation: Measures taken to eliminate, minimize, or compensate for damages from development activity.
Multi-Family Housing: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Natural Features: Physical characteristics of a property that are not man made.
Natural Zone or T1 Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Navigable Waterway: The navigable part of a waterway, centrally located with respect to the theoretical
axis of the waterway (or the axis of the improved channel of the Miami River) which provides a throughway
or access aisle for manned vessels.
Neighborhood: An urbanized area that is primarily Residential. A Neighborhood shall be based upon a
partial or entire Standard Pedestrian Shed. The physical center of the Neighborhood should be located
at an important traffic intersection associated with a Civic or Commercial use.
Neighborhood Conservation District (NCD): A zoning overlay district. See Section 3.12.
Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD): An overlay zoning district. See Article 3, Section 3.12.3.
NET: City of Miami’s Neighborhood Enhancement Team.
Nonconforming Lot: See Article 7, Section 7.2.1.
Nonconforming Site Improvements: See Article 7, Section 7.2.1.
Nonconforming Structure: See Article 7, Section 7.2.1.
Nonconforming Use: See Article 7, Section 7.2.1.
I.28
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Nursing Home or Extended Care Facility: An institution which is licensed by the State of Florida to
provide health care or medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours for three (3)
or more persons not related to the governing authority by blood, marriage or adoption. See Section
1.1 (Civil Support, Community Support Facility) and Article 6.
Office: See Section 1.1, Office Use.
Office Use: See Section 1.1.
Open Air Retail: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Open Space: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved by permanent Buildings and
open to the sky, excluding open parking areas; such space shall be reserved for public or private Use.
Open Spaces may include Parks, Greens, Squares, Courtyards, Gardens, Playgrounds, Paseos (when
designed predominantly for pedestrians), and pedestrian paths or associated landscaped areas.
Outbuilding: A Building, usually located towards the rear of the same Lot as a Principal Building. It is
sometimes connected to the Principal Building by a Backbuilding.
Park: A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation. See Article
4, Table 7. Also known as Public Park.
Parking Area: Any area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots and garages,
driveways, garages serving residential Uses, and Thoroughfares.
Parking Garage or Parking Structure: A Structure containing vehicular parking, including mechanical
parking systems.
Parking, Off-site: Spaces provided for vehicles and located outside of the boundaries of the Lots to
be served.
Parking, Off-street: Any land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots
and garages, driveways and garages serving residential uses, but excluding areas of Thoroughfares.
See Articles 3 and 4.
Parking, Tandem: The placement of vehicles one behind the other as opposed to side by side.
Parking, Underground: Parking in which the ceiling or roof of the top level does not rise above any
adjoining public Sidewalk.
Paseo: An access way limited to pedestrian use connecting streets, plazas, alleys, garages and other
I.29
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
existing and future public spaces abutting a property. A Paseo shall have a clear path of a miminum
of ten (10) feet in width that is restricted to pedestrian use and lined with active uses having frequent
doors and windows. A Paseo may be roofed above the first floor for (100%) of its length, but any roof
portion of Paseo shall not be counted as Open Space.
Pawnshop: Establishments which provide loans upon delivery of personal goods or other chattel as
security and sell those same items as a secondhand retail service. See Section 1.1 (Industrial, Products
and Services).
Pedestal: In T6 Zones, that portion of a Building up to the eighth Story. Also known as podium.
Pedestrian Orientation: The characteristics of an area where the location and access to Buildings,
types of Uses permitted on the street level, and storefront design relate to the needs of persons traveling
on foot.
Pedestrian Passage: An Open Space connecting other public spaces, that is restricted to pedestrian
use and limited vehicular access that connects Thoroughfares, Plazas, Alleys, Garages and other public
use spaces, Pedestrian Passage shall have frequent doors and windows.
Pedestrian Shed: An area, approximately circular, that is centered on a common destination. A Pedestrian
Shed is applied to determine the approximate size of a Neighborhood. A Standard Pedestrian
Shed is one-quarter (1/4) mile radius, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. A
Linear Pedestrian Shed is elongated to follow a commercial corridor, measuring one-quarter (¼) mile
out from the center line of the corridor. It has been shown that provided with a pedestrian environment,
most people will walk this distance rather than drive. The outline of the shed must be refined according
to actual site conditions, particularly along Thoroughfares. The common destination should have the
present or future capacity to accommodate Transect Zones successional in Density to its surroundings.
A Long Pedestrian Shed is one-half (1/2) mile radius, and may be used for mapping a Transit Oriented
Development (TOD) when transit is present or proposed. (Sometimes called a “walkshed” or “walkable
catchment”).
Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF): A facility for the provision of personal wireless services,
as defined by the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. A PWSF is any facility for the transmission
or reception of personal wireless services, which may consist of an antenna array, transmission cables,
equipment shelter or Building, access road, mount, and a guy system. Such facilities may include “monopole”
or “lattice tower (tower)” Structures. See Section 1.1, (Civil Support, Infrastructure and Utilities),
and Article 6.
Pervious Pavement System: A porous surface system with a stabilized base that allows water from
precipitation and other sources to pass directly through, thereby reducing the runoff from a site, allowing
groundwater recharge, and naturally cooling the surface through evaporation of water from pavement
voids or from beneath.
Pharmaceutical Laboratories: Pharmaceutical laboratories are facilities equipped and intended for
the testing of pharmaceutical products, particularly their effects on the human body. Such research
I.30
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
primarily entails the evaluation of the absorption, elimination, bioavailability and pharmacodynamics of
medications administered to research participants. Due to the standard protocols associated with such
research, test subjects must remain on-site for prolonged periods including overnight stays. See Section
1.1 (Industrial, Products and Services).
Pier: A platform extending from shore over water used to secure and protect vessels or allow pedestrian
access to extend over water. See Article 6.
Place of Assembly: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Planter: The element of the public streetscape which accommodates street trees. Planters may be
continuous or individual and separated.
Playground: See Article 4, Table 7.
Plaza: See Article 4, Table 7.
Porch: An open air room appended to a Building, with floor and roof but no walls on the sides facing
Frontages.
Porte-cochére: See Carport.
Pre-School: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
Primary-Secondary Grid: Thoroughfare designations appearing on a plan adopted under this Code or
a Special Area Plan. See Article 3, Section 3.9.
Principal Building: A Structure used to enclose or house the primary Use(s) located on a Lot; or the
main Building on a Lot, usually located toward the front.
Principal Dwelling Unit: See Single-Family Residence.
Product and Services: See Section 1.1, Industrial Uses.
Property Line: Demarcation of private property ownership.
Public: Facilities or land owned or operated by a governmental organization.
Public Benefits Program: See Article 3, Section 3.14.
I.31
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Public Parking: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Public Storage Facilities: An establishment containing separate, secured self-storage areas or lockers
used for the temporary storage of household items and seasonal or recreational vehicles, small boats,
trailers etc. These facilities cater primarily to the needs of nearby residents. See Section 1.1 (Commercial,
General Commercial) and Article 6.
Recreational Establishment: See Section 1.1, Commercial Use.
Recreational Facility: See Section 1.1, Civic Use.
Recreational Watercraft: A vessel or craft designed and licensed to move across or through water,
designed and outfitted exclusively for recreational use.
Religious Facility: See Section 1.1, Civic Use.
Research Facility: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
Rescue Mission: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Residential Use: See Section 1.1.
Retail Frontage Line: Frontage Lines designated on a Special Area Plan that require the ground level
to be available for retail Use.
Right-of-Way, Public : That land held in trust by the City between the base building lines, including the
sidewalk, swale and parkway area, and the roadway, street and highway.
Roof Terrace: An outdoor space accessible to Building occupants that is designed to provide elevated
views of the surrounding area. The terrace shall be located beyond the second story of a Building with
a minimum size of eight hundred (800) square feet, consisting primarily of Florida Friendly Landscaping
and high-albedo pavement, and may include container gardens and rooftop farming. Extensive,
Intensive or a combination of Extensive and Intensive Green Roof systems may also be provided as
additional landscape.
Rowhouse: A Dwelling Unit that shares a party wall with another Dwelling Unit of the same type.
Rural Zone or T2 Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Scale: The spatial relationship among Structures along a street or block front, including height, bulk and
yard relationships. Scale also refers to the proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another
I.32
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
and to the human figure.
Schools: Any public, parochial, private, charitable or non-profit school, college or university, other than
trade or business schools, which may include instructional and recreational uses, living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for students, teachers and employees,
including the Educational Uses such as: pre-school, elementary school, middle school, high school,
college and university.
Screening: Visually shielding or obscuring one Structure or Use from another by a Liner Building, fencing,
wall, or densely planted vegetation.
Secondary Grid: See Primary-Secondary Grid.
Setback: The distance from the Base Building Line to the point where a Building may be constructed.
This area must be maintained clear of permanent Structures with the exception of encroachments described
in each Transect Zone.
Shared Parking Standards: An accounting for parking spaces that are available to more than one
function.
Shopfront: See Article 4, Table 6.
Sidewalk: The paved layer of the Public Frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity.
Single-Family Residence: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Solar Reflectance: The fraction of solar energy reflected by a material.
Solid Waste Facility: Facility for the disposition of unwanted or discarded material including garbage
with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. See Section 1.1 (Industrial, Products and Services).
Special Area Plan: See Article 3, Section 3.9.
Special Training Facility / Vocational: See Section 1.1, Educational Use.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Those areas of the human body, less than completely and opaquely
covered, which consist of: (a) male and female genitals or pubic region; (b) male or female buttocks,
anus, anal cleft, or cleavage; (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
or (d) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See Section 1.1 (Commercial, Entertainment
Establishment, Adult).
I.33
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Specified Sexual Activities: Those activities which, when described, displayed, exhibited, simulated,
or depicted by whatsoever medium in an adult entertainment service establishment: (a) show the human
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, or being aroused to a state of sexual stimulation, (b) show
acts of human masturbation, human sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or sexual acts between humans
and animals; (c) show one (1) human being fondling or touching erotically the genitals, pubic area,
buttock, anus, or female breast of another human being. See Section 1.1 (Commercial Entertainment
Establishment, Adult).
Square: See Article 4, Table 7.
Stall / Berth: The space where vehicles are placed for parking or loading or unloading operations.
Stationing: The placing or positioning of a given movable item on a given parcel of land for period of
time exceeding 12 hours.
Stoop: A small stair, landing or ramp connecting a Building entrance to the Sidewalk. Also See Article
4, Table 6.
Storage and Distribution: See Section 1.1, Industrial Use.
Story: A level within a Building by which Height is measured.
Streetscape: The urban element that establishes the major part of the public realm. The streetscape is
composed of Thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and Sidewalks
or paths for pedestrians) as well as the amenities of the Public Frontages (street trees and plantings,
benches, streetlights, paving, street furniture, etc.), and the visible Private Frontages (Building Facades
and Building Elevations, Porches, yards, Fences, etc.).
Streetscreen: A freestanding wall required in certain Transect Zones built along the Frontage Line, or
coplanar with the Facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the Thoroughfare. See
Article 4, Table 8.
Structure: A Structure is anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires fixed location on
the ground or attachment to something having fixed location on the ground or on or below the surface
of the ground or water.
Sub-Urban Zone or T3 Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Terminated Vista: A location at the axial conclusion of a Thoroughfare. A Building located at a Terminated
Vista designated on a Special Area Plan is required to be designed in response to the axis.
Terrace: See Article 4, Table 6.
I.34
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Thoroughfare: A vehicular way incorporating moving lanes and parking lanes within a right-of-way as
part of an interconnected network for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle mobility.
Tower: In T6 Zones that portion of a Building that extends above the Pedestal.
Towing Service: Establishment which provides for the removal and temporary storage of vehicles but
does not include disposal, permanent disassembly, salvage or accessory storage of inoperable vehicles.
Townhouse: See Rowhouse.
Transect: A system of ordering human habitats in a range from the most natural to the most urban.
Transect Zones describe the physical character of place at any Scale, according to the Density and
Intensity of land use and urbanism.
Transect Zone (T-Zone): The identification of areas of varying Density whose character is determined
by the requirements for Use, Height, Setback and the form of Building and the form of the enfronting
public streetscape. The elements are determined by their location on the Transect scale. The T-Zones
are: T1 Natural, T2 Rural, T3 Sub-Urban, T4 Urban General, T5 Urban Center, and T6 Urban Core, CS
Civic Space, CI Civic Institutional, CI-HD Civic Institution – Health District, D1 Work Place, D2 Industrial
and D3 Waterfront Industrial. Within T3 through T6 Zones are additional categories, Restricted (R),
Limited (L) and Open (O), and each category shall also be considered a T-Zone.
Transit Corridor: A designation established by the City involving an area not exceeding a one-quarter
(1/4) mile radius from a non-limited access thoroughfare that included designated transit stop locations
and is served by one or more mass transit route(s) with designated transit vehicle(s) operating at an
average of ten (10) minute or less headway Monday thru Friday between the hours of 7am thru 7pm.
Multiple transit routes or types of transit vehicles may be added cumulatively under this definition for
the purpose of parking reductions.
Transit Facility: See Section 1.1, Civil Support Use.
Transit Oriented Development (TOD): A designation established by the City involving an area not
exceeding a one-half (1/2) mile radius from a convergence of modes of transit, or a train station.
Transition Line: A horizontal line spanning the full width of a Facade, expressed by a material change
or by a continuous horizontal articulation such as a cornice or a balcony.
Transmission Towers: Freestanding Structures intended for the support of antennas used in the reception
and relay of radar, radio, cellular, television or telephone communications.
Travel Trailer / Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular, portable Structure built on a chassis, designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation purposes. This includes pickup
I.35
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
campers, converted trucks, converted buses, converted automobiles, tent or pop-out campers, tents,
or other short-term housing or shelter arrangements.
Two-Family Residence: See Section 1.1, Residential Use.
Type: A category determined by Function, disposition, and configuration, including size or extent, such
as Thoroughfare types, Civic Space Types, etc.
Unity of Title: A written agreement executed by and between a property owner and the City whereby
the property owner for a specified consideration by the City agrees that the Lots and or parcels of land
constituting the Building site shall not be conveyed, mortgaged and or leased separate and apart from
each other and that they shall be held together as one (1) tract. Such Unity of Title shall be recorded in
the Public Records of Dade County, Florida and shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the
property owner(s), their successors and assigns. See Article 7, Section 7.1.7. A covenant in lieu of Unity
of Title is acceptable in situations where a unified lot is required by this Code, but a Unity of Title is not
practical due to different ownership. Such covenant must conform to all of the requirements of Article
7, Section 7.1.7.6 of this Code. The terms Unity of Title and covenant in lieu of Unity of Title shall be
interchangeable for purposes of this Code.
Urban Center Zone or T5 Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Urban Core Zone or T6 Zone: See Article 4, Table 1.
Urban Design: Form, in terms of both beauty and function, of urban areas. Urban design is concerned
with the location, mass, and design of various urban components and combines elements of urban planning,
architecture, landscape architecture, and traffic engineering.
Urban Form: The spatial arrangement of a particular environment, as defined by the connectivity of built
mass and form, the natural environment, and the movement of persons, goods and information within.
Use: The purpose or activity for which land, water or Buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or
for which land or Buildings are occupied or maintained.
USGBC: United States Green Building Council.
Variance: Permit approved pursuant to the requirements of Article 7.
Vehicle Rental Facility: An establishment where motor vehicles are kept and maintained for lease,
where such vehicles are dropped off or picked up and where customers complete all transactions necessary
for the short term lease of such vehicles. See Article 6.
Verge: The space between the Sidewalk and the Curb.
Vessel: Any watercraft, power-driven or not, mobile or stationary, surface, subsurface or hydrofoil, including
but not limited to ships, boats, houseboats, air boats, and sea planes, but excluding Floating Structures.
I.36
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Vessel, Commercial: A vessel built, altered, or used for the principal purpose of engaging in water-related
commercial activity, including but not limited to charter boats, fishing boats, cruise ships, and freighters.
Vessel, Private Pleasure Craft: A vessel which is privately owned or leased primarily for recreational
purposes. Private pleasure craft do not include commercial, official, or scientific vessels. For regulatory
purposes, private pleasure craft are divided into two (2) classes: Minor: Under sixteen (16) feet in
length; Major: Sixteen (16) feet and over in length. Private pleasure craft may or may not contain facilities
qualifying them Residential Use. Where they do contain such facilities, Use within the City limits shall
be governed as provided in this Code and other applicable regulations.
View Corridor: An axial view terminating on a natural or historical feature.
Visibility, Material impediment to: Any material obstruction to visibility that would result in concealment
of a child more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet in height approaching an intersection, or would
conceal an approaching automotive vehicle or cyclist from such a child. In determining whether a material
Impediment exists to visibility, the speed, direction, and duration of movement to point of potential
collision or contact shall be considered.
Visibility Triangle: See Article 4, Table 8.
Waiver: Permit approved pursuant to the requirements of Article 7.
Warrant: Permit approved pursuant to the requirements of Article 7.
Workforce Housing: See Article 3, Section 3.14.
Workforce Housing: Workforce housing shall mean a Dwelling Unit, owner-occupied and/or rental
housing with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts
established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is between 60 percent to 140
percent of Area Median Income as published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and certified by the Department of Community and Economic Development.
Work-Live: See Section 1.1, Residential Use
I.37
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
1.3 DEFINITIONS OF SIGNS
Notwithstanding definitions in this Code referring to Lot Frontage, for the purpose of regulating the
number of Signs, the term “fronting on a street,” “street frontage,” or “frontage” shall be construed as
adjacent to a street, whether at the front, rear, or side of a Lot.
Except as otherwise provided, any Sign bearing advertising matter shall be considered an Advertising
Sign for the purposes of this Code.
For purposes of this Code, and notwithstanding the definition of Structure generally applicable in this
Code, any trailer or other vehicle, and any other device which is readily movable and designed or used
primarily for the display of Signs shall be construed to be a Sign Structure, and any Signs thereon shall
be limited in area, number, location, and other characteristics in accordance with general regulations
and regulations applying in the Transect in which displayed.
Address Sign: Signs limited in subject matter to the street number or postal address of the property,
the names of occupants or the name of the property.
Aggregate Area: The total area allowed for all Sign types to be placed along a Building Frontage.
Awning or Canopy Sign: A Sign painted, stamped, perforated, stitched or otherwise applied on the
valance of an awning or other fabric protrusion above or around a window, door or other opening on a
Facade.
Animated Sign: A Sign which has any visible moving parts, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical
movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that
moves, changes, flashes, oscillates or visibly alters in appearance.
Banner Sign: A Sign made from flexible material suspended from a pole or poles, or with one (1) or
both ends attached to a Structure or Structures. Where Signs are composed of strings of banners, they
shall be construed to be Pennant or Streamer Signs.
Billboard: See City Code Chapter 62
Building Identification Sign: Any Sign containing the name of the Building, institution, person, or the
activity carried on in the Building.
Business Identification Sign: Any Sign used to identify an establishment within a Structure or its
premises limited to the name, activity or hours of operation.
Changeable Copy Sign: A Sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change or rearrange,
electronically or otherwise, without altering the face or surface of the sign, or manually through placement
of letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.
I.38
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Class A (temporary Signs): Any Sign(s) erected on a temporary basis, such as Signs advertising the sale
or rental of the premises on which located; Signs advertising a subdivision of property; Signs advertising
construction actually being done on the premises on which the Sign is located; Signs advertising future
construction to be done on the premises on which located; and Signs advertising special events, such as
carnivals, concerts, public meetings, sporting events, political campaigns or events of a similar nature.
Class B (point of sale Signs): Any sign advertising, identifying or designating the use, occupant of the
premises, merchandise, or entertainment event and products sold on the premises, shall be deemed to
be a point of sale sign (Class B) and shall be located on the same premises whereon such is situated
or the products sold.
Class C (commercial advertising Signs): Any Sign which is used for any purpose other than that
of advertising to the public the legal or exact firm name of business or other activity carried on at the
premises, or for advertising any service or product or products actually and actively being offered for
sale on the premises, or which is designed and displayed solely to offer for sale or rent the premises, or
to advertise construction being done, or proposed to be done, on the premises, or to advertise special
events, shall constitute a class C sign.
Directional, Notice, or Warning Sign: A Sign which guides or directs the public and contains no advertising.
Signs limited to providing notice concerning posting of property against trespassing, directing
deliveries or indicating location of entrances, exits or parking on public or private property; indicating
location of buried utilities, warning against hazardous conditions; prohibiting salesman, peddlers, or
agents, and the like.
Display Surface: The surface upon, against or through which a Sign copy is displayed or illustrated,
not including structural supports, Architectural Features of a Building or Sign Structure, nonstructural
thematic or decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which
the Sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as reveal or border.
Freestanding Sign: Any Sign not attached to or painted on a Building, but which is mounted on one
(1) or more columns, poles, or braces permanently attached to the ground. Permanently attached as
used herein shall mean that the supporting Structure of the Sign is attached to the ground by a concrete
foundation.
Hanging Sign: A projecting Sign suspended vertically from and supported by the underside of a canopy,
marquee, awning or from a bracket or other device extending from a Structure.
Historic Sign: See Chapter 23, Section 23.6.4 of City Code.
Home Office Sign: A Sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted Home Office.
Illuminated Sign: A Sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source. Where artificial lighting
that makes the Sign visible is incidental to general illumination of the premises, the Sign shall not be
construed to be an Illuminated Sign.
I.39
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Indirectly Illuminated Sign: A Sign illuminated primarily by light directed toward or across it or by backlighting
from a source not within it. Sources of illumination for such Signs may be in the form of gooseneck
lamps, spotlights, or luminous tubing. Reflectorized signs depending on automobile headlights for an
image in periods of darkness shall be construed to be Indirectly Illuminated Signs.
Internally (or Directly) Illuminated Sign: A Sign containing its own source of artificial light internally,
and dependent primarily upon such source for visibility during periods of darkness.
Kiosk: A small stand-alone structure used to provide information and services.
Media Tower: A Structure that may serve as a viewing tower and a kinetic illuminated media display
system, utilizing signage, video and all other forms of animated illuminated visual message media as
per Chapter 62 of the City Code.
Menu Board Sign: A Changeable Copy Sign for the purpose of displaying a menu selection or pricing
board for food service drive-up windows.
Monument Sign: Any Sign not attached to or painted on a Building, but which is mounted on a wall or
Structure and permanently attached to the ground. Permanently attached as used herein shall mean
that the supporting Structure of the Sign is attached to the ground by a concrete foundation. Monument
Sign Structure shall bear no visible freestanding poles.
Mural: See City Code Chapter 62.
Number Of Signs: Signs shall be comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on a wall or
similar surface of the Building or Structure. The area and dimensions of the Sign shall encompass a
regular geometric shape, or a combination of regular geometric shapes, which form, or approximate,
the perimeter of all elements in the Display Surface, the frame, and any applied background that is not
part of the architecture of the building. When separate elements are organized to form a single Sign,
and are separated by open space, the Sign Area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining
the geometric form, or combination of forms, which comprises all of the Sign Area, including the space
between different elements.
Pennant or Streamer Sign: Signs made up of strings of pennants, or composed of ribbons or streamers,
and suspended over open premises or attached to Buildings.
Portable Sign: Signs not permanently affixed to a Building, Structure or the ground (A-frame, inverted
T-frame, wheeled, and the like) and can be removed without tools.
Projecting Sign: Any Sign which has an independent Structure, which is attached to the Building wall,
and has a Sign display surface in a plane parallel or perpendicular to or approximately parallel or perpendicular
to the Building wall.
I.40
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Revolving or Rotating Sign: See Animated Sign.
Roof Sign: A Sign affixed in any manner to the roof of a Building, or a Sign mounted in whole or in part
on the wall of the Building and extending above the eave line of a pitched roof or the roof line (or parapet
line, if a parapet exists) of a flat roof.
Sign: Any identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, that is visible
from a public right-of-way or is located on private property and visible to the public and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business, message or solicitation, including any
permanently installed or situated merchandise, with the exception of window displays, and any letter,
numeral, character, figure, emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary Sign designed to
advertise, identify or convey information. Signs located within the interior of a Building that are visible
from the public right-of-way shall be subject to Sign regulations.
The following are specifically excluded from this definition of “Sign:”
• Governmental Signs and legal notices.
• Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the Lot or parcel upon which they are located, or from
any public right-of-way.
• Signs displayed within the interior of a Building which are not visible from the exterior of the Building.
• National flags and flags of political subdivisions.
• Weather flags.
• Address numbers, provided they do not exceed two square feet in area.
• Signs located in the public right-of-way which shall be governed by Chapter 54 of the City Code.
Sign Area: Signs shall be comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on a wall or similar surface
of the Building or Structure. The area and dimensions of the Sign shall encompass a regular geometric
shape, or a combination of regular geometric shapes, which form, or approximate, the perimeter of all
elements in the Display Surface, the frame, and any applied background that is not part of the architecture
of the building. When separate elements are organized to form a single Sign, and are separated by open
space, the Sign Area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining the geometric form, or combination
of forms, which comprises all of the Sign Area, including the space between different elements.
Sign Structure: A Structure for the display or support of Signs.
Special Sign Package: See Article 10, Section 10.3.6
Vehicle Sign: A trailer, automobile, truck, or other vehicle used primarily for the display of Signs (rather
than a Sign display incidental to use of the vehicle for transportation).
Wall Sign: Any Sign attached, painted or projected on the wall of a Building or Structure, and erected
parallel to the face of a Building, and supported throughout its length by such Building and which displays
I.41
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
only one (1) advertising surface.
Window Sign: A Sign painted, attached or affixed in any manner to the interior or exterior of a window
which is visible, wholly or in part, from the public right-of-way.
I.42
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
1.4 DEFINITIONS OF LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
The definitions contained in Section 1.2 of this Code shall apply except as otherwise changed herein:
Automatic Irrigation System: An irrigation system with programmable controller or timing mechanism.
Buffer, perimeter landscape: An area of land which is set aside along the perimeter of a parcel of land
in which landscaping is required to provide an aesthetic transition between different land uses and to
eliminate or reduce the adverse environmental impact, and incompatible land use impacts.
Caliper: For trees under four (4) inches in diameter, the trunk diameter measured at a height of six
(6) inches above natural grade. For trees four (4) inches and greater in diameter, the trunk diameter
measured at twelve (12) inches above natural grade.
Clearance pruning: Pruning required to avoid damage or danger related to structures, power distribution
and property, as defined in the current ANSI A300 Standards.
Controlled plant species: Those plant species listed in the Landscape Manual which tend to become
nuisances because of their ability to invade proximal native plant communities or native habitats, but
which, if located and cultivated properly may be useful or functional as elements of landscape design.
Diameter at breast height (DBH): Diameter of a tree’s trunk measured at a height four and one-half
(4.5) feet above natural grade. In the case of multiple-trunk trees, the DBH shall mean the sum of each
trunk’s diameter measured at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above natural grade.
Differential operation schedule: A method of scheduling an irrigation system to apply different quantities
of water, and/or apply water at different frequencies as appropriate, for different hydrozones.
Dissimilar land uses: Proximate or directly associated land uses which are contradictory, incongruous,
or discordant such as higher intensity residential, commercial or industrial uses located adjacent
to lower intensity uses.
Drip Line: An imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost horizontal circumference of a tree’s
branches to the ground.
Emitters: Devices which are used to control the discharge of irrigation water from lateral pipes.
Energy conservation zone: A zone located no more than twenty-two (22) feet from a structure in a one
hundred eighty (180) degree band from due east of the northeast point of the structure, to due south,
to due west of the northwest point of the structure.
Environmentally Endangered Lands: Lands that contain natural forest, wetland or native plant communities,
rare and endangered plants and animals, endemic species, outstanding geologic or other natural
I.43
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
features, or land which functions as an integral and sustaining component of an existing ecosystem.
Existing development: Existing development shall mean a site with structures that were legally approved
through the issuance of a certificate of use or certificate of occupancy as of the effective date
of this chapter.
Facultative: Plants with a similar likelihood of occurring in both wetlands and uplands, which are not
recognized indicators of either wetland or upland conditions.
Florida Friendly Landscaping: Describes best practices, materials or actions developed by the
Florida Yards & Neighborhood Program that help to preserve Florida’s natural resources and protect
the environment.
Florida Yards & Neighborhood Program: Is a partnership of the University of Florida/Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, Florida’s water management districts, the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection, the National Estuary Program, the Florida Sea Grant College Program and other agencies,
managed locally by the Miami-Dade Cooperative Extension Division of the Consumer Services Department.
Forbs: Herbaceous plants other than grasses.
Geologic feature: A natural rock or mineral formation.
Graywater: That portion of domestic sewage emanating from residential showers, residential bathroom
washbasins, or residential clothes washing machines.
Ground cover: A dense, extensive growth of low-growing plants, other than turfgrass, normally reaching
an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity.
Hatrack: The reduction of tree size using inter-nodal cuts without regard to tree health or structural
integrity.
Hazard pruning: The removal of dead, diseased, decayed, or obviously weak branches two (2) inches
in diameter or greater.
Head: A sprinkler head that provides above ground or overhead irrigation.
Heat island: An unnaturally high temperature microclimate resulting from radiation from unshaded
impervious surfaces.
Hedge: A landscape barrier consisting of a continuous, dense planting of shrubs, not necessarily of
the same species.
Herbaceous plant: A plant having little or no woody tissue.
I.44
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Hydromulch: A sprayed application of seed, mulch and water.
Hydrozone: A zone in which plant material with similar water needs are grouped together.
Included bark: Bark that is pushed inside a developing crotch, causing a weakened structure.
Irrigation detail: A graphic representation depicting the materials to be used and dimensions to be met
in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation plan: A plan drawn at the same scale as the landscape plan, indicating location and specification
of irrigation system components and other relevant information as required by this chapter.
Irrigation system: A system of pipes or other conduits designed to transport and distribute water to
keep plants in a healthy and vigorous condition.
Landscape feature: Trellis, arbor, fountain, pond, garden sculpture, garden lighting, decking, patio,
decorative paving, gazebo and other similar elements.
Landscape Manual: An illustrative interpretation of the standards provided in this code and suggested
guides for landscaping in accordance with these standards. Includes native and non-native plant lists.
The manual is developed by the Miami-Dade County Department of Planning and Zoning and adopted
by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
Landscape material: Plants such as grass, ground cover, forbs, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees and nonliving
material such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, or pervious decorative paving materials.
Landscape plan: A plan indicating all landscape areas, stormwater retention/detention areas, areas
which qualify to be excluded from maximum permitted lawn area, existing vegetation to be retained,
proposed plant material, landscape legend, landscape features, planting specifications, and details, and
all other relevant information in compliance with this article.
Lawn area: An area planted with lawn grasses.
Manual irrigation system: An irrigation system in which control valves and switches are manually
operated rather than operated by automatic controls.
Moisture and rain sensor switches: Devices which have the ability to switch off an automatic irrigation
controller after receiving a predetermined amount of rainfall or moisture content in the soil.
Mulch: Materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion, weed infestation, and retain
moisture and for use in planting areas.
Native habitat: An area enhanced or landscaped with an appropriate mix of native tree, shrub and
I.45
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
groundcover species that resembles a native plant community or Natural Forest Community in structure
and composition or is naturally occurring.
Natural Forest Community: All assemblages of vegetation designated as Natural Forest Communities
on the Miami-Dade County Natural Forest Community Maps and approved by the Board of County
Commissioners, pursuant to Resolution No. R-1764-84 and further defined in Section 24-5 of the Miami-
Dade County Code.
Native plant community: A natural association of plants dominated by one (1) or more prominent native
plant species, or a characteristic physical attribute.
Native plant species: Plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of Miami-
Dade County. Plants which are described as being native to Miami-Dade County in botanical manuals
such as, but not limited to, “A Flora of Tropical Florida” by Long and Lakela, are native plant species
within the meaning of this definition. Plant species which have been introduced into Miami-Dade County
by man are not native plant species.
Planting detail: A graphic representation of the plant installation depicting the materials to be used and
dimensions to be met in the placement of plants and other landscape materials.
Prohibited plant species: Those plant species listed in the Miami-Dade County Landscape Manual
which are demonstrably detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems, or human health, safety,
and welfare.
Shrub: A self-supporting woody perennial plant normally growing to a height of twenty-four (24) inches
or greater, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base.
Site plan: A comprehensive plan drawn to scale indicating appropriate site elevations, roadways, and
location of all relevant site improvements including structures, parking, other paved areas, ingress and
egress drives, landscaped open space and signage.
Specimen tree: A tree with any individual trunk or a multiple trunk tree, the sum of the diameter trunks
having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of eighteen (18) inches or greater. This excludes the following:
1. Non-native fruit trees that are cultivated or grown for the specific purpose of producing edible
fruit, including, but not limited to, mangos, avocados, or species of citrus;
2. Non-native species of the genus Ficus; and
3. All trees in the palm family.
Spray head: An irrigation device which applies water to the soil or plant surface by fixed spray or mist
nozzles.
Sprinkler Head: A sprinkler head that provides above ground or overhead irrigation.
I.46
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Stabilized lawn area: An area of ground underlain with structural support in the form of grass pavers
or stabilized soil prepared to withstand the load of intended vehicular use, such as automobiles, fire
trucks and garbage trucks.
Stormwater retention/detention area: An area designed, built and used for temporary storage of
stormwater. For purposes of this chapter, these areas are intended to be permanently exempt from
wetland regulations.
Street Tree Master Plan: A greenprint for Miami-Dade County as adopted by the Board of County
Commissioners on March 6, 2007 and as revised from time to time and the City of Miami Tree Master
Plan, as adopted by the City Commission on February 22, 2007.
Tree abuse: Tree abuse shall include: Damage inflicted upon any part of a tree, including the root
system, by machinery, construction equipment, cambium layer penetration, storage of materials, soil
compaction, excavation, chemical application or spillage, or change to the natural grade; Hatracking;
Girdling or bark removal of more than one-third (1/3) of the tree diameter; Tears and splitting of limb
ends or peeling and stripping of bark resulting from improper pruning techniques not in accordance with
the current ANSI A300 Standards and/or excessive root cutting.
Tree canopy: The aerial extent of the branches and foliage of a tree as defined by the drip line.
Temporary irrigation systems: A system including surface distribution elements (hose, pipe, etc.)
which may be easily removed when landscape is established.
Understory: The complex of woody, fibrous, herbaceous, and graminoid plant species that are typically
associated with a Natural Forest Community, native plant community, or native habitat.
Vegetation required to be preserved by law: Portions of a site, including but not limited to specimen
trees, Natural Forest Communities and native vegetation which are clearly delineated on site plans, plats,
or recorded restrictions, or in some other legally binding manner that are to be protected from any tree
or understory removal or effective destruction and maintained without any development.
Vegetation survey: A drawing provided at the same scale as the landscape plan which includes relevant
information as required by this chapter.
Vehicular use area: A hard surface area designed or used for off-street parking and/or an area used for
loading, circulation, access, storage, including fire trucks, garbage trucks, or display of motor vehicles.
Vine: A plant with a flexible stem which normally requires support to reach mature form.
Xeriscape: A landscaping method that employs drought tolerant plants in an effort to conserve resources,
especially water.
I.47
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
1.5 DEFINITIONS OF ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM
For the purposes on this Code, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
Art: Tangible creations by Artists which include all forms of the visual Arts conceived in any medium
material, or combination thereof, including, but not limited to, paintings; sculptures; engravings; carvings;
frescos; stained glass; mosaics; mobiles; tapestries; murals; photographs; video projections; digital images;
bas-relief; high relief; fountains; kinetics; collages; drawings; monuments erected to commemorate
a person or an event; functional furnishings, such as Artist designed seating and pavers; Artist designed
architectural elements; and Artist designed landforms or landscape elements. The following shall not be
considered as Art for the intents and purposes of this Code:
• Reproductions or unlimited copies of original pieces of Art;
• Directional elements such as Signage;
• Objects which are mass-produced; or
• Works that are decorative, ornamental, or functional elements of the architecture or landscape design,
except when commissioned from an Artist as an integral design aspect of a Structure or site.
Art in Public Places Board (“AIPPB”): The entity appointed by the City Commission to aid in the
administration of the Public Art Program. The AIPPB shall have the power to make decisions regarding
dedications, donations, and acquisitions of Art to fulfill the requirements as prescribed in Article 11 of this
Code and Chapter 62 of the City Code. Reference to approval by the AIPPB of this Code shall mean
approval at a duly noticed public meeting.
Artist: A practitioner exhibiting the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles in the visual Arts,
generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent and ability. Indications of a
person’s status as an Artist include, but are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission
of Art, frequent or consistent Art exhibitions, placement of Art in public institutions or museums, receipt
of honors, and awards or training in the Arts.
Construction Cost: The total value of the construction of, or reconstruction work on, Structures as determined
by the City’s Building Official in issuance of a Building permit for construction, reconstruction,
or remodeling. Costs such as that of land acquisition, architectural design, consultants, and engineering
fees are not Construction Costs.
Developer: The property owner, including the property owner’s successors and assigns, of the subject
development project.
Durable: Lasting, enduring and highly resistant to deterioration due to weather or the passage of time.
Government Development Project: Any Development initiated by a government agency, as defined
in Article 1 of this Code and Section 2-11.15 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended, including
remodeling, construction, or redevelopment, which requires a Building permit or permits as described
on the precise plan submitted for approval to the City. For purposes of this Article, Government Development
Projects shall also include:
• Private Sector Capital Development on land own by the government or on private land with the
Structure owned by the government.
• Development projects done through agreements with a private entity, including but not limited to
I.48
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
leases or development agreements (i.e. the government contracts with another party to develop a
Structure that the government will own now or in the future).
• All development projects funded or partially funded by General Obligation Bond (“GOB”) dollars.
Historic Resource: A property or resource that has been designated historic pursuant to Chapter 23 of
the City Code or is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Life Cycle: The natural deterioration time period for a piece of Art. Art created under this Section is
meant to be Durable and shall have a Life Cycle of at least twenty-five (25) years when properly designed
or created by the Artist and maintained, conserved, and repaired. Art reaches the end of its Life Cycle
when the Artist, Artist’s estate, or a qualified Art conservator verifies that the Art has deteriorated such
that the Art cannot reasonably be maintained, conserved, or repaired.
Project Cost: The total of specialty consulting fees; Construction Cost, including all systems and features
that make the facility functional; site work; and contingency allowances and allowance accounts
(e.g. permitting, surveying, inspections) for the Government Development Project. Project Cost shall
not include the cost of land acquisition or subsequent cost changes to the construction or architectural
contract(s) for the Government Development Project, including phased projects and all elements of an
approved Government Development Agreement. The total Project Cost shall be calculated as of the date
the contract for the construction is executed. The Developer shall provide Project Cost information and
in the absence of such information or if a dispute arises regarding the submission of such information,
the Project Cost shall be based upon the value of the Structure as computed using the latest Structure
valuation data as set forth by the International Conference of Building Officials (“ICBO”) together with
estimated design services fees.
Public Art Fee: See Sections 11.4(b) and 11.6(a).
Public Art Fund (“Fund”): A separate, interest bearing account set up by the City with the sole purpose
of receiving monies designated for the Public Art Program or to fulfill the requirements set forth in Article
11 of this Code and Chapter 62 of the City Code.
Public Art Master Plan: A plan adopted by the City Commission, pursuant to a recommendation by the
AIPPB, which shall identify Public Place locations for Art and establish a priority order to the City Commission,
and which shall be amended, as needed, to ensure that the Public Art Master Plan and the
Public Art Program as a whole remain coherent and consistent with the intents and purposes for which
Article 11 of the Code was adopted.
Public Art Program Guidelines: A set of standards, criteria, policies, and procedures related to the
submission, donation, dedication, consideration, and acceptance of Art, which shall be adopted by the
City Commission, and amended as necessary, to ensure that the Public Art Program Guidelines and the
Public Art Program as a whole remain coherent and consistent with the intent and purposes for which
Article 11 of this Code was adopted.
Public Place: Any exterior area on Public property, and shall also mean any private property within the
City limits, which is easily accessible or clearly visible to the general public from adjacent Public property
including, but not limited to, a street, Public Thoroughfare ,Sidewalk, cross Block vehicular or pedestrian
Passage, or Pedestrian Paseo.
Remodeling: Any change to the facade of a Structure, any change to the interior of a Structure, any
increase or decrease in the Floor Area of a Structure, or any change to exterior improvements.
MIAMI 21
II.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2.A MIAMI 21 ATLAS II.5
2.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT II.7
2.2 APPLICABILITY II.11
MIAMI 21
II.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
II.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Amendments To Article 2 2
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
MIAMI 21
II.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
II.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.A MIAMI 21 ATLAS
The Official Miami 21 Atlas is maintained in the Office of the City Clerk.
MIAMI 21
II.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
II.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
2.1.1 Title and Purpose
a. This Code shall be known as the Miami 21 Code of the City of Miami, Florida. This Code is de
clared to be in accord with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as required by the
Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, Section
163.3161 et seq., Florida Statutes (the “Comprehensive Plan”). A primary purpose of this Code
is to implement the Comprehensive Plan.
b. It is further the purpose of the Miami 21 Code to promote the public health, safety, morals,
convenience, comfort, amenities, prosperity, and general welfare of the City and to provide a
wholesome, serviceable, and attractive community, including without limitation protection of the
environment; conservation of land, energy and natural resources; improved mobility; more efficient
use of public funds; greater health benefits of a pedestrian environment; historic preservation;
provision of recreational and open spaces; reduction of sprawl; and improvement of the built
environment and human habitat.
c. To further the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and the purpose of this Code, the
City is divided into Transect Zones (“T-Zones”) of such number, characteristics, area, common
unity of purpose, adaptability, or use as will accomplish the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan and this Code.
2.1.2 Intent
The Miami 21 Code is intended to advance the interests of both conservation and development
while responding to the existing conditions of the City, its regional context, and its natural features,
infrastructure and Buildings.
a. The conservation goals include:
1. Preserving Neighborhoods, Historical Resources and the natural environment
2. Improving the relationship between low Density Residential neighborhoods and
adjacent Commercial Corridors with appropriate transitions of Density and Height
following the theory of the Transect
3. Increasing access to the natural environment through the Baywalk, the Riverwalk,
the north-south Greenway, and new Parks
4. Conserving energy and reducing carbon dioxide emissions through improved Thoroughfare
connectedness to encourage walkability, bicycling and transit use
5. Increasing tree canopy
6. Encouraging green Buildings
MIAMI 21
II.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
b. The development goals include:
1. Maintaining the future growth capacity of the City core to ensure its preeminence as the
transit-oriented, pedestrian-friendly focus for the region’s economic, civic and cultural activities
2. Rebuilding the City’s commercial Corridors to function as Mixed-Use, transit-oriented, walkable
centers for adjacent Residential Neighborhoods
3. Ensuring that private Development contributes to increased infrastructure capacity, and
through building embellishes a pedestrian-friendly public realm of highest ambient quality
4. Establishing a rational process for successional growth in areas identified for density and
growth
2.1.3 Transect Principles
The Miami 21 Code is intended to encourage the evolution of a settlement pattern based on the
organizational principles of the Transect. The Transect is defined as a geographical cross-section
that reveals a sequence of environments. Applied to the human or the built environment, the Transect
is used to identify and organize a continuum of the physical environment ranging from the least to
the most urban.
Transect planning creates coordinated, integrated and harmonious environments, based on the arrangement
of all the components to support locational character. Within the range of urban contexts,
each different type of location, called a Transect Zone, has development Function, Intensity and
Disposition appropriate to the location, and integrates the details of the corresponding public realm.
To ensure this integration, the Miami 21 Code controls development on Lots as well as establishes
guidelines for the detailing of public right-of-way. For example, narrow streets with open swales find
their place in neighborhoods of suburban character, while wide streets with tree lined sidewalks accompany
Commercial Development in more intense urban areas.
The Transect encourages the making of places that build on historic character and that evolve over
time. This evolution, with the principles enumerated below guiding growth or reduction in Density
and Intensity, is called succession. Successional change emerges from a vision of the larger urban
context and appropriate transitions across Transect Zones.
The City of Miami’s urban context is comprised of a series of Neighborhoods, Corridors, urban
centers, and Districts, each with its own arrangement of Transect Zones. In all cases the goal of
transit-oriented, pedestrian-friendly, Mixed-Use urbanism shall guide the arrangement of Transect
Zones, Thoroughfares, Buildings and landscape. The specific design of each component should be
appropriate to its Transect Zone, as provided in this Code.
Transect Zones are sequential in Intensity: successional zoning changes shall only be permitted
sequentially and respecting transitions across Abutting Transect Zones as provided in Article 7.
Transect Zones manifest a range of responses to natural and urban conditions. As described in
Article 5, Transect Zones T1, T2 and T3, the least urban, emphasize the presence of the natural
MIAMI 21
II.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
environments. Transect Zones T4, T5 and T6, D1, D2 and D3 prioritize the built environment.
Specific to Natural (T1), Rural (T2) and Sub-Urban (T3) Zones, impermeable surface shall be minimized
and confined to the ratio of Lot Coverage by Building specified in Article 5. To the extent not
inconsistent with applicable state or federal law, storm water management on Thoroughfares may
be accomplished through retention and percolation, channeled by curbside swales, or through underground
storm drainage channeled by raised curbs.
Specific to General Urban (T4), Urban Center (T5) and Urban Core (T6) Zones, to the extent not
inconsistent with applicable state or federal law, the continuity of the urbanized areas should transition
to take precedence over the natural environment, except Parks, recreation and natural features.
Storm water management on Thoroughfares and Lots shall be implemented primarily through underground
storm drainage channeled by raised curbs, and there shall be no retention or detention
required on the individual Lots. Impermeable surface shall be confined to the ratio of Lot Coverage
by Building specified in Article 5.
2.1.3.1 The City - Guiding Principles
a. The City should retain its natural infrastructure and visual character derived from its location and
climate, including topography, landscape and coastline.
b. Growth strategies should encourage Infill and redevelopment.
c. New Development should be structured to reinforce a pattern of Neighborhoods and urban centers,
focusing growth at transit nodes rather than along Corridors.
d. Transportation Corridors should be planned and reserved in coordination with land Use.
e. Green Corridors should be encouraged and developed to enhance and connect the urbanized
areas.
f. The City should include a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems that provide
alternatives to automobile use.
g. A diversity of land use should be distributed throughout the City to enable a variety of economic
activity, workplace, residence, recreation and civic activity.
h. Affordable and Workforce Housing should be distributed throughout the City to match job opportunities
and to avoid concentrations of poverty.
i. The City should expand and enhance transit opportunities and connections throughout the City.
2.1.3.2 The Community - Guiding Principles
a. Neighborhoods and urban centers should be the preferred pattern of Development and Transect
Zones emphasizing single use should be the exception.
b. Neighborhoods and Urban centers should be compact, pedestrian-oriented and Mixed-Use.
Density and Intensity of Use should relate to degree of transit service.
MIAMI 21
II.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
c. The ordinary activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings, allowing
independence to those who do not drive.
d. Interconnected networks of Thoroughfares should be designed to disperse and reduce the length
of automobile trips and to encourage walking and bicycling.
e. A range of Open Space, including Parks, Squares and Playgrounds, should be distributed within
Neighborhoods and urban centers.
f. Appropriate building Densities and land uses should occur within walking distance of transit
stops.
g. Civic, Institutional and Commercial activity should be embedded in Mixed-Use urban centers,
not isolated in remote single-use complexes.
h. Schools should be located to enable children to walk or bicycle safely to school. New schools
should not be located on primary Thoroughfares.
i. Within Neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should accommodate diverse
ages and incomes.
2.1.3.3 The Block and the Building - Guiding Principles
a. Buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of Thoroughfares as civic
places.
b. Development should adequately accommodate vehicles while respecting the pedestrian and the
spatial form of public space.
c. The design of Thoroughfares and Buildings should reinforce safe environments, but not at the
expense of accessibility. Designs should incorporate principles of Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design (CPTED).
d. Architecture and landscape design should grow from local climate, topography, history, and
building practice.
e. Buildings should allow their inhabitants to experience the geography and climate through energy
efficient design.
f. Civic Buildings and public gathering places should be located to reinforce community identity
and support self-government.
g. Civic Buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to a role more important than the other
Buildings that constitute the fabric of the City.
h. Preservation and renewal of historic resources should be facilitated to affirm the continuity of the
community.
MIAMI 21
II.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
i. Harmonious and orderly change and Development of urban areas should be enabled through a
form-based zoning code that guides and regulates change.
2.2 APPLICABILITY
2.2.1 Generally
2.2.1.1 This Code replaces the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Miami, also known as Ordinance 11000
except that Section 627, “SD-27 Midtown Special District” is hereby retained and incorporated as
Appendix C hereto and all provisions of Ordinance 11000 referred to in Section 627 shall be applied
to Midtown Special District, providing however that within the SD-27 Special District the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board and procedures related to appeals thereto set out by this Miami 21 Code
shall replace the Zoning Board and procedures related to appeals thereto in Ordinance 11000.
Furthermore, Section 616.3, “Miami WorldCenter” is hereby retained and incorporated as Appendix
D hereto and all provisions of Ordinance 11000 referred to in Section 616.3 shall be applied to Miami
WorldCenter, providing however that within the Miami WorldCenter the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board and procedures related to appeals thereto set out by this Miami 21 Code shall replace
the Zoning Board and procedures related to appeals thereto in Ordinance 11000.
2.2.1.2 Miami 21 Atlas
a. The Miami 21 Atlas is the official Zoning Atlas for the City of Miami. The boundaries of all Transect
Zones and the Transect designation are shown on the series of map sheets that compose the
Miami 21 Atlas. The Miami 21 Atlas may be supplemented by additional layers or separate maps
to the Atlas sheets, where the scale generally applicable to the Atlas sheets does not adequately
show the details of boundaries or designations necessary to the particular area.
b. The Miami 21 Atlas, together with all adopted explanatory and supplemental material shown
therein, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be part of this Code. The Official Zoning Atlas
as adopted by Ordinance 11000 for the same area is hereby repealed.
c. The Miami 21 Atlas, and any amendments thereto, shall be maintained in the office of the City
Clerk, and a certified copy of the Miami 21 Atlas shall be maintained at the Planning Department.
Each Atlas sheet or supplemental element thereto shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Mayor of the City, attested by the signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall bear the seal
of the City.
d. Any proposed amendment to the Miami 21 Atlas shall be identified by reference to the Atlas sheet
or supplement involved, in addition to a legal description of the property or such other information
as is required to make specific the application of the amendment. Any unauthorized changes to
the Miami 21 Atlas shall be considered a violation of this Code and punishable as provided by
law.
2.2.1.3 This Code affects all lands, water, Structures, Uses, and occupancies within the area of the City of
Miami shown on the Miami 21 Atlas. No Building, Structure, land or water shall be used or occupied,
MIAMI 21
II.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
no land shall be subdivided and no Building, Structure, land or part thereof shall be developed except
in conformity with the Transect regulations in which it is located and with all applicable regulations
in this Miami 21 Code.
2.2.2 Conflicts
Where the requirements of this Miami 21 Code vary with the applicable requirements of any law,
statute, rule, regulation, ordinance, or code, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard
shall govern.
This Code does not abrogate or affect any Easements, covenants, deed restrictions, property owner
association rules, or agreements between private parties. Where the regulations set out in this Code
are more restrictive than such Easements, covenants, deed restrictions, homeowner association
rules, or agreements between private parties, the restrictions of this Code shall govern.
2.2.3 Pending Actions and Development Approvals
The effective date of this Miami 21 Code shall not affect nor prevent the prosecution of any action
pending at the time of the effective date of this Code, which action is to enforce Ordinance 11000,
or the conditions of any development order adopted under Ordinance 11000. The conditions of a
development approval under Ordinance 11000 shall continue in full force and effect unless a new
approval is obtained, at which time the development shall come into conformance with these regulations
if required under Article 7, Section 7.2 “Nonconformities” of this Code.
2.2.4 Rules of Construction
2.2.4.1 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Miami 21 Code shall be the minimum
requirements or maximum limitations, as the case may be, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals or general welfare.
2.2.4.2 The following general rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Code:
a. Headings. Section and subsection headings shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of the Miami 21 Code.
b. Illustrations. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision
and any illustration, the text shall control, unless the intent of the Code is clearly otherwise.
c. Terminology: Shall, may and should. “Shall” is always mandatory and not permissive. “May” is
permissive. “Should” is advisory and identifies guidance provided by the City Commission in the
implementation of these regulations.
d. Tenses and numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular, unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary.
MIAMI 21
II.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
e. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following conjunctions shall
be interpreted as follows:
1. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply.
2. “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
3. “Either/or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
f. Gender. Use of the masculine gender includes the feminine gender and use of the feminine
gender includes the masculine.
g. Any act authorized by this Code to be carried out by a specific official or agency of the City is
impliedly authorized to be carried out by a designee of that official or agency.
h. Any reference to federal laws, Florida Statutes, Florida Administrative Code, Miami-Dade County
Code, or any other official code shall be construed to be a reference to the most recent enactment
of the particular law, and shall include any amendments to it as may be adopted from time
to time.
i. Capitalized terms in Articles 2 - 9 refer to Article 1 Definitions.
2.2.4.3 Calculations
a. Rounding. Where cumulative requirements or limitations are to be computed for purposes of this
Code, fractions shall be carried forward in the summation, and the total rounded to the nearest
whole number, subject to existing minimum Lot sizes and maximum Densities or Intensities of
development required by the regulations of this Miami 21 Code.
b. Time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day
shall be excluded.
2.2.5 Transect Zone Boundaries
2.2.5.1 Except as otherwise specifically provided, a Transect symbol or name shown within Transect
boundaries in the Miami 21 Atlas indicates that regulations pertaining to the Transect Zone extend
throughout the whole area surrounded by the boundary line.
2.2.5.2 Except as provided in Section 2.2.5.3, where a Transect Zone designation is not indicated for an
area in the Miami 21 Atlas, the area shall be construed to be zoned as for the most restrictive Abutting
Zone, until corrective action shall be taken by the City Commission.
2.2.5.3 Where uncertainty exists as to the location of the boundary of a Transect Zone, or other areas delineated
for regulatory purposes in the Miami 21 Atlas, the following rules shall apply:
a. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way,
or Easements shall be construed as following such centerlines as they exist on the ground.
MIAMI 21
II.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
b. Boundaries indicated as approximately following boundaries of Thoroughfares, public or private
Property Lines, Rights-Of-Way, or Easements shall be construed as following such boundaries.
Provided, however, that where such boundaries are so located with relation to other opposing
boundaries as to leave such areas without apparent zoning designation, such boundaries shall
be construed as running to the centerlines of the areas remaining.
c. Boundaries indicated as approximately following mean high water lines or centerlines of streams,
canals, lakes, bays, or other bodies of water shall be construed as following such mean high
water lines or centerlines. In the case of a change in mean high water line, the boundary shall
be construed as moving with the change.
d. Where variation of the actual location from the mapped location would change the zoning status
of a Lot or parcel, the boundary shall be interpreted so as to avoid the change.
e. In the event of vacation, the boundary shall be construed as remaining in its location, except
where ownership of the vacated property is divided other than at the center, in which case the
boundary shall be construed as moving with the ownership.
2.2.5.4 Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City
limits. Where property previously within the City is removed from its limits, the zoning boundaries
involved shall be construed as moving to conform to the change in City limits. Where property previously
located outside the City is annexed, zoning boundaries shall not be construed as moving with
City limits. In such cases, the City may receive and process permit applications for the property, but
no permit shall be issued until the City Commission shall have rezoned the property to establish its
zoning status and the permit is found to be in accord with the zoning.
2.2.5.5 Boundaries indicated as entering any body of water, but not continuing to intersection with other
Transect boundaries or with the City limits, shall be construed as extending in the direction in which
they enter the body of water to intersection with other zoning boundaries or with the City limits.
2.2.5.6 Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or extensions of mean high water lines or centerlines
of bodies of water shall be construed as being parallel to or extensions of such features.
2.2.5.7 Where distances are not specifically indicated on any map in the Miami 21 Atlas, they shall be determined
by reference to the scale of the map.
2.2.5.8 Where boundaries occur within a parcel of land comprising more than one Lot, the Lots shall be
developed separately according to the assigned Transect Zone.
MIAMI 21
III.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3.1 TRANSECT ZONES III.5
3.2 PHASING III.5
3.3 LOTS AND FRONTAGES III.5
3.4 DENSITY AND INTENSITY CALCULATIONS III.8
3.5 MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT III.9
3.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS III.11
3.7 FENCES AND WALLS III.16
3.8 THOROUGHFARES III.16
3.9 SPECIAL AREA PLANS III.19
3.10 HISTORIC PRESERVATION STANDARDS III.20
3.11 WATERFRONT STANDARDS III.21
3.12 DESIGN GUIDELINES AND NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS III.22
3.13 SUSTAINABILITY III.27
3.14 PUBLIC BENEFITS PROGRAM III.30
3.15 AFFORDABLE AND ATTAINABLE MIXED-INCOME HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT III.34
PROGRAM SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
3.16 WORKFORCE HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT PROGRAM SUPPLEMENTAL III.37
REGULATIONS
3.17 PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS III.38
MIAMI 21
III.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
III.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
AMENDMENTS TO MIAMI 21
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13166 04-22-2010 Measurement of Height (T6-36 and above) 10-00291zt-b
13173 05-13-2010 D1 height and mezzanine 10-00374zt
13177 05-13-2010 “Green” ordinances carried into Miami 21 10-00519
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
13265 05-12-2011 Incentives for construction of Affordable
Housing
11-00022zt
13271 05-26-2011 Modified bond requirements and necessary
LEED documentation.
11-00195zt
13314 02-23-2012 Added “Structures other than signs” to dominant
setback waivers.
11-0079zt
13359 01-10-2013 Accessory Parking 12-00942zt
13358 01-10-2013 Added watercraft stationing regulations 11-00806zt
13354 01-10-2013 Tigertail Setback Area 12-01180zt
13373 03-28-2013 Affordable Housing Setbacks above the 8th
Floor by Waiver
13-00002zt
13436 02-27-2014 Affordable Housing Amendment 13-01348zt
13452 04-24-2014 Park Improvements Amendment 13-01088zt
13465 05-22-2014 Affordable Housing Amendment 14-00109zt
13494 01-22-2015 Amended Article 3 to allow substitution of “and”
for “or”.
14-01074zt
13507 03-12-2015 Modification of Public Benefits Program
language to include T6-24b
14-01198zt
13114 09-24-2015 Added definition of Extensive Green Roof,
Intensive Green Roof, Legacy Structure, Paseo,
and Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD).
Updated definitions of Open Space, Pedestrian
Passage, and Roof Terrace.
15-00678zt
13114 07-13-2015 Modification of Article 3.12 to include 3.12.3
Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD)
15-00678zt1
13596 02-25-2016 Article 3 Section 3.3.6(g) 1 an existing
Established Setback Area to include an
established Side Setback for the entire Height
of a building.
15-01496zt
13636 09-22-2016 Density transfer across transect boundaries. 16-00659zt
13665 10-27-2016 Attainable Mixed Income Housing definition and
supplemental regulations.
1177
13656 01-12-2017 Art in Public Places definitions, requirements
and administration.
1222
13672 03-23-2017 Attainable Workforce Housing definition and
supplemental regulations.
1677
MIAMI 21
III.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
III.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.1 TRANSECT ZONES
3.1.1 The Miami 21 Code Transect Zones are described in Article 4, Table 1 and include the standards
summarized in Article 4, Table 2 and further described in Article 5. They range in Function and
Density from low-Density, primarily residential areas to high Density Mixed-Use areas, across the
Transect, with zones identified as T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6, CS, CI, CI-HD, D1, D2 and D3 and all R,
L, O and T6 subcategories.
3.2 PHASING
All development shall conform to this Code regardless of phasing. Each phase of a development
project shall conform to this Code in its entirety.
3.3 LOTS AND FRONTAGES
3.3.1 Lots assembled into one (1) ownership within one (1) Transect Zone may be developed as a single
Lot. Lots assembled into one (1) ownership that encompass more than one (1) Transect Zone shall
be developed according to the corresponding Transect regulation for each Lot, except as described
in Section 3.6.1(e). In such cases, there shall be no transfer of Density or Intensity of Development
Capacity between Transect Zones, except if the Lots are assigned equal Densities, Density may
be transferred across the Transect boundary. Where Lots are assembled into one (1) ownership,
the side or rear Setbacks sharing the Property Line may be eliminated. Lot assembly shall require
a Unity-of-Title acceptable to the City Attorney. Contiguous Lots in one (1) ownership, as of the effective
date of this Code, may be developed as one (1) Lot in excess of the maximum Lot size.
3.3.2 In Transect Zones T5, T6, CI, CS, D1, D2, and D3, buildable sites shall Enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
or a Pedestrian Passage, with at least one Principal Frontage.
3.3.3 Lots facing Thoroughfares on more than one (1) side shall have designated Principal Frontage(s) and
may have Secondary Frontage(s). Unless otherwise designated by a Special Area Plan, a Principal
Frontage shall be that facing the Thoroughfare of higher pedestrian importance or intensity (i.e.,
traffic volume, number of lanes, etc.), as determined by the Planning Department upon request by
the Zoning Administrator.
a. If two Thoroughfares are of equal importance each Frontage shall be considered a Principal
Frontage. Lots with two or more Frontages may consider other non-fronting Property Lines as
sides.
b. Lots shall have at least one (1) Principal Frontage, except waterfront Lots shall have at least
two (2) Principal Frontages, one of which shall be the waterfront and shall conform to Waterfront
Setback Standards. For Waterfront Setbacks, see Section 3.11.
c. Where an existing lot of record is located adjacent to a Thoroughfare in a manner that creates
an irregular Frontage such that the side or rear yards cannot be determined as with a regular lot,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine, by Waiver, the yard and setbacks for the lot as fits the
circumstances of the case. In addition to general Waiver requirements, the Zoning AdministraMIAMI
21
III.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
tor shall consider the minimum dimensions and methods of measurement as generally required
for either a side or rear yard in the transect, determining which shall apply by the relation of the
portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot, with due regard to the
orientation of structures and buildable areas on each lot.
3.3.4 For the purposes of this Code, Lots are divided into Layers which control Development on the Lot.
3.3.5 Where the property to be developed abuts an existing Building, a Waiver may be granted so that
the proposed Building matches the dominant Setback of the block and its Context.
3.3.6 For new Buildings in Established Setbacks Areas, the Established Setback shall be maintained.
(See also Article 4, Diagram 10) Galleries and Arcades may be permitted within the First Layer in
Established Setback Areas and shall not encroach the Public Right-of-Way except by Special Area
Plan. Where a Gallery or Arcade is permitted, the Established Setback shall only be maintained
if a Gallery or Arcade is provided. Where a Gallery or Arcade is not provided, the setback for the
underlying Transect Zone shall be maintained.
Established Setback Areas include:
a. Brickell Financial
1. Boundary: All properties on Brickell Avenue between SE 15th Road and the Miami River.
Brickell Avenue Setback: Thirty (30’) feet; Side and Rear: Fifteen (15’) feet;
2. Boundary: All properties bounded by SE 1st Avenue to the west, SE 8th Street to the north,
Biscayne Bay to the east and SE 15th Road to the south.
Interior Side and Rear Setback: fifteen (15’) feet
b. Biscayne Boulevard
1. Boundary: All properties along the west side of Biscayne Boulevard from NE 7th Street to
NE 12th Street and both sides of Biscayne Boulevard from NE 12th Street to NE 17th Street.
Setback Adjacent to Biscayne Boulevard: Fifteen (15’) feet
2. Boundary: Biscayne Boulevard from NE 17th Street to Interstate 195.
Setback Adjacent to Biscayne Boulevard: Zero (0’) feet with Gallery
c. Design District
1. Boundary: All properties bounded on the east by Biscayne Boulevard; on the south by NE
36th Street; on the west by North Miami Avenue; and on the north by NE 40th Street.
Frontage Setback: Zero (0’) feet
d. 27th Avenue Coconut Grove
1. Boundary: The west side of 27th Avenue from SW 28th Terrace to South Dixie Highway.
27th Avenue Frontage Setback: Twenty-five (25’) feet
MIAMI 21
III.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
2. Boundary: The north side of SW 28th Terrace between South Dixie Highway and SW 27th
Avenue.
SW 28th Terrace Frontage Setback: Fifteen (15’) feet
3. Boundary: Bird Avenue between Mary Street and Aviation Avenue; Lincoln Avenue between
SW 27th Avenue and Darwin Street; the north Side of Abaco Avenue from SW 27th Avenue
to Washington Street; the south Side of Aviation Avenue from SW 27th Avenue to Swanson
Avenue.
Frontage Setback on all streets except SW 27th Avenue: Fifteen (15’) feet
e. 9th Street Promenade
1. Boundary: All properties Adjacent to NW 9th Street between NW 2nd Avenue and North
Miami Avenue.
NW 9th Street Frontage Setback: Twenty-five (25’) feet
f. Tigertail Avenue
1. Boundary: All properties along the southeast side of Tigertail Avenue between Darwin Street
and Aviation Avenue.
Tigertail Avenue Setback: One hundred feet (100’) except, Residential Uses (as ancillary
Use), may be developed in accordance with Setback provisions of the underlying Transect
Zone. Parking structures lined by Residential Uses must be setback a minimum of fifty (50’)
feet from Tigertail Avenue.
g. South Bayshore Drive
1. Boundary: All properties on the northern side of South Bayshore Drive from McFarlane Road
to Aviation Avenue.
South Bayshore Drive Setback: Thirty (30’) feet; Side Setback: fifteen (15’) feet minimum
for the entire height of the building.
2. Boundary: All properties on the northern side of South Bayshore Drive from Aviation Avenue
to SW 17th Avenue.
South Bayshore Drive Setback: Eighty (80’) feet
h. Coral Way
1. Boundary: Coral Way from the western City limits (SW 37th Avenue) to SW 1st Court.
Coral Way Setback: Zero (0’) feet with Gallery
i. 8th Street
1. Boundary: All properties Adjacent to SW 8th Street between SW 27th Avenue and SW 1st
Court.
MIAMI 21
III.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
SW 8th Street Setback: Zero (0’) feet with Gallery
j. 22nd Avenue
1. Boundary: 22nd Avenue from NW 1st Street to SW 8th Street.
22nd Ave Setback: Zero (0’) feet with Arcade
k. Central Coconut Grove
1. Boundary:
• All properties Adjacent to Grand Avenue between Margaret Street and Mary Street.
• All properties Adjacent to Commodore Plaza between Grand Avenue and Main Highway
• All properties Adjacent to Fuller Street between Grand Avenue and Main Highway.
• All properties Adjacent to Main Highway between Charles Avenue to Grand Avenue.
• All properties Adjacent to McFarlane Road between Grand Avenue and South Bayshore
Drive.
• All properties Adjacent to Virginia Street between Oak Avenue and Grand Avenue.
• All properties Adjacent to Florida Avenue between Virginia Street and Mary Street.
• All properties Adjacent to Rice Street between Oak Avenue and Florida Avenue.
• All properties on the west side of Mary Street between Oak Avenue and Grand Avenue.
• All properties on the south side of Oak Avenue between Matilda Street and Tigertail
Avenue.
Central Coconut Grove Setback (on the streets listed above): Five (5) feet.
l. Wynwood
1. Boundary: Established Setback Areas have been identified within Wynwood NRD-1 Street
Master Plan located within Appendix A of this Code.
3.4 DENSITY AND INTENSITY CALCULATIONS
3.4.1 Lot Area, inclusive of any dedications, is used for purposes of Density and Intensity calculation.
3.4.2 Density shall be calculated in terms of units as specified by Article 4, Tables 3 and 4. The referenced
tables provide the maximum allowable Densities. Intensity shall be calculated in terms of Floor Lot
Ratio. The buildable Density or Intensity on any particular site will be affected by other regulations
in this Code and thus the stated maximums of this Miami 21 Code may exceed the actual Capacity
that a site can sustain when other regulations of this Code are applied to the site. The inability to
reach the maximum Density or Intensity because of the necessity to conform to the other regulations
of this Code shall not constitute hardship for purposes of a Variance.
3.4.3 Lodging Units shall be considered as equivalent to one-half (0.50) of a Dwelling Unit.
3.4.4 The allowable Transect Zone Density may be increased as provided by the Future Land Use Element
of the Miami Comprehensive Plan (Residential Density Increase Areas), as illustrated in Article 4,
Diagram 9.
MIAMI 21
III.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.5 MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT
3.5.1 Unless otherwise specified herein, the Height of Buildings shall be measured in Stories. The height
of Fences and walls shall be measured in feet. The Height of Buildings, Fences and walls shall be
measured from the Average Sidewalk Elevation or, where no sidewalk exists, the average of the
record profile grade elevation of the street Abutting the Principal Frontage of the Building, as determined
by the Public Works Department. In the event that the base flood elevation, as established
by FEMA, is higher than the sidewalk or grade elevations, the Height of the first Story but not the
height of Fences and walls shall be measured from the base flood elevation.
3.5.2 A Story is a Habitable level within a Building of a maximum fourteen (14) feet in Height from finished
floor to finished floor. Basements are not considered Stories for the purposes of determining Building
Height. A ground level retail Story may exceed this limit up to a total height of twenty-five (25) feet. A
single floor level exceeding fourteen (14) feet, or twenty-five (25) feet at ground level retail, shall be
counted as two (2) Stories; except for T6-36, T6-48, T6-60, T6-80, and D1, where a single floor level
exceeding fourteen (14) feet may count as one (1) story if the building height does not exceed the
maximum height, including all applicable bonuses, allowed by the transect at fourteen (14) feet per
floor. Where the first two stories are retail, their total combined Height shall not exceed thirty-nine
(39) feet and the first floor shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in Height. Mezzanines may not
exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the Habitable Space Floor Area, except for D1, where mezzanines
may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the Habitable Space Floor Area. Mezzanines extending
beyond thirty-three percent (33%) of the Floor Area, or fifty percent (50%) of the Floor Area in D1,
shall be counted as an additional floor. The Height of a Parking Structure concealed by a Liner may
be equal to the Height of the Liner; this may result in a Liner Story concealing more than one level
of Parking.
3.5.3 Except as specifically provided herein, the Height limitations of this Code shall not apply to any roof
Structures for housing elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, solar energy collectors, or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the Building (provided that such Structures shall not
cover more than twenty percent (20%) of roof area for T4 and T5); nor to church spires, steeples,
belfries, monuments, water towers, flagpoles, vents, or similar Structures, which may be allowed
to exceed the maximum Height by Waiver; nor to fire or parapet walls, which shall not extend more
than five (5) feet above the maximum Height in T4 and T5 and ten (10) feet in T6 and Districts.
3.5.4 No Building or other Structure shall be located in a manner or built to a Height which constitutes a
hazard to aviation or creates hazards to persons or property by reason of unusual exposure to aviation
hazards. In addition to Height limitations established by this Code, limitations established by
the Miami-Dade County Height Zoning Ordinance as stated in Article 37 of the Code of Miami-Dade
County (Miami International Airport) shall apply to Heights of Buildings and Structures.
A letter authorizing clearance from the Miami-Dade Aviation Department or the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) may be required by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of any Building
permit.
Construction of an Educational facility within the delineated Miami International Airport Critical Approach
Area as defined by the Miami-Dade County Code shall only be granted by Exception. Construction
of such facility is subject to the approval by the Miami-Dade County Aviation Department
or any other agencies authorized by law to approve the construction.
MIAMI 21
III.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.5.5 Height limitations for Properties Abutting and in Proximity to National Historic Landmarks
a. All properties designated a National Historic Landmark (NHL) which include a Designed Landscape
that is an integral part of the documented significance supporting the NHL designation shall
be protected by height limitations throughout the entire Civic Institution zoned property of which
the NHL is a part, so as to protect the Designed Landscape from the potentially adverse effects
of an undertaking that may diminish the integrity of the NHL property’s location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, association or qualities that qualified it for NHL designation. Examples
of adverse effects which diminish the integrity of the NHL property include those which: cause
physical destruction of or damage to all or part of the NHL property; or change the character of
the NHL property’s use or physical features within the NHL property’s setting that contribute to
its historic significance; or introduce visual, atmospheric or audible elements that diminish the
integrity of the NHL property’s significant historic features; or alter the NHL property in a way that
is not consistent with the federal standards for the treatment of historic properties and applicable
guidelines, as published by the United States Department of the Interior.
b. The height of structures throughout the entire Civic Institution zoned property of which the NHL
is a part shall not exceed that established by a six (6) degree vertical plane which is measured
beginning from the ground floor elevation of the principal historic building at the façade that overlooks
the Designed Landscape, which plane shall extend in a one hundred eighty (180) degree
arc facing the Designed Landscape and measured at grade from the midpoint of the building
façade. The ground floor elevation shall be measured according to the 1929 N.G.V.D. of Mean
Sea Level supplied by the City of Miami. Structures existing on affected properties at the time of
the effective date of this Miami 21 Code shall not be considered nonconforming structures.
c. Should the height limitations for structures located in such Civic Institution zoned property as of
the effective date of this Miami 21 Code be more restrictive than that created by this section, the
most restrictive height shall apply. In the event of a rezoning of all or part of the Civic Institution
property, either by successional zoning or by Special Area Plan, the height limitations specified
in this Section 3.5.5 shall be incorporated in all subsequent rezonings.
d. For purposes of this Section 3.5.5., the following definitions shall apply:
1. Designed Landscape is one or more of the following:
• a landscape that has significance as a design or work of art;
• a landscape consciously designed and laid out by a master gardener, landscape architect,
architect, or horticulturalist to a design principle, or an owner or other amateur using
a recognized style or tradition in response or reaction to a recognized style or tradition;
• a landscape having a historical association with a significant person, trend, event, etc. in
landscape gardening or landscape architecture; or
• a landscape having a significant relationship to the theory or practice of landscape architecture.
2. National Historic Landmark is a nationally significant historic place designated by the Secretary
of the Interior because it possesses exceptional value or quality in illustrating or interpreting
the heritage of the United States, and defined in Title 36, Section 65.3 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
3.5.6 See Chapter 23 of the City Code, titled Historic Preservation, for regulations and additional height
MIAMI 21
III.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
requirements.
3.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
3.6.1 Off-street Parking Standards
a. Off-street Parking requirements for the individual Transect Zones shall be as set forth in Article
4, Table 4. Where required off-street parking is based on square footage of Use, the calculation
shall only include Habitable Rooms and Habitable Space occupied by such Use.
b. Off-street Parking dimensions and Shared Parking (mixed-use) reduction table shall be as set
forth in Article 4, Table 5.
c. Required Parking for Adaptive Reuses may be reduced or exempted by Waiver for properties
located in a Community Redevelopment Area, or in areas where a Parking Trust Fund has been
established, or for historic sites and contributing Structures within designated historic districts.
d. Parking reductions shall not be cumulative except in T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80. Parking
reductions shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total Off-street Parking required, except for
Residential components of projects within one thousand (1,000) feet of Metrorail or Metromover
stations.
e. Parking that is otherwise not allowed but that is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal
Use may be provided in any T3 or T4-R Transect Zone by process of Exception and only
if there is an existing legally built parking lot. Access for such Lots shall be subject to all other
requirements of the Transect Zone including Liner, landscaping, or Streetscreen requirements.
Such parking shall not expand or increase the degree of nonconformity. Parking in other Transect
Zones shall be approved pursuant to Article 4, Table 3.
3.6.2 Off-street Parking Driveway Standards [RESERVED]
3.6.3 Additional Off-street Parking Regulations
General performance standards for Off-street Parking facilities:
a. Parking shall be implemented so as to provide safe and convenient access to and from public
Thoroughfares which include movement lanes and Public Frontages.
b. Vehicular access through Residential properties for nonresidential Uses shall be prohibited.
c. Off-street Parking spaces shall be located with sufficient room for safe and convenient parking
without infringing on any public Thoroughfare or sidewalk.
d. Off-street Parking spaces whose locations require that cars back into movement lanes shall
only be permissible in T3 and T4 zones. Backing into Alleys shall be permissible in all Transect
Zones.
e. Off-street Parking or loading area shall not be used for the sale, repair, or dismantling of any
vehicle or equipment, or for storage of materials or supplies.
MIAMI 21
III.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
f. Parking or storage of commercial trucks, buses, vans, sign trailers; trailers or semi-trailers for
freight, cargo; non-recreational watercraft; or the like shall not be permitted in any T3, T4, T5-R
or T6-R Zone.
g. Inoperable vehicles and other inoperable Recreational Watercraft or equipment shall be stored
only in storage facilities or other approved places where they are completely concealed from
public view.
h. Except in connection with permitted active continuing construction on the premises, construction
equipment such as earth moving machines, excavators, cranes, and the like shall only be
allowed in D1, D2 and D3, as allowed by this Code.
i. All Off-street Parking shall comply with applicable regulations related to lighting, paving, and
drainage including the Miami-Dade County Code and the Florida Building Code.
j. Specific areas may be set aside for Tandem Parking. Tandem Parking in all Transect Zones,
except T3 and T4, shall be used only by a valet parking operator.
k. Parking facilities on adjoining Lots may share access points, driveways and parking subject to
a recorded covenant running with the property on which the facilities are located, by process of
Waiver.
l. Stationing of Recreation Watercraft:
1. Transect Zones
Stationing of Recreational Watercraft may only be permitted in T3, T4-R and T4-L Zones and
only where incidental to a Single-Family Residence. This section shall not be construed as
preventing the docking of boats along the waterfront.
2. Screening
Screening arrangements shall be made to buffer view of the Recreational Watercraft from
Abutting parcels by means of walls, fences or landscaping of sufficient opaqueness to visually
conceal its bulk while in keeping with applicable provisions in Article 3 and 5.
3. Occupancy
Recreational Watercraft stationed in T3, T4-R and T4-L Zones shall not be used as Residential
or other Occupancies.
4. Location
Stationing of Recreational Watercraft may only be permitted when placed within the Second
or Third Layer of the property.
5. Height
The maximum height of the Recreational Watercraft shall not exceed eight (8) feet, inclusive
of trailer and excluding Minor Accessories.
6. State or condition
Stationing of Recreational Watercraft in T3, T4-R and T4-L Zones may only be permitted as
MIAMI 21
III.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
long as the Recreational Watercraft is maintained in an orderly and seemly condition.
3.6.4 Calculation of Off-street Parking requirements related to number of seats.
Where parking requirements relate to number of seats and seating is in the form of undivided pews,
benches, or the like, twenty (20) lineal inches shall be construed to be equal to one (1) seat. Where
Parking requirements relate to movable seating in auditoriums and other assembly rooms, ten (10)
square feet of Floor Area shall be construed to be equal to one (1) seat except where otherwise
specified. Net floor area shall be the actual area occupied by seating and related aisles, and shall
not include accessory unoccupied areas or the thickness of walls.
3.6.5 Valet Parking
Off-street Parking facilities maintained with valet parking shall be allowed generally, provided that
the minimum Off-street Parking requirements of this Code are satisfied and that an attendant shall
remain on duty during business hours or as long as the Principal Building is occupied.
3.6.6 Parking Management Plan
Parking allowed off-site through a parking management plan agreement with the City of Miami Parking
Authority shall be as set forth in Chapter 35 of the City Code.
Within areas under a parking management plan, outdoor areas, including the public right-of-way,
which are regularly used for display and sales, or as dining areas, shall be calculated as part of the
establishment’s total floor area and shall comply with Off-Street parking requirements.
3.6.7 Off-street Parking Reductions by Use
a. Parking reductions for Elderly Housing.
1. Housing for the Elderly, in relation to this regulation, is not to be construed as homes or institutions
for the aged which are primarily convalescent or Nursing Homes.
2. Off-street Parking space requirements in connection with Housing for the Elderly conforming
to the requirements of state or federal programs may be reduced by Waiver to a maximum
of one (1) parking space per every two (2) dwelling units.
3. The applicant shall submit plans which demonstrate how the remaining parking will be accommodated
in the event that the housing becomes market rate housing at some time in the
future.
The following criteria shall apply:
(a) Applicant shall submit written certification from the applicable state or federal agency in
charge of the program.
(b) Off-street Parking reduction shall be permitted upon a finding by the Planning Director
that, in view of location of such housing, the economic status of anticipated occupants,
and other pertinent considerations as specified in the permit, there will be adequate OffMIAMI
21
III.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
street Parking for occupants, visitors, and staff.
(c) The premises shall be used as Housing for the Elderly, subject to the exceptions and
limitations set forth in (a) above, until the parking requirements for a different Use have
been met.
b. Parking Reduction for Low-Income Housing
1. Off-street Parking requirements in connection with housing for low income families and individuals
may be reduced by process of Exception only up to fifty percent (50%) of the spaces
generally required. Housing for low-income families and individuals shall be qualified by the
City of Miami Department of Community Development.
2. The applicant shall submit plans which demonstrate how the remaining parking may be accommodated
in the event that the housing becomes market rate housing at some time in the
future.
3. The following criteria shall apply:
(a) The project shall otherwise conform to the requirements of state or federal programs
for this purpose.
(b) The Board, in its consideration of the application for Exception, shall determine and
make a finding that the reduction in Off-street Parking requirements is justified in view
of the nature and type of prospective occupancy and the economic circumstances
involved, and that traffic and parking problems resulting from such reduction will not
unduly burden traffic facilities in the Neighborhood.
(c) The Board shall, as part of its grant of Exception, specify that the City, upon notice
and review for Waiver, may later require that the applicant implement its plan to provide
the full amount of required parking if it is demonstrated that traffic and parking
conditions together with impact on the Neighborhood require such provision.
(d) After such permit has been issued, the premises shall not be used other than as Low
Income Housing, subject to the Exception and limitations set forth in (a) above, unless
and until any parking requirements and all other requirements or limitations of
this Code have been met.
3.6.8 Deferral of Off-street Parking Standards
a. Deferral of portions of total required parking improvements in phased projects
Parking requirements shall be met as set forth by this Code and built concurrently with approved
improvements generating said requirement. Provision of parking should not in part or in whole
be deferred for future implementation. Further, phased projects shall be approved subject to
provision of required parking for each component phase to be provided concurrently with the
phase generating said requirement; however deferrals may be granted by Exception as specified
below.
MIAMI 21
III.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
b. Deferral period, revocation of permit; notice of revocation.
A deferral may be allowed for up to five (5) years without provision for renewal except upon application
for a new Exception.
3.6.9 Off-street Loading Requirements
a. Off-street vehicular loading shall be required for all T5, T6, CS, CI, CI-HD and D zones, as shown
in Article 4, Table 5 and shall require no more than three (3) turning movements.
3.6.10 Off-street Bicycle Parking Requirements
a. Off-street bicycle parking shall be provided for all T4, T5, T6, CS, CI, CI-HD, and D zones, as
shown in Article 4, Table 4.
b. After the first fifty (50) required bicycle spaces are provided, additional spaces may be reduced
by one-half.
c. Required bicycle parking shall meet the following standards:
1. Required bicycle parking shall be provided in a safe, accessible and convenient location.
2. Bicycle parking facilities shared by more than one use are encouraged.
3. Required bicycle parking facilities may be located within the project site or in a shared bicycle
parking facility subject to all the conditions for shared bicycle parking facilities below:
(a) Required bicycle parking spaces for two (2) or more adjacent sites may be satisfied
by the same bicycle parking facility used jointly provided that such right of joint use
and maintenance is evidenced by covenant running with the land or equivalent legal
document establishing the joint use.
(b) Required shared bicycle parking facilities are to be located within 300 feet of any
building’s main entrance.
(c) The minimum number of required bicycle parking is satisfied by all sites using the
shared facility.
(d) For the purposes of this section, shared bicycle parking facilities are areas, locations,
or structures designed to accommodate, house, store, maintain or hold several bicycle
parking spaces.
4. When required off-street vehicular parking is covered, the required bicycle parking shall also
be covered.
5. When required bicycle parking is provided in racks, one (1) standard U-rack will accommodate
two (2) bikes and each rack must meet the following standards:
(a) The bicycle frame and one (1) wheel can be locked to the rack with a high security,
MIAMI 21
III.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle;
(b) A bicycle six feet long can be securely held with its frame supported so that the bicycle
cannot be pushed or fall in a manner that will damage the wheels or components;
and
(c) The rack must be securely anchored.
6. When required bicycle parking is provided in lockers, the lockers must be securely anchored.
7. Parking and maneuvering areas.
(a) Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another
bicycle;
(b) There must be an aisle of at least five (5) feet wide behind all required bicycle parking
to allow room for bicycle maneuvering;
(c) The area devoted to bicycle parking must be hard surfaced.
8. A one (1) square foot directional sign shall be required if the bicycle parking area is not visible
from the street or main building entrance. Said sign must be posted at the main building
entrance indicating the location of the bicycle parking.
3.7 FENCES AND WALLS
3.7.1 General
For all Commercial and Industrial Uses, a six-foot (6) solid masonry wall shall be provided along all
property lines which adjoin T3, T4-R, T5-R and T6-R.
3.7.2 Prohibited on Fences and walls
a. The use of broken glass, projecting nails, coiled razor wire, spikes or similar materials on walls
and Fences is prohibited in all Transect Zones.
b. Barbed wire Fences, or use of barbed wire along the top of a fence or wall, shall be permissible
only in D1, D2 and D3, subject to approval by Waiver upon making a written finding that its use
and placement are reasonably necessary to the safety, welfare and security of the property.
3.8 THOROUGHFARES
3.8.1 General Principles
a. Thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic and to
provide access to Lots and Open Spaces.
MIAMI 21
III.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
b. Thoroughfares consist of lanes for vehicles, transit, bicycles and Public Frontages. The lanes
may have a variety of widths for movement and parking. The Public Frontages contribute to the
character of Transect Zones. They may include swales, Sidewalks, curbing, Planters, bicycle
paths and street trees. See Article 4, Tables 6 and 8.
c. Thoroughfares should be designed in context with the urban form and desired design speed of
the Transect Zones through which they pass. The Public Frontages that pass from one Transect
Zone to another should be adjusted accordingly.
d. Bicycles are a sustainable and viable mode of transportation and recreation in the City of Miami.
Bicycle use of Thoroughfares should be as follows: Bicycles and vehicles may share use of lanes
on all Thoroughfares. Thoroughfares that have sufficient paving width to accommodate bicyclists’
safety should include dedicated Bicycle Lanes. Greenways, waterfront walks and other Civic
Spaces should include Bicycle usage .
e. A City-wide bicycle plan may designate an interconnected network serving bicyclists with a series
of marked routes that include Bicycle Lanes as well as Bicycle Routes that give bicycles priority,
such as those Thoroughfares which parallel major corridors or include major corridors which can
be reconfigured to limit conflicts between vehicles and bicycles.
f. Pedestrian comfort should be a primary consideration of Thoroughfare design and dimensions.
Design conflict between vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian movement should be decided in favor
of the pedestrian.
3.8.2 Thoroughfares
a. The guidelines for Thoroughfares are as described in Article 8.
b. The Thoroughfare network should be designed to prioritize connectivity, defining Blocks not exceeding
an average perimeter length of 1,320 feet. The length shall be measured as the sum of
Lot Frontage Lines. Thoroughfare closings should not be allowed; instead, traffic calming designs
should be deployed to control traffic volume and speed.
c. All Thoroughfares should terminate at other Thoroughfares, to form a network. Cul-de-sacs
should be permitted only when supported by natural site conditions. Thoroughfares that provide
View Corridors shall not be vacated.
d. In T5 and T6 Zones, Public and Private Frontages should be coordinated with a single paving
and landscape design as provided in Article 4, Table 6 and Article 8.
3.8.3 Public Frontages
a. Public Frontages should be designed as shown in Article 4, Table 6 and allocated within Transect
Zones as specified in Article 4, Table 2.
b. Within the Public Frontages, the arrangement of street trees and street lights should be as provided
in Article 8.
c. The Public Frontage in Transect Zones T1, T2 and T3 should include trees of various species, and
MIAMI 21
III.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
may include low maintenance understory landscape. The introduced landscape should consist
primarily of native species requiring minimal irrigation, fertilization and maintenance.
d. The Public Frontage in Transect Zones T4, T5, T6 and D1 should include trees planted in a
regularly-spaced Allée of single or alternated species with shade canopies of a height that, at
maturity, clears the first Story. The introduced landscape should consist primarily of durable species
tolerant of soil compaction.
3.8.4 Vision Clearance
3.8.4.1 Intent; “Material Impediment to Visibility” construed.
It is the intent of these regulations to provide protection from traffic hazards at intersections for automotive
vehicles and their passengers, and for cyclists and pedestrians, including small children.
Given this intent, the phrase “Material Impediment to Visibility,” as used here, is to be construed as
any material obstruction to Visibility which would result in concealment of a child over two and onehalf
(2 1/2) feet in height approaching an intersection, or would conceal an approaching automotive
vehicle or cyclist from such a child. In determinations as to whether or not there is Material Impediment
to Visibility, the speed, direction, and duration of movement to point of potential collision or
contact shall be considered.
Adjacent to Thoroughfares, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to form a Material Impediment to Visibility between the heights of two and one-half (2
1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the street grade level within Visibility Triangles described below:
a. At Thoroughfare intersections with Building Setbacks:
Visibility Triangles shall be maintained to include an area bounded by the first twenty-five (25)
feet along the intersecting edges of the right-of-way (or Base Building Line) projected where
rounded, and a line running across the Lot and connecting the ends of such twenty-five-foot
lines. See Article 4, Table 8.
b. At intersections of driveways with Thoroughfares with Building Setbacks:
Visibility Triangles shall be maintained to include an area bounded by the first ten (10) feet along
the intersecting edges of the Base Building Line and the driveway, projected where rounded, and
a line running across any intervening right-of-way and the Lot and connecting the ends of such
ten-foot lines. See Article 4, Table 8.
c. At Thoroughfare intersections with Buildings with no Setbacks:
Visibility Triangles shall be maintained to include an area bounded by the first ten (10) feet along
the intersecting edges of the Base Building Line, projected where rounded, and a line running
across the Lot and connecting the ends of such ten-foot lines. See Article 4, Table 8.
d. At intersections of driveways with Thoroughfares with no Building Setbacks:
Visibility triangles shall be maintained to include an area bounded by the first five (5) feet along
the intersecting edges of the Base Building Line and driveway, projected where rounded, and
a line running across any intervening right-of-way and the Lot and connecting the ends of such
five-foot lines. See Article 4, Table 8.
e. At all Thoroughfare intersections:
MIAMI 21
III.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
Visibility Triangles shall be maintained to include an area bounded by the first ten (10) feet along
the intersecting edges of the Base Building Line, projected where rounded, and a line running
across the Lot and connecting the ends of such ten-foot lines. See Article 4, Table 8.
3.8.4.2. Variances prohibited.
No Variances from the provisions of Section 3.8.4 are permitted.
3.9 SPECIAL AREA PLANS
The purpose of a Special Area Plan is to allow parcels greater than nine (9) Abutting acres in size
to be master planned so as to allow greater integration of public improvements and Infrastructure,
and greater flexibility so as to result in higher or specialized quality building and Streetscape design
within the Special Area Plan.
The purpose of a Special Area Plan further is to encourage the assembly and master planning of
parcels greater than nine (9) Abutting acres in size, in order to provide greater integration of public
and private improvements and Infrastructure; to enable Thoroughfare connectivity; to encourage
a variety of Building Heights, massing and Streetscape design, and to provide high quality design
elements, all in order to further the intent of this Code expressed in Article 2.
3.9.1 General
a. The single or multiple owner(s) of Abutting properties in excess of nine (9) acres may apply for
a rezoning to a Special Area Plan.
b. A Special Area Plan shall be approved by the process of rezoning with or without Transect
changes.
c. A Special Area Plan shall assign Thoroughfares, Transect Zones and Civic Space Types, with
appropriate transitions to Abutting areas. Guidelines for Thoroughfares and Public Frontages
may be adjusted to the particular circumstances of the Special Area Plan.
d. A Special Area Plan shall include a map of the Thoroughfares and Transect Zones, and the
standards that deviate from the requirements of Article 5.
e. A Special Area Plan shall assign at least five percent (5%) of its aggregated Lot Area to a Civic
Space Type. Civic Building sites are to be located within or adjacent to Civic Space Types or at
the axial termination of significant Thoroughfares. The developer shall be responsible for constructing
the public improvements within the Special Area Plan, including but not limited to the
Civic Space Types and Thoroughfares.
f. Development within the Special Area Plan shall be pursuant to a recorded development agreement
that will establish the allocation of Thoroughfares and Civic Space Types and Building Area
among the Building sites, and the creation and retention of the public benefits.
g. Unless a Building is specifically approved as part of the Special Area Plan, any Building shall
be reviewed by the Planning Director, after referral to and recommendation from the CRC for
MIAMI 21
III.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
conformance to the Plan, prior to issuance of the Building Permit.
h. A Special Area Plan may include:
1. A differentiation of the Thoroughfares as a Primary-Grid (A-Grid) and a Secondary-Grid
(B-Grid). Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Code in
support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered
for automobile-oriented standards allowing surface parking lots, unlined parking decks, and
drive-throughs. The Frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the total length within a Special Area Plan. For Frontages on the B-Grid, parking areas
may be allowed in the Second Layer.
2. Retail Frontage requiring that a Building provide a Commercial Use at sidewalk level along
the entire length of the Frontage. The Commercial Use Building shall be no less than seventy
percent (70%) glazed in clear glass and provided with an Awning overlapping the sidewalk
as generally illustrated in Article 4, Table 6. The first floor should be confined to Retail Use
through the depth of the Second Layer.
3. Gallery or Arcade Frontage, requiring that a Building provide a permanent cover over the
sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The Gallery or Arcade Frontage may
be combined with a Retail Frontage as shown in Article 4, Table 6. Gallery or Arcade Frontage
within the First Layer may apply towards Open Space requirements.
4. Build-to-lines that differ from Transect Zone Setback requirement.
5. A Terminated Vista location, requiring that the Building be provided with architectural articulation
of a Type and character that responds to the location.
6. A Pedestrian Passage, requiring a minimum ten (10) foot wide pedestrian access be reserved
between Buildings.
7. A preservation plan acceptable to the Historic and Environmental Preservation Board for any
historic resources in the area of the Special Area Plan.
8. Area Design Guidelines.
9. A parking management program that enables shared parking among public and private Uses.
10. Flexible allocation of development capacity and Height, excluding Density on individual sites
within the Special Area Plan shall be allowed so long as the capacity or Height distribution
does not result in development that is out of Scale or character with the surrounding area,
and provides for appropriate transitions.
3.10 HISTORIC PRESERVATION STANDARDS
See Chapter 23 of the City Code, titled Historic Preservation, for regulations and additional height
requirements.
MIAMI 21
III.21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.11 WATERFRONT STANDARDS
In addition to the Miami City Charter requirements, the following Setback, walkways and waterfront
standards shall apply to all waterfront properties within the City of Miami, except as modifications to
these standards for all waterfront properties may be approved by the City Commission pursuant to
the procedures established in the City Charter.
All Miami riverfront properties shall include water-related uses across all Transect Zones except T3.
a. Waterfront Setbacks
1. Waterfront Setbacks shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet measured from the mean high
water line provided along any waterfront, except where the depth of the Lot is less than twohundred
(200) feet the Setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the Lot
depth; and except for T3, T4-R, D1, D2 and D3 Transect Zones where a minimum Setback of
twenty (20) feet shall be provided, except where the depth of the Lot is less than eighty (80)
feet the Setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the Lot depth. These
requirements shall not apply to Marine Related Industrial Establishments along the Miami
River. Within D1, D2 and D3 Transect Zones facilities may span across man-made slips with
a Structure to conduct marine-related commercial and industrial activities.
2. Side Setbacks shall be equal in aggregate to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the water
frontage of each Lot based on average Lot Width, to allow View Corridors open from ground
to sky and to allow public access to the waterfront; except for T3, T4-R, D1, D2 and D3
Transect Zones.
b. Waterfront Walkways Design Standards:
1. Waterfront walkways shall be designed and constructed within the waterfront Setbacks in
accordance with these Waterfront Walkway Design Standards and should remain open to
public access during all times, but at a minimum, shall remain open to the public between
6am through 10pm. Waterfront walkways are not required within Transect Zones T3, T4-R,
D1, D2 and D3 unless the site is a new Commercial retail, Office or restaurant Use.
2. Waterfront walkways shall feel public, meet all Americans with Disabilities Act (A.D.A.) requirements
throughout the entire length of the waterfront walkway and provide unobstructed
visual access to the water.
3. Waterfront walkways shall connect to abutting public walkways, neighboring walkways, and
Open Space at a consistent A.D.A. compliant width and grade to allow clear pedestrian circulation
along the water’s edge.
4. The waterfront walkway surface shall remain at a constant elevation and be accessible to
handicapped persons throughout the entire length of the waterfront walkway. Walkways
should have a slight grade away from the bulkhead edge for stormwater retention within the
transition zone.
5. The total width of a waterfront walkway shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and built
to the standards and guidelines outlined in Waterfront Design Guidelines, on Appendix B.
MIAMI 21
III.22
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.12 DESIGN GUIDELINES, NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS, AND NEIGHBORHOOD
REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
3.12.1 Design Guidelines
This section lists additional guidelines defining elements to protect and promote Neighborhood or
area character, which may be obtained through the Planning Department. In the areas for which
guidelines have been adopted, any proposed building shall be reviewed by the Planning Director
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
a. MLK Boulevard Streetscape Beautification Master Plan and Façade Standards
b. Southeast/Overtown Park West Community Redevelopment Plan
c. Miami River Greenway Regulatory Design Standards
d. Grand Avenue Vision Plan
e. Coral Way Beautification Master Plan
f. Little Haiti - French Creole Design Standards
g. Offstreet Parking Design Standards and Guidelines
h. Overtown Folklife Village
i. OMNI CRA Streetscapes: Performing Arts & Media Entertainment District
3.12.2 Neighborhood Conservation Districts (NCD)
a. Intent
A Neighborhood Conservation District (NCD) is an overlay zoning district that is intended to
preserve unique and distinctive neighborhoods that exhibit a certain defined character worthy of
protection, such as physical features, design characteristics, and recognized cultural or historical
identity. The Neighborhood Conservation District provides additional regulations or design
guidelines for new construction, major alterations and additions to existing Buildings, in order to
protect, enhance and perpetuate the value of the neighborhood conservation area. It is further
intended that such districts and the regulations adopted for them shall be in accord with, and
promote the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan.
b. Purposes
The purposes of creating a Neighborhood Conservation District, singularly or in combination,
are to:
1. Protect neighborhoods that have distinguishable architectural character but that do not qualify
for historic district status because of the loss of the original fabric through attrition and new
development, although the neighborhood still maintains a considerable number of noncontiguous
traditional structures that retain some characteristics that reflect their historical
origins.
2. Identify structures within the district that, while not historically designated, possess significant
character reflecting a Type, period or method of construction important to Miami’s past.
Demolition of such structures will be subject to review prior to receiving a demolition permit.
MIAMI 21
III.23
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3. Protect areas that have a distinctive landscape, geologic, or environmental character. Protect
and promote the lush sub-tropical vegetation and tree canopy that defines the South
Florida landscape and gives particular identity to the neighborhood. Protect remaining unique
environmental features such as exposed bluffs, natural rock outcroppings, caves, natural
sinkholes, and springs.
4. Identify and celebrate those neighborhoods whose immigrant or émigré citizens have brought
a unique cultural perspective to a neighborhood and which deserve recognition and protection.
5. Protect and promote specialized commercial areas with distinct character, such as antique,
arts, outdoor markets, or design districts, and assist in their economic revitalization and enhancement.
c. Designation Process
The NCD shall be designated by process of rezoning, and shall be initiated by an applicant who
submits the following to the Planning Department:
1. A description of the proposed boundaries of the NCD;
2. A description of the distinctive features of the district which are sought to be protected and
preserved;
3. A list of all property owners within the boundaries of the proposed district;
4. Evidence that demonstrates that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the owners within the proposed
boundary support the initiation of the NCD rezoning.
The Planning Director shall prepare a recommended conservation plan and any proposed
regulations and/or design guidelines as provided in paragraph d. below. The PZAB shall
consider the recommendations and provide its recommendations to the City Commission.
In addition, the City shall conduct at least one workshop regarding the proposed NCD during
the consideration of the rezoning, and notification of the workshop shall be sent by first
class mail to all property owners located within the proposed boundaries of the district, as
shown on the tax roll, at least thirty days prior to the workshop. The City Commission upon
designation of the NCD shall adopt the conservation plan and any requisite regulations for
the NCD, and the Zoning Atlas shall be amended to show the district boundaries of the NCD.
Amendments to any NCD adopted under this Code shall be adopted pursuant to this Code.
d. Recommendation for Neighborhood Conservation District designation
The Planning Department shall prepare a recommendation for the designation of each NCD.
Each recommendation shall identify the proposed rezoning by the specific name created for the
NCD and shall contain the following information:
1. A statement of the purposes of the NCD, specifying the substantial public interest involved
and the objectives to be promoted by the conservation plan and any special regulations for
the district as a whole, or within any subareas of the district which may be recommended.
MIAMI 21
III.24
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
2. The boundaries of the NCD district and any sub-areas, if any, including a map and a general
land description of the boundaries.
3. An explanation of the boundaries selected that meet the intent and requirements for the NCD.
4. A conservation plan identifying and describing the distinctive neighborhood characteristics
of the proposed district, with appropriate maps and graphics, and any design guidelines or
regulations recommended to promote the purposes of the district. Regulations may require
rezoning to different Transect zones than those existing at the time of designation, additional
overlay zoning standards, additional overlay zoning processes, or the like, as tailored to the
purposes of the specific NCD.
e. NCD Land Development Regulations
The requirements of this Code shall be effective in the NCD except as modified by the regulations
of the conservation plan adopted by the City Commission upon designation of the NCD..
The ordinance designating the NCD shall be referenced in this Code, with any specific regulations
and design guidelines of the NCD adopted by reference to this Code and maintained in the
Planning Department.
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board and procedures related to appeals thereto set out by
this Miami 21 Code shall replace the Zoning Board and procedures related to appeals thereto
in Ordinance 11000.
f. NCD-1 Coral Gate Neighborhood Conservation District
The Coral Gate NCD-1, originally adopted by Ord. No. 12413, on September 25, 2003, is hereby
amended and codified in Appendix A.1 to this Code.
g. NCD-2 Village West Island and Charles Avenue Neighborhood Conservation District
The Village West Island and Charles Avenue NCD-2 incorporates and amends:
1. The Charles Avenue NCD-2, originally adopted by Ord. No. 12417, September 25, 2003, and
repealed and reenacted by Ord. No. 12651, adopted January 27, 2005;
2. SD-28, the Village West Ordinance, adopted by Ord. No. 12651, January 27, 2005;
3. Portions of SD-2 adopted by Ord. No. 12651, adopted January 27, 2005;
4. Portions of the Coconut Grove NCD-3, originally adopted by Ord. No. 12672, September 24,
2005.
The Village West Island and Charles Avenue NCD is hereby adopted and codified in Appendix
A.2 to this Code.
h. NCD-3 Coconut Grove Neighborhood Conservation District
MIAMI 21
III.25
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
The Coconut Grove NCD-3 incorporates and amends:
1. The Coconut Grove NCD-3, originally adopted by Ord. No. 12672, September 24, 2005;
2. Portions of SD-2, originally adopted by Ord. No. 12651, January 27, 2005; and
3. SD 18, originally adopted by Ord. No. 10863, March 28, 1991; and
4. SD 18.1, originally adopted by Ord. No. 11240, March 27, 1995.
The Coconut Grove NCD is hereby adopted and codified in Appendix A.3 to this Code.
3.12.3 Neighborhood Revitalization Districts (NRD)
a. Intent
A Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD) is an overlay zoning district that is intended to revitalize
unique and distinctive neighborhoods that exhibit a certain defined character worthy of enhancements,
such as distinct physical features, unique design characteristics, or recognized cutural identity.
A NRD provides additional regulations or design guidelines for new construction or modifications
to existing Buildings and Streetscapes, in order to promote, enhance, and perpetuate the value of
properties while responding to the existing conditions of the neighborhood. It is further intended
that such districts and the regulations adopted for them shall be in accordance with and promote
the adopted Zoning Ordinance and Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan.
b. Purposes
The purposes of creating a NRD, sigularly or in combination, are to:
1. Revitalize unique and distinctive neighborhoods that have exhibited a certain defined character
worthy of enhancements, such as distinct physical features, unique design characteristics, or recognized
cultural identity.
2. Identify and preserve structures within the district that, while not historically designated, possess
significant character reflecting a Legacy Structure which is a component of the neighborhood and
important to Miami’s past.
3. Protect and promote specialized commercial areas with distinct character, such as arts, outdoor
markets, or design districts, and assist in their economic revitalization and enhancement.
4. Establish commercial Corridors to function as Mixed-Use, transit-oriented, walkable areas for the
neighborhood and its surrounding community.
5. Improve off-street parking efficiency through transit incentivized parking reductions and centralized
parking programs.
6. Implement a Public Benefits Program calibrated to the neighborhood to address specific needs
for Affordable/Workforce Housing, Public Parks and Open Space, or Civic Space or Civic Support
Uses.
MIAMI 21
III.26
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
c. Designation Process
The NRD shall be designated by process of rezoning, and may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning
Department or by an applicant. If initiated by an applicant, such application must be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Department and accompanied by the following:
1. A description of the proposed boundaries of the NRD;
2. A description of the distinctive physical features and characteristics of the district which are sought
to be enhanced and perpetuated for the future of the neighborhood;
3. A list of all property owners within the boundaries of the proposed district;
4. Written evidence that demonstrates that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the owners within the
proposed boundaries support the initiative of the NRD rezoning.
The Planning Director shall prepare a recommended revitalization plan and any proposed regulations
or design guidelines as provided in paragraph d. below. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board (“PZAB”) shall consider the recommendations and provide its recommendations to the City
Commission. In addition, the City shall conduct at least one workshop regarding the proposed NRD
during the consideration of the rezoning, and notification of the workshop shall be sent by first class
mail to all property owners located within the proposed boundaries of the district, as shown on the
tax roll, at least ten (10) days prior to the workshop. The City Commission, upon designation of the
NRD, shall adopt the revitalization plan and any proposed regulations or design guidelines for the
NRD, and the Zoning Atlas shall be amended to show the district boundaries of the NRD. Amendments
to any NRD adopted under this Code shall be adopted pursuant to this Code.
d. Recommendation for Neighborhood Revitalization District designation
The Department of Planning and Zoning shall prepare a recommendation for the designation of each
NRD. Each recommendation shall identify the proposed rezoning by the specific name created for
the NRD and shall contain the following information:
1. A statement of the purposes of the NRD, specifying the substantial public interest involved, the
objectives to be promoted by the revitalization plan and any proposed regulations or design guidelines,
and any special regulations for the district as a whole, or within any sub-areas of the district
which may be recommended.
2. The boundaries of the NRD district and any sub-areas, if any, including a map and a general land
description of the boundaries.
3. An explanation of the boundaries selected that meets the intent and requirements for the NRD.
4. Appropriate maps and graphics, and any design guidelines or regulations recommended to
promote the purposes of the district. Regulations may require rezoning to different Transect Zones
than those existing at the time of designation, additional overlay zoning standards, additional overlay
zoning processes, or the like, as tailored specifically to the NRD.
MIAMI 21
III.27
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
e. NRD Land Development Regulations
The requirements of this Code shall be effective in the NRD except as modified by the regulations of
the revitalization plan and any proposed regulations or design guidelines adopted by the City Commission
upon designation of the NRD. The ordinance designating the NRD shall be referenced in
this Code, with any specific regulations and design guidelines of the NRD adopted by reference to
this Code and maintained in the Planning and Zoning Department.
f. NRD-1 Wynwood Neighborhood Revitalization District
The Wynwood NRD-1, originally adopted by Ord. No. 13561, on September 24, 2015, is hereby
amended and codified in Appendix J to this Code.
3.13 SUSTAINABILITY
3.13.1 General
a. Landscape requirements are as required in Article 9 of this Code and the City of Miami Tree
Protection regulations of Chapter 17 of the City Code, except that where this Code is more restrictive
than the Tree Protection regulations, this Code shall apply.
b. All new Buildings of more than 50,000 square feet of Habitable Rooms or Habitable Space in the
T5, T6, CI and CS zones shall be at a minimum certified as Silver by the United States Green
Building Council (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards
or equivalent standards adopted or approved by the City.
1. At the time of Building Permit application, the owner shall submit:
(a) Proof of registration with the Green Building Certification Institute, or equivalent agency;
(b) A signed and sealed affidavit from a LEED Accredited Professional, or applicable designation,
stating that the proposed Building is designed to achieve the required certification;
and
(c) A LEED Scorecard, or equivalent document, identifying anticipated credits to be achieved.
2. At the time of Certificate of Occupancy application, the owner shall submit:
(a) Proof of certification by the Green Building Certification Institute, or equivalent agency;
(b) A bond posted in a form acceptable to the City, in the amount indicated below;
(i) Two percent (2%) of the total cost of construction for a 50,000 - 100,000 square feet
Building;
(ii) Three percent (3%) of the total cost of construction for a 100,001 - 200,000 square
feet Building;
(iii) Four percent (4%) of the total cost of construction for any Building greater than 200,000
square feet; or
MIAMI 21
III.28
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
(c) Proof of partial compliance from the Green Building Certification Institute, or applicable
agency, which demonstrates the credits presently achieved. In addition, a prorated portion
of the full bond amount, as indicated in subsection 2(b) above, shall be posted based
on the number of remaining credits needed to meet minimum certification requirements.
The bond amount to be posted shall be calculated as follows:
(credits remaining for certification / credits required for certification) x full bond amount =
prorated bond amount
3. Forfeiture of Bond
A bond under this Section 3.13.1 shall be forfeited to the City in the event that the Building
does not meet the for LEED Silver certification or applicable certification. The City will draw
down on the bond funds upon failure of the owner to submit proof of LEED Silver certification
in a form acceptable to the City within one (1) year of the City’s issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy for the Building. If required certification is not achieved but a majority of the credits
have been verified, the owner shall forfeit a portion of the bond based on any outstanding
credits which shall be calculated as follows:
(credits remaining for certification / credits required for certification) x full bond amount =
bond amount forfeited
If the amount to be forfeited is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the full bond amount, the
bond shall be forfeited in its entirety. Funds that become available to the City from the forfeiture
of the bond shall be placed in the Miami 21 Public Benefits Trust Fund established by
this Code.
c. Affordable Housing Developments that qualify under Section 3.15, may elect to comply with the
sustainability requirements promulgated by the Florida Housing Finance Corporation, or its successor
agency, in lieu of the requirements set forth in Section 3.13.1.b above.
d. The preservation of Natural Features of land such as trees, vegetation, geological, and other
characteristics and the preservation of features of archaeological significance are declared to
be in the public interest. Said preservation may justify the relaxation of Setbacks or required
Off-street Parking by Waiver. The Zoning Administrator shall determine that the trees, vegetation,
geological and other natural characteristic, or archaeological features are in the Buildable Area
of the Site and not in Setback areas required for the development of the site.
3.13.2 Heat Island Effect
The intent of this section is to reduce the heat island effect in the City of Miami and to consequently
reduce energy consumption and bills for buildings within the City.
a. Applicability
In all Transect Zones, except T3, the provisions of this section are applicable to all new construction
and to repair or replacement greater than fifty percent (50%) by area of existing roofs or site
Hardscape. All repairs or replacement of existing roofing or Hardscape shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Department for compliance with this section. The following portions of new or existing
roofs are exempted from the requirements of section 3.13.2:
MIAMI 21
III.29
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
1. The portion of the roof acting as a substructure for and covered by a rooftop deck, vegetation
associated with an extensive or intensive green roof as defined by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or any area of a roof utilized by photovoltaic and solar equipment.
2. A rooftop deck covering a maximum of 1/3 of the rooftop total gross area.
3. Existing roofs where less than fifty percent (50%) of existing roof area is repaired or replaced
are exempt from the requirements of 3.13.2.c.
4. Existing Hardscapes where less than fifty percent (50%) of existing Hardscape area is being
repaired or replaced are exempt from the requirements of 3.13.2.d.
b. Solar Reflectance
1. For roofing materials, all roof exterior surfaces and building materials used to comply with
this section, shall have a minimum Solar Reflectance as specified in sections 3.13.2.c and
3.13.2.d when (i) tested in accordance with ASTM E903 or ASTM E1918, (ii) tested with
a portable reflectometer at near ambient conditions, (iii) labeled by the Cool Roof Rating
Council, or (iv) labeled as an Energy Star qualified roof product. Any product that has been
rated by the Cool Roof Rating Council or by Energy Star shall display a label verifying the
rating of the product.
2. For paving materials, all paving materials used to comply with this section shall have a minimum
solar reflectance as specified in sections 3.13.2.d when (i) tested in accordance with
ASTM E903 or ASTM E1918, (ii) tested with a portable reflectometer at near ambient conditions,
or (iii) default values of Solar Reflectance for listed materials may be used as follows:
c. Roof
1. Requirements for Low Sloped Roofs
Roofing materials used in roofs with slopes of a rise of zero (0) units in a horizontal length
(0:12 pitch) up to and including roofs with slopes of a rise of two (2) units in a horizontal
length of 12 units (2:12 units) (“low-sloped”) shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Low-sloped roofs constructed as part of a new building shall utilize roofing products that
meet or exceed an initial reflectance value of 0.72 or a three-year installed reflectance
value of 0.5 as determined by the Cool Roof Rating Council or by Energy Star.
Material Solar Reflectance
Typical new gray concrete 0.35
Typical weathered gray concrete 0.20
Typical new white concrete 0.40
Typical weathered white concrete 0.40
New asphalt 0.05
Weathered asphalt 0.10
MIAMI 21
III.30
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
(b) Exception. Where more than 50% of the total gross area of the low-sloped roof is covered
with vegetation associated with an extensive or intensive green roof as defined by the
US EPA, the remainder of the roof shall have a reflectance value of a minimum of 0.30
and the rooftop deck exception in section 3.13.2.a.1 applies.
(c) Exception. Ballasted roofs with a minimum of 15 lbs/sq. ft. or ballast over the entire roof
surface may have a reflectance value of a minimum of 0.30. For the purposes of this
section, “ballast” shall mean river rock aggregate or larger, pavers or other means of
weighing down a roofing membrane over a substrate to resist wind uplift.
2. Requirements for Steep Sloped Roofs
Roofing materials used in roofs with slopes of a rise greater than two (2) units in a horizontal
length (2:12 pitch) (“steep-sloped”) shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Steep sloped roofs shall have an initial Solar Reflectance of 0.15 or greater.
3. Requirements for Roofs with Multiple Slopes
Roofs with multiple slopes shall be subject to those requirements applicable to the slope
which covers the largest area of the building footprint.
g. Non-roof Requirements
1. Provide any combination of the following strategies for fifty percent (50%) of the site Hardscape:
(a) Shade from solar panels or roofing materials with a Solar Reflectance of at least 0.30.
(b) Shade from trees within five (5) years of occupancy.
(c) Paving materials with a Solar Reflectance of at least 0.30.
(d) Pervious Pavement System.
OR
2. Place a minimum of fifty-percent (50%) of parking spaces under cover (defined as underground,
under deck, under roof, or under building). Any roof used to shade or cover parking
must have a Solar Reflectance of at least 0.30.
3.14 PUBLIC BENEFITS PROGRAM
The intent of the Public Benefits Program established in this section is to allow bonus Building Height
and FLR in T6 Zones and bonus Building Height in D1 Zones in exchange for the developer’s contribution
to specified programs that provide benefits to the public.
3.14.1 The bonus Height and FLR shall be permitted if the proposed Development contributes toward the
specified public benefits, above that which is otherwise required by this Code, in the amount and in
the manner as set forth herein.
MIAMI 21
III.31
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
The bonus shall not be available to properties in a T6 Zone if the property abuts a T3 Zone or in a
T6-8 Zone if the property abuts a CS Zone.
1. T6-8: eight Story maximum, bonus to twelve (12) Stories, FLR 5; bonus of twenty-five percent
(25%)
2. T6-12: twelve (12) Story maximum, bonus to twenty (20) Stories, FLR 8, bonus of thirty percent
(30%)
3. T6-24a: twenty-four (24) Story maximum, bonus to forty-eight (48) Stories, FLR 7, bonus of
thirty percent (30%)
4. T6-24b: twenty-four (24) Story maximum, bonus to forty-eight (48) Stories, FLR 16, bonus
of forty percent (40%)
5. T6-36a: thirty-six (36) Story maximum, bonus to sixty (60) Stories, FLR 12, bonus of forty
percent (40%)
6. T6-36b: thirty-six (36) Story maximum, bonus up to sixty (60) Stories, FLR 22, bonus of forty
percent (40%)
7. T6-48a: forty eight (48) Story maximum, bonus up to eighty (80) Stories, FLR 11, bonus of
fifty percent (50%)
8. T6-48b: forty eight (48) Story maximum, bonus up to eighty (80) Stories, FLR 18, bonus of
fifty percent (50%)
9. T6-60a: sixty (60) Story maximum, bonus up to unlimited Stories, FLR 11, bonus of fifty
percent (50%)
10. T6-60b: sixty (60) Story maximum, bonus up to unlimited Stories, FLR 18, bonus of fifty
percent (50%)
11. T6-80: eighty (80) Story maximum, bonus to unlimited Stories, FLR 24; bonus of fifty percent
(50%).
Transect Zone Heights are fully described in Article 5.
In addition, certain other bonuses may be provided as follows:
11. An additional Story in a T5 zone that Abuts a D1 zone, for an equivalent square footage of
Affordable/ Workforce Housing as described in Section 3.14.4. This shall not be applicable
to properties Abutting T3 zones.
12. In T6 zones, additional Height and FLR for LEED certified Silver, Gold or Platinum Buildings
as described in Section 3.14.4.
13. An additional Story in any zone for development of a Brownfield as described in Section
3.14.4.
14. In T6 zones additional Height and FLR for development that donates a Civic Space Type or
Civil Support Use area to the City of Miami as described in Section 3.14.4.
3.14.2 Upon providing a binding commitment for the specified public benefits as provided in Section 3.14.3
below, the proposed development project shall be allowed to build within the restrictions of the specific
Transect Zone, up to the bonus Height and FLR as established in this Section. The only square
footage allowed above the maximum Height is that achieved through the bonus program.
MIAMI 21
III.32
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
3.14.3 The proposed bonus Height and FLR shall be permitted in exchange for contribution to the City for
the following public benefits: affordable/workforce housing, Public Parks and Open Space, Green
Buildings, Brownfields, and Civic Space or Civil Support space. The City shall establish a Miami
21 Public Benefits Trust Fund for the cash contributions for Affordable/ Workforce Housing, Public
Parks and Open Space, and Green Building certification shortfall penalty made under this section.
The City Commission, upon the manager’s recommendation, shall annually decide the allocation of
funds from the Trust Fund collected under this section. All cash contributions thus allocated by the
Commission to support affordable/ workforce housing shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund for expenditures pursuant to the guidelines adopted by the City Commission. All cash
contributions thus allocated by the Commission to support Parks and Open Space shall be deposited
in the Parks and Open Space Trust Fund, set forth in Chapter 62 of the City Code, to be expended
in accordance with the guidelines outlined therein.
a. Definitions
1. Affordable/ Workforce Housing shall mean: housing available to families which meet the
qualifications as established by the City Community Development Department.
2. Public Parks and Open Space shall mean: Open Space meeting the standards of Article 4,
Table 7 of this Code.
3. Green Building shall mean a Building certified by the United States Green Building Council
(USGBC) as Silver, Gold or Platinum rated.
4. Brownfield shall mean: a site within the City that is subject to a Brownfield Site Rehabilitation
Agreement (BSRA) executed between the property owner and the City Department of
Economic Development.
3.14.4 For the purposes of the public benefits program, the following criteria shall apply:
a. Affordable/ Workforce Housing. The development project in a T6 zone may provide any of the
following or combination thereof:
1. Affordable/workforce housing on site of the development. For each square foot of affordable/
workforce housing (including pertaining shared space such as parking and circulation)
provided on site, the development shall be allowed two square feet of additional area up to
the bonus Height and FLR as described in Section 3.14.1.
2. Affordable/Workforce housing off-site. For each square foot of affordable /workforce housing
(including pertaining shared space such as parking and circulation) provided off site, in a
location within the City approved by the City Manager, the development shall be allowed an
equivalent square footage of additional area up to the bonus Height and FLR as described
in Section 3.14.1. No additional allowance is given for the purchase of the site.
3. Trust Fund contributions. For a cash contribution to the Miami 21 Public Benefit Trust Fund,
the development shall be allowed additional Floor Area up to the bonus Height and FLR described
in Section 3.14.1. The cash contribution shall be determined based on a percentage
of the market value of the per square foot price being charged for units at projects within
the market area where the proposed project seeking the bonus is located. The calculation
MIAMI 21
III.33
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
assumes a land value per saleable or rentable square foot within market area to equate to
between 10 (ten) to 15 (fifteen) percent of market area’s weighted average sales price per
square foot. The cash contributions shall be adjusted on an annual basis to reflect market
conditions effective October 1st of every year.
b. Public Parks, Open Space, or Park Improvements. The development project in a T6 zone may
provide any of the following or combination thereof:
1. Public Park, or Open Space, provided through purchase and in an area of need identified by
the City Parks and Open Space Master Plan and the City’s Parks Department. In addition
park improvements provided through donation for Public Parks with amenity levels that are
Moderate or that Need Improvement as defined by the Parks Department Facilities’ Assesment
Report.
i. For each square foot of dedicated public Park or Open Space provided, the development
shall be allowed two times the development Floor Area of provided land up to the bonus
Height and FLR as described in Section 3.14.1. The Open Space may be a Park, Green
or Square, as more fully described in Article 4, Table 7 of this Code.
ii. Park improvements shall be valuated and for said value the development project shall be
allowed additional Floor Area up to the bonus Height and FLR described in Section 3.14.1
and shall for all applicable purposes be treated as a Trust Fund contribution pursuant to
Section 3.14.4.b.(3).
iii. Park improvements for Public Parks in areas below 50% median income threshold shall
be allowed two times the valuation credit.
iv Donations must meet all City requirements for design, equipment specifications, construction,
warranties, etc. Park improvements are subject to review and approval by the City
Manager or designee in accordance with Miami 21.
2. Public Open Space provided on-site in a location and of a design to be approved by the
Planning Director. For each square foot of dedicated public Park or Open Space provided,
the development shall be allowed an equivalent amount of development Floor Area up to
the bonus Height and FLR as described in Section 3.14.1. The project shall maintain the
Frontage requirements of the Transect Zone. The Open Space may be a Courtyard, Plaza,
or Thoroughfare or Pedestrian Passage through the site connecting two (2) Thoroughfares,
such as a segment of the Baywalk or FEC Greenway. See Article 4, Table 7.
3. Trust Fund contribution. For a cash contribution to the Miami 21 Public Benefits Trust Fund,
the development project shall be allowed additional Floor Area up to the bonus Height and
FLR described in Section 3.14.1. The cash contribution shall be determined based on a
percentage of the market value of the per square foot price being charged for units at projects
within the market area where the proposed project seeking the bonus is located. The
calculation assumes a land value per saleable or rentable square foot within market area to
equate to between 10 (ten) to 15 (fifteen) percent of market area’s weighted average sales
price per square foot. The cash contributions shall be adjusted on an annual basis to reflect
market conditions effective October 1st of every year.
MIAMI 21
III.34
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
c. Historic Preservation. Bonus Floor Area to the maximum bonus Height and FLR as described in
Section 3.14.1 shall be allowed for additional square footage qualified under the city Transfer of
Development Rights program established in Chapter 23, City Code.
d. Green Building. In a T6 zone, additional Height and FLR shall be allowed for Buildings certified
by the U.S. Green Building Council as follows:
1. Silver: For Buildings under 50,000 sf, 2.0% of the floor lot ratio (FLR)
2. Gold: 4.0% of the Floor Lot Ratio (FLR)
3. Platinum: 13.0% of the Floor Lot Ratio (FLR)
Note: Standards equivalent to the USGBC, as adopted by the City, may alternatively apply.
If at the time the first Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the Building that received a public
benefits bonus for a Green Building, the anticipated LEED certification has not been achieved,
then the owner shall post a performance bond in a form acceptable to the City of Miami. The
performance bond shall be determined based on the value of land per square foot of Building
in the area of the City in which the proposed project is located, which may be adjusted from
time to time based on market conditions. The methodology for determining the value of land
per square foot of Building shall be maintained in the Planning Department. The City will draw
down on the bond funds if LEED certification has not been achieved and accepted by the City
within one year of the City issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the Building. Funds that
become available to the City from the forfeiture of the performance bond shall be placed in the
Miami 21 Public Benefits Trust Fund established by this Code.
e. Brownfields. One additional Story of Height shall be permitted for redevelopment on a Brownfield
Site as defined herein.
f. Civic Space Types and Civil Support Uses. For a development project in a T6 zone that donates
a Civic Space Types or Civil Support Uses on site to the City of Miami, an additional two square
feet of area for each square foot of donated space or use, up to the bonus Height and FLR, shall
be allowed.
3.14.5 No Building permit shall be issued for bonus Height and FLR until the Zoning Administrator has certified
compliance with the provisions of this section, upon referral and assurance of compliance from
applicable departments. Certification shall be made only after a certified check has been deposited
and cleared to the Miami 21 Public Benefits Trust Fund or, for non cash contributions, a binding commitment
has been approved by the City Manager. The cash contribution shall be nonrefundable.
3.15 AFFORDABLE AND ATTAINABLE MIXED-INCOME HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT PROGRAM
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The intent of the Affordable Housing special benefit program established in this section is to facilitate
the development of high quality Affordable Housing in the City by providing development incentives,
including, but not limited to, modifications of architectural/design standards and parking reductions.
3.15.1 As a pre-requisite to qualify as an Affordable Housing Development eligible for any of the special
benefits described in Section 3.15, an applicant shall submit to the Office of Zoning:
a. Certification by the City’s Community and Economic Development Department that the proMIAMI
21
III.35
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
posed Development will provide a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the Dwelling Units
(Multi-family or Elderly) as Affordable Housing serving residents at or below sixty percent
(60%) of the area median income (AMI) as published by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development annually; or that the proposed Development is a mixed-income
building providing at least forty percent (40%) of the units as Affordable Housing serving
residents at or below sixty percent (60%) of AMI or providing at least twenty percent (20%) of
the units as Affordable Housing serving residents at or below fifty percent (50%) of AMI, is not
restricted to elderly residents, and is located within a Residential Density Increase Area as set
forth in Article 4, Diagram 9 of the Miami 21 Code;
b. A recorded covenant running with the land acceptable to the City of Miami, confirming the
property will meet the criteria in subsection (a) above for a period of no less than thirty (30)
years from the date of the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy
3.15.2 As a pre-requisite to qualify as an Attainable Mixed-Income Housing Development eligible for any
of the special benefits described in Section 3.15, an applicant shall submit to the Office of Zoning:
a. Certification by the City’s Community and Economic Development Department that the proposed
Development will provide a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the Dwelling Units as Affordable
Housing serving residents at or below sixty percent (60%) of AMI and the remainder of the Dwelling
Units as Workforce Housing; or certification by the City’s Community and Economic Development
Department that the proposed Development will provide a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
the Dwelling Units as Affordable Housing serving residents at or below fifty percent (50%) of AMI
and the remainder of the Dwelling Units as Workforce Housing.
b. Verification that the proposed Development is within a quarter (¼) mile of a Transit Corridor, or
a half (½) mile of a TOD.
c. A recorded covenant running with the land acceptable to the City of Miami, confirming the property
will meet the criteria in subsection (a) above for a period of no less than thirty (30) years from
the date of the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy, with two (2) automatic ten (10) year
extensions that may be released by a vote of the City Commission.
3.15.3 Affordable and Attainable Mixed-Income Housing Developments that abut a T3 Zone are not eligible
for the provisions in Section 3.15. Affordable and Attainable Mixed-Income Housing Developments
that abut a T4 Zone shall require a Warrant for consideration under Section 3.15.
3.15.4 In place of any conflicting provisions elsewhere in this Code, Affordable and Attainable Mixed-Income
Housing Developments may be developed in accordance with the following, subject to a Warrant:
a. Height
1. T5: Maximum building height of 75 feet with no limitation on the number of Stories;
2. T6-8: Maximum building height of 125 feet with no limitation on the number of Stories;
3. T6-12: Maximum building height of 240 feet with no limitation on the number of Stories;
b. Parking may extend into the Second Layer above the first Story along all Frontages. The Façade
of a parking garage that is not concealed behind a Habitable Liner shall be screened to conceal
from view all internal elements including, but not limited to, vehicles, plumbing pipes, fans, ducts
and all lighting. The size, location, and materials for such screening elements shall be reviewed
by Waiver with referral to the Planning Department.
MIAMI 21
III.36
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
c. Pedestrian or Vehicular Cross Block Passages shall not be required.
d. Development Abutting two (2) or more Thoroughfares shall have only one (1) Principal Frontage
and shall not be subject to the minimum Principal Frontage Line requirement. Determination
of which Frontage is to serve as the Principal Frontage shall be made by the Planning
Director upon request by the Zoning Administrator.
e. Development shall not be subject to maximum Lot Area requirements.
f. Development in T6 Zones shall be exempt from complying with the requirements contained in
Sections 5.6.1 (h) and 5.6.2 (b).
g. Setback requirements above the eighth floor may be modified by Waiver for Development in
T6 Zones.
3.15.5 Parking requirements for those units that qualify as Affordable or Attainable Mixed-Income Housing
may be reduced as stated below. The parking reductions below may be cumulative; however in no
event shall parking be reduced by more than eighty percent (80%) of the spaces required.
a. A thirty-five percent (35%) reduction in required parking is permitted by Right.
b. Within a Transit Oriented Development (TOD), an additional reduction of fifteen percent (15%)
of required parking is permitted by Right and an additional reduction of fifteen percent (15%) of
required parking is permitted for Attainable Mixed-Income Housing Projects by Waiver.
c. An additional reduction of up to fifteen percent (15%) of required parking may be permitted by
Warrant, upon a showing that the reduction in off-street parking is justified in view of the nature
and type of prospective occupancy and the economic circumstances involved, and that the
impacts from such reduction are not likely to unduly burden traffic and parking facilities in the
neighborhood.
d. Parking for development proposals providing Housing for the Elderly may be reduced by Warrant
to provide a maximum of one (1) parking space per every two (2) Dwelling Units provided
as Elderly Housing, upon a showing that the reduction in off-street parking is justified in view of
the nature and type of prospective occupancy and the economic circumstances involved, and
that the impacts from such reduction are not likely to unduly burden traffic and parking facilities
in the neighborhood.
e. Affordable or Attainable Mixed-Income Housing Developments whose parking has been reduced
under the terms set forth in Section 3.15 will continue to operate under the recorded covenant
described in Subsection 3.15.1(b) or 3.1.5.2(b), until parking requirements applicable at the time
of release are met.
3.15.6 In addition to the Development incentives listed above, Attainable Mixed-Income Housing projects
shall be afforded Density bonuses as follows;
a. Any Development that meets the criteria in Subsection 3.15.2 (a) and 3.15.2 (b) and provides
a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the Dwelling Units as Extremely Low Income as defined
herein shall be provided one (1) additional unit of Density per Attainable-Workforce Housing unit
provided. The Development after the Density bonus shall maintain the affordable and workforce
MIAMI 21
III.37
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
housing mix described in 3.15.2 (a), and shall provide ten percent (10%) of the Dwelling Units
as Extremely Low Income Housing for the entire Development.
b. Any Development that meets the criteria in Subsection 3.15.2 (a) and 3.15.2 (b) and provides a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the Dwelling Units as Extremely Low Income as defined herein
shall be provided one half (1/2) additional unit of Density Attainable-Workforce Housing unit
provided. The Development after the Density bonus shall maintain the affordable and workforce
housing mix described in 3.15.2 (a), and shall provide five percent (5%) of the Dwelling Units as
Extremely Low Income Housing for the entire Development
3.16 WORKFORCE HOUSING SPECIAL BENEFIT PROGRAM SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
3.16.1 As a pre-requisite to qualify as an Attainable Workforce Housing Development eligible for any of the
special benefits described in Section 3.16, an applicant shall submit to the Office of Zoning:
a. Certification by the City’s Community and Economic Development Department that the proposed
Development will provide a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the Dwelling Units as Workforce
Housing serving residents above sixty percent (60%) of the area median income (“AMI”)
and at or below eighty percent (80%) of the AMI as published by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) annually; that the proposed Development will provide
a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the Dwelling Units as Workforce Housing serving residents
above eighty percent (80%) of the AMI and at or below one-hundred-twenty percent (120%) of
the AMI as published by HUD annually; and the proposed Development will provide the remaining
Dwelling Units as Workforce Housing serving residents above sixty percent (60%) of the AMI
and at or below one-hundred-forty percent (140%) of the AMI as published by HUD annually;
b. Verification that the proposed Development is within a quarter (¼) mile from a Transit Corridor
or a half (½) mile from a Transit Oriented Development (“TOD”); and
c. A recorded covenant running with the land, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, requiring
the property meet the criteria in Subsection (a) above for a period of no less than thirty (30)
years from the date of the issuance of a temporary or final Certificate of Occupancy, whichever
is issued first.
3.16.2 Attainable Workforce Housing Developments that Abut a T3 Zone are not eligible for the provisions
in Section 3.16. Attainable Workforce Housing Developments that abut a T4 Zone shall require a
Warrant for consideration under Section 3.16.
3.16.3 Notwithstanding any conflicting provisions elsewhere in this Code, Attainable Workforce Housing
Developments may be developed in accordance with the following, subject to a Warrant:
a. Height
1. T5: Maximum building height of seventy-five (75) feet with no limitation on the number of
Stories;
2. T6-8: Maximum building height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet with no limitation on
the number of Stories;
3. T6-12: Maximum building height of two hundred forty (240) feet with no limitation on the
MIAMI 21
III.38
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL TO ZONES
number of Stories;
b. Parking may extend into the Second Layer above the first Story along all Frontages. The Façade
of a parking garage that is not concealed behind a Habitable Liner shall be screened to conceal
from view all internal elements including, but not limited to, vehicles, plumbing pipes, fans, ducts
and all lighting. The size, location, and materials for such screening elements shall be reviewed
by the Planning Department.
c. Pedestrian or Vehicular Cross Block Passages shall not be required.
d. Developments abutting two (2) or more Thoroughfares shall have only one (1) Principal Frontage
and shall not be subject to the minimum Principal Frontage Line requirement. Determination
of which Frontage is to serve as the Principal Frontage shall be made by the Planning Director
upon request by the Zoning Administrator.
e. Developments shall not be subject to maximum Lot Area requirements.
f. Developments in T6 Zones shall be exempt from complying with the requirements contained in
Sections 5.6.1(h) and 5.6.2(b).
g. Setback requirements above the eighth floor may be modified for Developments in T6 Zones.
3.16.4 Parking requirements for those units that qualify as Attainable Workforce Housing may be reduced
as stated below. The parking reductions below may be cumulative; however, in no event shall parking
be reduced by more than eighty percent (80%) of the spaces required.
a. A thirty-five percent (35%) reduction in required parking is permitted by Right.
b. Within a TOD, an additional reduction of fifteen percent (15%) of required parking is permitted
by Right and an additional reduction of fifteen percent (15%) of required parking is permitted for
Attainable Workforce Housing Projects by Waiver.
c. An additional reduction of up to fifteen percent (15%) of required parking may be permitted by
Warrant, upon a showing that the reduction in off-street parking is justified in view of the nature
and type of prospective occupancy and the economic circumstances involved, and that the
impacts from such reduction are not likely to unduly burden traffic and parking facilities in the
neighborhood.
d. Attainable Workforce Housing Developments whose parking has been reduced under the terms
set forth in Section 3.16 will continue to operate under the recorded covenant described in Subsection
3.16.1(c), until parking requirements applicable at the time of release are met.
3.17 PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS
Government Development Projects shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Public Art Program
pursuant to Article 11 of this Code and Chapter 62, Article XVI, of the City Code, as applicable.
MIAMI 21
IV.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. STANDARDS & TABLES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE 1 TRANSECT ZONE DESCRIPTIONS IV.5
TABLE 2 MIAMI 21 SUMMARY IV.6
TABLE 3 BUILDING FUNCTION: USES IV.8
TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING IV.9
TABLE 5 BUILDING FUNCTION: PARKING AND LOADING IV.27
TABLE 6 FRONTAGES IV.28
TABLE 7 CIVIC SPACE TYPES IV.29
TABLE 8 DEFINITIONS ILLUSTRATED IV.30
DIAGRAM 9 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY INCREASE AREAS IV.31
DIAGRAM 10 AREA SPECIFIC ILLUSTRATIONS IV.32
DIAGRAM 11 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT - TOD IV.33
TABLE 12 DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA IV.34
MIAMI 21
IV.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
ARTICLE 4. STANDARDS & TABLES
MIAMI 21
IV.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. STANDARDS & TABLES
Amendments to Article 4
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13165 04-22-2010 Marine Related and Childcare Uses in CS
Transect
10-00285zt
13164 04-22-2010 Alcohol Uses by Exception 10-00287zt
13176 05-13-2010 D1 Density 10-00361zt
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
13238 12-16-2010 Requirements for sheds and other structures;
loading berth substitutions; requirements for
child are facilities; requirements for public and
commercial storage facilities; distance separation
requirements for ALF’s; distance separation
requirements for uses and structures
10-00963zt
13239 12-16-2010 Parking ratios for Educational Facilities 10-00964zt
13281 07-28-2011 Regional Activity Complex permissibility and sign
regulations for same
11-00588zt
13290 10-27-2011 Minor modifications to Article 4 11-00585zt
13307 01-26-2012 Public Storage Facilities modifications 11-00875zt
13452 04-24-2014 Amend Article 4, Table 7; Public Benefits for Park
Improvements
13-01088zt
13464 05-22-2014 Update Article 4 Table 12; Sign Standards 12-00941zt1
13507 03-12-2015 Modification of Article 4, Table 2 to include T6-24b 14-01198zt
13565 10-22-2015 Amend Transit Corridor Definition and Standards
for Parking Reductions
14-01076zt1
13695 07-13-2017 Civic space zones density, intensity, and parking
requirements.
2289
13729 12-14-2017 Micro dwelling units definitions, and residental
density intensity and parking requirements.
3108
13729 01-25-2018 Alcohol Service Establishment, Food Service
Establishment, and supplemental regulations.
1972
MIAMI 21
IV.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
ARTICLE 4. STANDARDS & TABLES
MIAMI 21
IV.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 1 TRANSECT ZONE DESCRIPTIONS
THE NATURAL ZONE consists of lands approximating
a wilderness condition, permanently set aside for
conservation in an essentially natural state.
THE RURAL ZONE consists of lands in open or cultivated
state or sparsely settled. These include woodland,
grassland and agricultural land.
THE SUB-URBAN ZONE consists of low-Density
areas, primarily comprised of Single-Family and Two
Family residential units with relatively deep Setbacks,
Streetscapes with swales, and with or without Sidewalks.
Blocks may be large and the roads may be
of irregular geometry to accommodate natural and
historic conditions.
THE GENERAL URBAN ZONE consists of a Mixed-Use
but primarily residential urban fabric with a range of
Building types including rowhouses, small apartment
Buildings, and bungalow courts. Setbacks are short
with an urban Streetscape of wide Sidewalks and trees
in planters. Thoroughfares typically define mediumsized
blocks.
THE URBAN CENTER ZONE consists of higher Density
Mixed-Use Building types that accommodate retail and
office Uses, rowhouses and apartments. A network of
small blocks has Thoroughfares with wide Sidewalks,
steady street tree planting and Buildings set close to
the Frontages with frequent doors and windows.
THE URBAN CORE ZONE consists of the highest
Density and greatest variety of Uses, including Civic
Buildings of regional importance. A network of small
blocks has Thoroughfares with wide Sidewalks, with
steady tree planting and Buildings set close to the
Frontage with frequent doors and windows.
THE CIVIC ZONE consists of public use space and
facilities that may contrast in use to their surroundings
while reflecting adjacent Setbacks and landscape.
THE DISTRICT ZONE consists of the least regulated
Building and accommodates commercial and industrial
Uses of a scale and with a Streetscape that facilitate
vehicular access.
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
C
D
MIAMI 21
IV.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 2 MIAMI 21 SUMMARY
R U R A L l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
LOT OCCUPATION NATURAL ZONE RURAL ZONE SUB-URBAN ZONE GENERAL URBAN ZONE URBAN CENTER ZONE URBAN CORE ZONES
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min. 1,400 s.f. - 20,000 s.f. ** 1,200 s.f. - 40,000 s.f.** 5,000 sf. min
40,000 s.f. max.**
5,000 sf. min.
70,000 s.f. max.**
5,000 sf. min.
100,000 s.f.max. **
b. Lot Width 50 ft. min. 16 ft. min / 50 ft. min.** 16 ft. min / 50 ft. min.** 50 ft. min. 50 ft. min. 50 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage 50% max.1st Floor
30% max. 2nd Floor for
T3 R & T3L only
60% max. 80% max. 80% max.** 80% max.** 80% max.**
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) 5 / 25% additional Public
Benefit ***
8 / 30% additional Public
Benefit ***
a. 7 / 30% additional
Public Benefit or b.16 /
40% additional Public
Benefit ***
e. Frontage at front Setback 50% min. 70% min. 70% min. 70% min. 70% min.
f. Green / Open Space Requirements 25% Lot Area min. 15% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min.
g. Density 9-18 du/acre max.** 36 du/acre max. 65 du/acre max. 150 du /acre * 150 du /acre * 150 du /acre *
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 20 ft. min. 10 ft.min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min.
c. Side 5 ft. min.** 0 ft. min. / 5 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.**
d. Rear 20 ft. min. 20 ft. min. 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.**
OUTBUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 20 ft. min. (T3 L only) 30 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min. (T3 L only) 10 ft. min.
c. Side 5 ft. min. (T3 L only) 0 ft. min. / 5 ft. min.
d. Rear 5 ft. min. (T3 L only) 5 ft. min.
PRIVATE FRONTAGES
a. Common Lawn permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
b. Porch & Fence permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
d. Forecourt prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
e. Stoop prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
f. Shopfront prohibited permitted (T4 L, T4 O) permitted (T5 L, T5 O) permitted (T6-8 L, T6-8 O) permitted (T6-12 L, T6-12 O) permitted (T6-24 L, T6-24 O)
g. Gallery prohibited prohibited permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted **
h. Arcade prohibited prohibited permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted **
BUILDING HEIGHT (Stories)
a. Principal Building 2 max. 3 max. 2 min.
5 max.
2 min.
8 max.
2 min.
12 max.
2 min.
24 max.
b. Outbuilding 2 max. 2 max.
c. Benefit Height
Abutting T6, T5 & T4 only
1 max.** 4 max.** 8 max.** 24 max.**
THOROUGHFARES
a. HW & RR permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
b. BV permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
c. SR permitted permitted prohibited permitted permitted permitted
d. RS permitted permitted prohibited permitted permitted permitted
e. SS & AV prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted
f. CS & AV prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted
g. Rear Lane permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
h. Rear Alley permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
i. Path permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
j. Passage permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
k. Bicycle Path permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
l. Bicycle Lane permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
m. Bicycle Route permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
n. Sharrow prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
o. Priority Bicycle Route permitted permitted prohibited permitted permitted permitted
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
** Note: Refer to Article 5 for Specific Transect Zone Regulations
*** Note: Bonus shall not be available for T6 properties abutting T3 properties (refer to Article 3)
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6-8 T6-12 T6-24
MIAMI 21
IV.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 2 MIAMI 21 SUMMARY
l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l U R B A N D I S T R I C T S C I V I C
URBAN CORE ZONES WORK PLACE INDUSTRIAL WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL CIVIC INSTITUTION
HEALTH DISTRICT
T6-36 T6-48 T6-60 T6-80 D1 D2 D3 CI-HD
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 sf. min. 5,000 sf. min. 5,000 sf. min. 5,000 sf. min. 5,000 s.f. min. 5,000 s.f. min. 10,000 s.f. min. 10,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 50 ft. min. 50 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 50 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage 80% max.** 80% max.** 80% max.** 80% max.** 80% max 90% max 90% max 80% max
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) a.12 or b.22 / 40%
additional Public
Benefit ***
a.11 or b.18 / 50%
additional Public
Benefit ***
a.11 or b.18 / 50%
additional Public
Benefit ***
24 / 50%
additional Public
Benefit ***
8
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min. 70% min. 70% min. 70% min. None None None None
f. Open Space Requirements 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min. 5% Lot Area min. 5% Lot Area min. 5% Lot Area min. 10% Lot Area min.
g. Density 150 du /acre * 150 du /acre * 150 du /acre * 150 du /acre * 36 du/acre max. 150 du /acre *
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 5 ft. min. 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 10 ft. min. 5 ft. min. 5 ft. min. 10 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.**
d. Rear 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.** 0 ft. min.**
OUTBUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front
b. Secondary Front
c. Side
d. Rear
PRIVATE FRONTAGES
a. Common Lawn prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted
b. Porch & Fence prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted
d. Forecourt permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
e. Stoop permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-36 L, T6-36 O) permitted (T6-48 L, T6-48 O) permitted (T6-60 L, T6-60 O) permitted (T6-80 L, T6-80 O) permitted permitted permitted permitted
g. Gallery permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted **
h. Arcade permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted ** permitted **
BUILDING HEIGHT (Stories)
a. Principal Building 2 min.
36 max.
2 min.
48 max.
2 min.
60 max.
2 min.
80 max.
none
8 max.
none
8 max.
none
8 max.
1 min.
As regulated by F.A.A.
b. Outbuilding
c. Benefit Height
Abutting T6, T5 & T4 only
24 max.** 32 max.** unlimited ** unlimited ** 2 max.**
THOROUGHFARES
a. HW & RR prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
b. BV permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
c. SR permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
d. RS permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
e. SS & AV permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
f. CS & AV permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
g. Rear Lane prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
h. Rear Alley permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
i. Path prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited
j. Passage permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
k. Bicycle Path permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
l. Bicycle Lane permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
m. Bicycle Route permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
n. Sharrow permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
o. Priority Bicycle Route permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
** Note: Refer to Article 5 for Specific Transect Zone Regulations
*** Note: Bonus shall not be available for T6 properties abutting T3 properties (refer to Article 3)
MIAMI 21
IV.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 3 BUILDING FUNCTION: USES
T3
SUB-URBAN
T4
URBAN GENERAL
T5
URBAN CENTER
T6
URBAN CORE
C
CIVIC
D
DISTRICTS
R L O R L O R L O R L O CS CI CI-HD D1 D2 D3
DENSITY (UNITS PER ACRE) 9 9 18 36 36 36 65 65 65 150* 150* 150* N/A AZ** 150* 36 N/A N/A
RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE R R R R R R R R R R R R
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE R R R R R R R R R R R R R
ANCILLARY UNIT R R R R
TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE R R R R R R R R R R
MULTI FAMILY HOUSING R R R R R R R R R R
DORMITORY E E R R R R E R
HOME OFFICE R R R R R R R R R R R R R
LIVE - WORK R R R R R R R
WORK - LIVE R R
LODGING
BED & BREAKFAST W R R E R R E R R R R
INN R R R E R R R R
HOTEL R R R R R
OFFICE
OFFICE R R R R R R E R R R W
COMMERCIAL
AUTO-RELATED COMMERCIAL ESTAB. W W W R R
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT R W R R R R R
ENTERTAINMENT ESTAB. - ADULT R
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT R R R R W R R W E R R R W
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SERVICE ESTAB. E E E E E E E E E E
GENERAL COMMERCIAL R R R R W R R E E R R R W
MARINE RELATED COMMERCIAL ESTAB. W W W W E R R R
OPEN AIR RETAIL W W W W W E R R R W
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY R R E R R E E R R W
RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT R R R R E R R R W
CIVIC
COMMUNITY FACILITY W W W W W W W E W R R
RECREATIONAL FACILITY E E E E R R E R R E R R W E W R R
RELIGIOUS FACILITY E E E E R R E R R E R R W E R R R W
REGIONAL ACTIVITY COMPLEX E E E
CIVIL SUPPORT
COMMUNITY SUPPORT FACILITY W W W W W W E E R R W
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES W W W W W W W W W W W W W E W W R W
MAJOR FACILITY E R E E E
MARINA E W W E W W E W W R E R R R
PUBLIC PARKING W W E W W E W W E R R R W
RESCUE MISSION E R E W W
TRANSIT FACILITIES W W E W W E W W E R R R W
EDUCATIONAL
CHILDCARE E W W E W W W W W E E R E
COLLEGE / UNIVERSITY W W W W E R E
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL E E E E E E E W W E W W E R E
LEARNING CENTER E E R R R R E E R E
MIDDLE / HIGH SCHOOL E E E E E E E W W E W W E R E
PRE-SCHOOL E E E E E E E R R E R R E R E
RESEARCH FACILITY R R R R R R E R R R W
SPECIAL TRAINING / VOCATIONAL E W W W W E R R R W
INDUSTRIAL
AUTO-RELATED INDUSTRIAL ESTBL. R R W
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING R R W
MARINE RELATED INDUSTRIAL ESTBL. R R R
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES R R W
STORAGE/ DISTRIBUTION FACILITY R R W
R Allowed By Right
W Allowed By Warrant: Administrative Process - CRC (Coordinated Review Committee)
E Allowed By Exception: Public Hearing - granted by PZAB (Planning, Zoning & Appeals Board)
Boxes with no designation signify Use prohibited.
Uses may be further modified by Supplemental Regulations, State Regulations, or other provisions of
this Code. See City Code Chapter 4 for regulations related to Alcohol Beverage Service Estab.
* Additional densities in some T6 zones are illustrated in Diagram 9.
** AZ: Density of lowest Abutting Zone
MIAMI 21
IV.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T3 - SUB-URBAN ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 9 UNITS PER ACRE 9 UNITS PER ACRE 18 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces per principal Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit.
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• All Dwelling Units shall be under single ownership
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces per principal Dwelling Unit.
• Minimum of 1 parking space per Ancillary Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member in addition to the parking required for
the Dwelling Units.
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces per principal Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member in addition to the parking required for
the Dwelling Units.
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12.
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each
faculty or staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100
students, 1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11
and 12.
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each
faculty or staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100
students, 1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11
and 12.
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING
MIAMI 21
IV.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T4 - GENERAL URBAN ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per principal Dwelling
Unit.
• Ancillary Dwelling - Minimum of 1 parking space per
ancillary dwelling unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
Dwelling Units.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per principal Dwelling
Unit.
• Ancillary Dwelling - Minimum of 1 parking space per
ancillary dwelling unit.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Units.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence- Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
Dwelling Units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per principal Dwelling Unit.
• Ancillary Dwelling - Minimum of 1 parking space per
ancillary dwelling unit.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum of 1 parking space
per staff member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence- Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
Dwelling Units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
LODGING • See City Code, Chapter 23. Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
5 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
5 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Limited to the first Story of the Principal Building or Accessory
Structure;
• Office and Commercial Uses shall be less than 50%
Building floor area total.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE
T4 - GENERAL URBAN ZONE
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Limited to the first Story of the Principal Building or Accessory
Structure;
• Office and Commercial Uses shall be less than 50%
Building floor area total.
• A maximum area of 4,000 square feet per establishment.
• Food establishments of a maximum seating capacity
of 40 patrons.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of commercial use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• A maximum area of 4,000 square feet per establishment.
• Food establishments of a maximum seating capacity
of 40 patrons.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of commercial use.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular spaces
required (before any reductions).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking for civic uses may be provided off-site within a
distance of 1,000 feet.
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking for civic uses may be provided off-site within a
distance of 1,000 feet.
MIAMI 21
IV.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE
T4 - GENERAL URBAN ZONE
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed inTable 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Adult Daycare- Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular spaces
required (before any reductions).
• Adult Daycare- Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty
or staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100
students, 1 parking space per 5 students in grades
11 and 12.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 dropoff
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
MIAMI 21
IV.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Maximum of 1 parking space per Micro Dwelling Unit,
with a maximum of 1 additional visitor parking space for
every 10 Micro Dwelling Units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Maximum of 1 parking space per Micro Dwelling Unit,
with a maximum of 1 additional visitor parking space for
every 10 Micro Dwelling Units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
LODGING Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• The first and second Story of the Principal Building and
Office and Commercial Uses shall be less than 25%
Building floor area total.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• The first and second Story of the Principal Building and
Office and Commercial Uses shall be less than 25%
Building floor area total.
• A maximum area of 55,000 square feet per establishment.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of commercial use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• A maximum area of 55,000 square feet per establishment,
except for Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of commercial use, except for Public Storage Facilities,
minimum 1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet
with a minimum of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
• Commercial Auto-related, Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities
- See Article 6.
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1000 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine use.
• Adult Daycare- Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1000 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine use.
• Adult Daycare- Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE 65 UNITS PER ACRE
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Parking ratio may be reduced within ½ mile radius of
TOD or within ¼ mile radius of a Transit Corridor by thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when site is
within 500 feet of T3.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Parking ratio may be reduced within ½ mile radius of
TOD or within ¼ mile radius of a Transit Corridor by thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when site is
within 500 feet of T3.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Parking ratio may be reduced within ½ mile radius of
TOD or within ¼ mile radius of a Transit Corridor by thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when site is
within 500 feet of T3.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading- Refer to Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 – 1,000 UNITS PER ACRE *
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence - Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• In T6-60 & T6-80, parking for residential Uses located
within 1,000 feet of a Metrorail or Metromover station
shall not be required.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Maximum of 1 parking space per Micro Dwelling Unit,
with a maximum of 1 additional visitor parking space for
every 10 Micro Dwelling Units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes- Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence- Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• In T6-60 & T6-80, parking for residential Uses located
within 1,000 feet of a Metrorail or Metromover station
shall not be required.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per Dwelling Unit.
• Maximum of 1 parking space per Micro Dwelling Unit,
with a maximum of 1 additional visitor parking space for
every 10 Micro Dwelling Units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units.
• Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
• Adult Family-Care Homes- Minimum 1 space per staff
member and 1 space per 4 residents.
• Community Residence- Minimum of 1 parking space per
staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• In T6-60 & T6-80, parking for residential Uses located
within 1,000 feet of a Metrorail or Metromover station
shall not be required.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
LODGING Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
15 lodging units.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE *
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• The Building area allowed for office use on each lot is
limited to four Stories of the Principal Building and Office
and Commercial Uses shall be less than 25% of Building
floor area total.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• In T6-24, T6-36 and T6-48 a minimum of 1 parking space
for every 800 square feet of office use shall be provided
• In T6-60 and T6-80, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 1,000 square feet of office use shall be provided
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of office use.
• In T6-24, T6-36 and T6-48, a minimum of 1 parking space
for every 800 square feet of office use shall be provided
• In T6-60 and T6-80, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 1,000 square feet of office use shall be provided
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Commercial establishments limited to a maximum area
of 4,000 square feet each and shall be less than 25%
building floor area total.
• The Building area allowed for commercial use on each lot
is limited to the first two Stories of the Principal Building.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of commercial use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• The Building area allowed for Commercial Use on each
lot is limited to two Stories of the Principal Building and
Office and Commercial Uses shall be less than 25% of
Building floor area total.
• A maximum area of 55,000 square feet per establishment.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of commercial use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• A maximum area of 55,000 square feet per establishment,
except for Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of commercial use, except for Public Storage Facilities,
minimum 1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet
with a minimum of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Auto-related - Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - See Article
6.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE *
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet
of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use; or
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use; or
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine
use; or
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1000 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine
use.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1000 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
use.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips of marine
use.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
* Please refer to Diagram 9
MIAMI 21
IV.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE *
T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty
or staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:.
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/
operator and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off
space for every 10 clients cared for.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site
is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
CS – CIVIC SPACE CI – CIVIC INSTITUTION CI-HD – CIVIC INSTITUTION HEALTH DISTRICT
DENSITY (UPA) N/A DENSITY OF ABUTTING ZONE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Density and all intensity, parking and loading regulations
to match that of the most restrictive Abutting zone.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Residential Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
LODGING • Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square
feet of Residential Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Office Use.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking ratio may be reduced according to the shared
parking standard.
• Parking may be provided offsite in CI, D, T5 or T6
within 500 feet through a parking management plan/
zone.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square
feet of Office Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of
commercial space.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking ratio may be reduced according to the shared
parking standard.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5.
• Loading needs, including maneuvering, shall be accommodated
on site.
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Building area allowed for Commercial Use on each lot
shall be less than 25% Building floor area total.
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of
commercial space
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 7 seats in a
Major Sports Facility
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking ratio may be reduced according to the shared
parking standard.
• Parking ratio may be reduced for Major Sports Facility
within 1 mile of a Metrorail, Metromover Station, or
mass transit facility by up to 10%.by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
• Loading needs, including maneuvering, shall be accommodated
on site.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Commercial Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
C - CIVIC
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.22
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
CS – CIVIC SPACE CI – CIVIC INSTITUTION CI-HD – CIVIC INSTITUTION HEALTH DISTRICT
DENSITY (UPA) N/A DENSITY OF ABUTTING ZONE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf of
exhibition or recreation space, and parking spaces
for other Uses as required.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every staff member
for recreational uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 500 sf of Building
area for recreational uses.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided offsite in CI, D, T5 or T6
within 500 feet through a parking management plan/
zone.
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly
uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf of
exhibition or recreation space, and parking spaces
for other Uses as required.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every staff member
for recreational uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 500 sf of Building
area for recreational uses.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided offsite in CI, D, T5 or T6
within 500 feet through a parking management plan/
zone.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square
feet of Civic Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• For Civil Support, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 1,000 sf.
• For Marine Uses, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 5 slips.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• For Civil Support, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 1,000 sf.
• For Assembly uses, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 5 seats.
• For Marine Uses, a minimum of 1 parking space for
every 5 slips.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member
and 1 space for owner.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Civil Support Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of
educational space
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Childcare Facilities - Minimum of 1 space per staff
member, 1 space for owner and 1 drop-off space for
every 10 clients cared for.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of
educational space
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Childcare Facilities - Minimum of 1 space per staff
member, 1 space for owner and 1 drop-off space for
every 10 clients cared for.
• Minimum of one Bike space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required (before any reductions).
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD
area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty
percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent
(50%) by process of Waiver and payment into a transit
enhancement Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35
of the City Code; or by one hundred percent (100%) for
any Structure with a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 800 square feet
of Educational Use.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
C - CIVIC
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.23
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 D - DISTRICT
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space per Dwelling Unit.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
LODGING Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 2 lodging units.
• Minimum of 1 additional parking space for every 10 lodging
units for visitors.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1,000 feet by process of Waiver, except when site is within
500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of office space.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of office space.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of office space.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.24
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018 D - DISTRICT
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of commercial
space, except for Public Storage Facilities, minimum 1
parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a minimum
of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for Public Storage
Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - Refer to Article 6.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of commercial
space, except for Public Storage Facilities, minimum 1
parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a minimum
of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for Public Storage
Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - Refer to Article 6.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 3 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of commercial
space, except for Public Storage Facilities, minimum 1
parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a minimum
of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for Public Storage
Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - Refer to Article 6.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf of exhibition
or recreation space, and parking spaces for other Uses as
required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf of exhibition
or recreation space, and parking spaces for other Uses as
required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats of assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf of exhibition
or recreation space, and parking spaces for other Uses as
required.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.25
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf. of Civil
Support Use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats for assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips for marine Uses.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf. of Civil
Support Use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats for assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips for marine Uses.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 1,000 sf. of Civil
Support Use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 seats for assembly uses.
• Minimum of 1 parking space for every 5 slips for marine Uses.
• Adult Daycare - Minimum of 1 space per staff member.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of educational
Use.
• Schools – Minimum of 1 parking space for each faculty or
staff member, 1 visitor parking space per 100 students,
1 parking space per 5 students in grades 11 and 12 or
College/University.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Childcare Facilities- Minimum of 1 space for the owner/operator
and 1 space for each employee, and 1 drop-off space for
every 10 clients cared for.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of educational
Use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of 2 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of educational
Use.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Shared
Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3 Transect
Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within a TOD area
or within a Transit Corridor area by up to thirty percent
(30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty percent (50%) by
process of Waiver and payment into a transit enhancement
Trust Fund, as established by Chapter 35 of the City Code;
or by one hundred percent (100%) for any Structure with
a Floor Area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within
1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
D - DISTRICT
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.26
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
INDUSTRIAL Industrial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Please refer to Article 6 for additional specific requirements.
• Minimum of 1 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of Industrial
Use, except for Commercial Storage Facilities, minimum
1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a
minimum of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3
Transect Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within
a TOD area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to
thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty
percent (50%) by process of Waiver and payment into
a transit enhancement Trust Fund, as established by
Chapter 35 of the City Code; or by one hundred percent
(100%) for any Structure with a Floor Area of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of
Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Industrial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Please refer to Article 6 for additional specific requirements.
• Minimum of 1 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of Industrial
Use, except for Commercial Storage Facilities, minimum
1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a
minimum of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3
Transect Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within
a TOD area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to
thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty
percent (50%) by process of Waiver and payment into
a transit enhancement Trust Fund, as established by
Chapter 35 of the City Code; or by one hundred percent
(100%) for any Structure with a Floor Area of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of
Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
Industrial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 3, limited by
compliance with:
• Please refer to Article 6 for additional specific requirements.
• Minimum of 1 parking spaces for every 1,000 sf of Industrial
Use, except for Commercial Storage Facilities, minimum
1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet with a
minimum of 8 parking spaces.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Article 4, Table 5, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
• Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
• Except for sites within 500 feet of an ungated T3
Transect Zone, the parking ratio may be reduced within
a TOD area or within a Transit Corridor area by up to
thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver; by up to fifty
percent (50%) by process of Waiver and payment into
a transit enhancement Trust Fund, as established by
Chapter 35 of the City Code; or by one hundred percent
(100%) for any Structure with a Floor Area of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or less.
• Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite
within 1000 feet and in Transect Zone D by process of
Waiver.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 5
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
D - DISTRICT
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 4 DENSITY, INTENSITY AND PARKING (CONTINUED)
MIAMI 21
IV.27
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
LOADING BERTH STANDARDS T5, T6, CS, CI-HD & CI DISTRICT NOTES
RESIDENTIAL* From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf Berth Types
Residential*: 200 sf = 10 ft x 20 ft
x 12 ft
Commercial**: 420 sf = 12 ft x 35 ft
x 15 ft
Industrial***: 660 sf= 12 ft x 55 ft x 15 ft
* Residential loading berths shall be
set back a distance equal to their
length.
** 1 Commercial berth may be substituted
by 2 Residential berths
*** 1 Industrial berth may be substituted
by 2 Commercial berths.
A required Industrial or Commercial
loading berth may be substituted
by a Commercial or Residential
loading berth, by Waiver, if the size,
character, and operation of the Use
is found to not require the dimensions
specified and the required
loading berth dimension could not
otherwise be provided according to
the regulations of this Code.
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
LODGING From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
L o a d i n g
Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
L o a d i n g
Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
OFFICE
COMMERCIAL**
INDUSTRIAL***
From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
Loading Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Area
25K sf - 50K sf
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
L o a d i n g
Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Area
25K sf - 50K sf
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1 /
Area
500K sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1 /
Area
500K sf
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 5 BUILDING FUNCTION: PARKING AND LOADING
The shared Parking Standards Table provides the method for calculating shared parking for buildings
with more than one Use type. It refers to the parking requirements that appear in Table 4.
The parking required for any two Functions on a Lot is calculated by dividing the number of spaces
required by the lesser of the two uses by the appropriate factor from this Table and adding the result to
the greater use parking requirement.
For instance: for a building with a Residential Use requiring 100 spaces and a Commercial Use requiring
20 spaces, the 20 spaces divided by the sharing factor of 1.2 would reduce the total requirement to
100 plus 17 spaces. For uses not indicated in this chart on a mixed use lot a sharing factor of 1.1 shall
be allowed. Additional sharing is allowed by Warrant.
SHARING FACTOR
Function with Function
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LODGING LODGING
OFFICE OFFICE
COMMERCIAL 1.4 COMMERCIAL
1.1
1.2 1.7
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.2
1
1
1
1
1.7
1.3
1.2
ANGLE OF
PARKING
ACCESS AISLE WIDTH
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
SINGLE LOADED
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
TWO WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
90 23 ft 23 ft 23 ft
60 12.8 ft 11.8 ft 19.3 ft
45 10.8 ft 9.5 ft 18.5 ft
Parallel 10 ft 10 ft 20 ft
Standard stall: 8.5 ft x 18 ft minimum
• Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet of paved width of a one-way drive and 20 feet for a two-way
drive for parking area providing 10 or more stalls.
• Pedestrian entrances shall be at least 3 feet from stall, driveway or access aisle.
• Allowable slopes, paving, and drainage as per Florida Building Code.
• Off-street Parking facilities shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet. Where such a facility is
to be used by trucks or loading Uses, the minimum clearance shall be 12 feet Residential and 15 feet
Commercial and Industrial.
• Ingress vehicular control devices shall be located so as to provide a minimum driveway of 20 feet in
length between the Base Building Line and dispenser.
• For requirements of parking lots, refer to Article 9 and the City of Miami Off-street Parking Guides
and Standards.
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
SHARED PARKING STANDARDS
MIAMI 21
IV.28
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 6 FRONTAGES
SECTION PLAN
LOT
PRIVATE ?
Frontage
R.O.W.
? PUBLIC
Frontage
LOT
PRIVATE ?
Frontage
R.O.W.
? PUBLIC
Frontage
a. Common Lawn: a Frontage wherein the Façade is set back substantially
from the Frontage Line. The front yard created remains
unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent yards, supporting
a common landscape. The Setback can be densely landscaped to
buffer from higher speed Thoroughfares.
b. Porch & Fence: a Frontage wherein the Façade is set back from
the Frontage Line with an attached Porch permitted to encroach. A
fence at the Frontage Line maintains the demarcation of the yard
while not blocking view into the front yard.
c. Terrace or Light Court: a Frontage wherein the Façade is set back
from the Frontage Line by an elevated terrace or a sunken light
court. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and
removes the private yard from public encroachment. The raised
terrace is suitable for outdoor cafes.
d. Forecourt: a Frontage wherein a portion of the Façade is close
to the Frontage Line with a portion set back. The forecourt
with a large tree offers visual and environmental variety to
the urban Streetscape. The Forecourt may accommodate a
vehicular drop off.
e. Stoop: a Frontage wherein the Façade is aligned close to the
Frontage Line with the first Story elevated from the sidewalk
sufficiently to secure privacy for the windows. The entrance is
usually an exterior stair and landing. This type is recommended
for ground-floor Residential Use.
f. Shopfront: a Frontage wherein the Façade is aligned close to the
Frontage Line with the Building entrance at sidewalk grade. This
type is conventional for retail Use. It has substantial glazing at the
sidewalk level and an Awning that may overhang the sidewalk.
g. Gallery: a Frontage wherein the Façade is aligned close to the
Frontage Line with an attached cantilevered or a lightweight
colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. This type is conventional for
retail Use. The Gallery shall be no less than 15’ feet wide and may
overlap the whole width of the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb.
Permitted by Special Area Plan.
h. Arcade: a Frontage wherein the Façade includes a colonnade that
overlaps the sidewalk, while the Façade at sidewalk level remains
at the Frontage Line. This type is conventional for retail Use. The
arcade shall be no less than 15’ feet wide and may overlap the
whole width of the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb. Permitted
by Special Area Plan.
MIAMI 21
IV.29
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
a. Park: A natural preserve available for unstructured and structured recreation programs. A Park may
be independent of surrounding Building Frontages. Its landscape may be naturalistic and consist of
paths and trails, meadows, woodland, sports fields and open shelters. Parks may be Conservation
Areas, preserving natural conditions and their size may vary.
b. Green: An Open Space, available for unstructured recreation programs. A Green may be spatially
defined by landscaping rather than Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and trees,
naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be one acre and the maximum shall be 4 acres.
c. Square: An Open Space available for unstructured recreation programs and civic purposes. A square
is spatially defined by Building Frontages with streets on at least one Frontage. Its landscape shall
consist of pavement, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection
of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/3 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
d. Plaza: An Open Space available for civic purposes and programmed activities. A Plaza shall be
spatially defined by Building Frontages and may include street Frontages. Its landscape shall consist
primarily of pavement and trees. Plazas shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares.
The minimum size shall be 1/8 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
e. Courtyard / Garden: An Open Space spatially defined by Buildings and street walls, and visually
accessible on one side to the street.
f. Playground: An Open Space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A Playground
shall be fenced and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within residential
areas and may be placed within a Block. Playgrounds may be included within Parks and Greens.
There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
g. Pedestrian Passage: An Open Space connecting other public spaces, that is restricted to pedestrian
use and limited vehicular access, of a minimum width of 20 feet. Building walls enfronting a
Pedestrian Passage shall have frequent doors and windows. In T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80, a
Pedestrian Passage may be roofed.
h. Community Garden: A grouping of garden plots available for small-scale cultivation, generally to
residents of apartments and other dwelling types without private gardens. Community gardens
should accommodate individual storage sheds.
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 7 CIVIC SPACE TYPES
This table describes the standards for areas zoned as Civic Space (CS) and for Public Parks and Open Space provided by the Public Benefits Program.
Civic Space Types should be at the ground level, landscaped and/or paved, open to the sky and shall be open to the public. Civic Space Types may be publicly or
privately owned. Open Space requirements for each zone are described in Article 5.
MIAMI 21
IV.30
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Thoroughfare (R.O.W.)
a. THOROUGHFARE & FRONTAGES
1-Radius at the Curb
2-Effective Turning Radius
b. TURNING RADIUS
1-Frontage Line
2-Lot Line
3-Façades
4-Elevations
5-Streetscreen
d. LOT LAYERS e. FRONTAGE & LOT LINES
1- Principal Building
2- Backbuilding
3- Outbuilding
c. BUILDING DISPOSITION
Private Building
Frontage
Public
Frontage
Public Vehicular Lanes
Frontage
Private
Building Frontage
Private Lot Private Lot
Parking Lane
Moving Lane
2
1
1 1
2
3 3
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 8 DEFINITIONS ILLUSTRATED
2
4
3
3
4 4
1
1
3
1
4 4
5
g. VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
Fig 1.
At Thoroughfare intersections
with Building
Setbacks
Fig 2.
At intersections of
driveways with Thoroughfare
with no
Building Setbacks
Fig 3.
At Thoroughfare intersections
with no
Building Setbacks
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
3rd Layer 2nd Layer 1st Layer
1st Layer
2nd Layer
3rd Layer
1
2
1
2
2
1
3
f. SETBACK DESIGNATIONS
1-Front Setback
2-Side Setback
3-Rear Setback
MIAMI 21
IV.31
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
8th Street
Flagler Street
7th Street
MacArthur
Causeway
I-395
Venetian Causeway
20th Street
REFER TO MIAMI COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN
ARTICLE 4. DIAGRAM 9 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY INCREASE AREAS
OMNI
500 units/acre
LITTLE HAVANA
200 units/acre
BRICKELL
500 units/acre
RIVER QUADRANT
500 units/acre
CBD
1,000 units/acre
SOUTH EAST
OVERTOWN
300 units/acre
Note:
The Official Miami 21 Residential Density
Increase Areas Diagram is maintained in
the Office of the City Clerk.
PARK WEST
500 units/acre
MIAMI 21
IV.32
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. DIAGRAM 10 AREA SPECIFIC ILLUSTRATIONS
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 1
NCD 1 CORAL GATE
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 2
NCD 2 VILLAGE WEST ISLAND AND CHARLES AVENUE
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 3
NCD 3 COCONUT GROVE
MIDTOWN
MIAMI WORLD CENTER
ESTABLISHED SETBACK AREAS
See Article 3, Section 3.3.6
a. Brickell Financial
b. Biscayne Boulevard
c. Design District
d. SW 27th Avenue Coconut Grove
e. 9th Street Promenade
f. Tigertail Avenue
g. South Bayshore Drive
h. Coral Way
i. 8th Street
j. 22nd Avenue
Note: The Official Miami 21 Area Specific Illustrations k. Coconut Grove
Diagram is maintained in the Office of the City Clerk.
A
B
C
D
E
F
K
G
H
H
I I
J
NCD-1
NCD-2
MIDTOWN
MIAMI WORLD
CENTER
NCD-3
MIAMI 21
IV.33
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 4. DIAGRAM 11 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT - TOD
METRORAIL
FUTURE METRORAIL
METROMOVER
BUS ROUTES
STREETCAR
HEALTH DISTRICT CIRCULATOR
HEALTH DISTRICT STOPS
FUTURE TRANSIT SHEDS
1/2 MILE TRANSIT SHED
1/4 MILE PEDESTRIAN SHED
Note: The Official Miami 21 TOD Diagram is maintained in the Office of the City Clerk.
MIAMI 21
IV.34
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA
BUILDING DISPOSITION
• Respond to the physical context taking into consideration natural features, existing urban form and Transect Zone intentions.
• For Buildings on Corner Lots, design Façades to acknowledge all Frontages.
• For modifications of nonconforming Structures. See also Article 7, Section 7.2 for specific regulations.
• Create transitions in Height and mass with Abutting properties and Transect Zones.
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
• Articulate the Building Façade vertically and horizontally in intervals appropriate to the existing Neighborhood and Transect Zone.
• Articulate the Building Façade at street level to recognize pedestrian continuity and interest, and at upper levels to recognize long views of Buildings.
• Use architectural styles and details (such as roof lines and fenestration), colors and materials derivative from surrounding area.
• Design Façades that respond primarily to human scale.
• Promote pedestrian interaction.
• Design all walls as active Façades, with doors and windows; when not possible, embellish walls with architectural design treatment.
• Provide usable Open Space that allows for visible and convenient pedestrian access from the public sidewalk.
• Building sites should locate service elements, such as trash dumpsters, utility meters, loading docks, backflow preventers, siamese connections and electrical, plumbing,
mechanical and communications equipment away from a street front. All service elements shall be situated and screened from view to the street and adjacent properties.
BUILDING FUNCTION & DENSITY
• Respond to the Neighborhood context and Transect Zone.
PARKING STANDARDS
• Minimize the impact of automobile parking and driveways on the pedestrian environment and adjacent properties, especially T3 areas.
• For pedestrian and vehicular safety minimize conflict points such as the number and width of driveways and curb cuts.
• Minimize off-street parking adjacent to a thoroughfare front and where possible locate parking behind the Building.
• Design landscaping or surface parking areas as buffers between dissimilar Uses.
• Screen parking garage structures with Habitable Space. Where Habitable Space is not provided, architectural treatments and landscaping shall screen the garage structure.
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
• Preserve existing vegetation and/or geological features whenever possible.
• Reinforce Transect Zone intention by integrating landscape and hardscape elements.
• Use landscaping to enhance Building design and continuity of Streetscape.
• Use landscape material, such as plantings, trellises, pavers, screen walls, planters and similar features, to enhance building design and continuity of streetscape.
• Provide landscaping that screens undesirable elements, such as surface parking lots, and that enhances open space and architecture.
SIGN STANDARDS
• Provide signage appropriate for the scale and character of the establishment and immediate Neighborhood.
• Signage shall be within calculated aggregate area appropriate for Transect Zone.
• Signage shall be located below fifty (50) foot height limit along the Building Primary Frontage.
• Number of Signs for an establishment shall not exceed the allowable amount per linear Frontage.
• Monument Signs shall be located within the appropriate Setback and not to disrupt pedestrian activity.
• Illumination and other lighting effects shall not create a nuisance to adjacent property or create a traffic hazard.
AMBIENT STANDARDS
• Provide lighting appropriate to the Building and landscape design in a manner that coordinates with signage and street lighting.
• Orient outdoor lighting to minimize glare to the public realm and adjacent properties.
• Protect residential areas from excessive noise, fumes, odors, commercial vehicle intrusion, traffic conflicts and the spillover effect of light.
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 12 DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA
MIAMI 21
V.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
5.1 GENERALLY V.5
5.2 NATURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T1) AND RURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T2) V.6
5.3 SUB-URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T3) V.7
5.4 GENERAL URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T4) V.12
5.5 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5) V.18
5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6) V.24
5.7 CIVIC SPACE ZONES (CS) AND CIVIC INSTITUTION ZONES (CI) V.43
5.8 CIVIC INSTITUTION ZONES - HEALTH DISTRICT (CI-HD) V.44
5.9 DISTRICT ZONES (D1 AND D2) V.51
5.10 WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ZONES (D3) V.59
MIAMI 21
V.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE 5
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13176 05-13-2010 D1 Density 10-00361zt
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout the
Code
10-00956zt
13238 12-16-2010 Requirements for sheds and other structures; loading berth
substitutions; requirements for public and commercial
storage facilities; distance separation requirements for
ALF’s; distance separation requirements for uses and
structures
10-00963zt
13240 12-16-2010 Modification of door spacing requirements and removal of
public easement requirements
10-00968zt
13242 12-16-2010 Establish limits and procedures for extensions above
maximum height for stairs, elevators, mechanical equip.,
etc.
10-00970zt
13254 02-24-2011 Modify story height for T4 Transect to 40 feet max 10-01454zt
13259 03-24-2011 Regulations for fences and walls in certain Transects 10-01461zt
13314 02-23-2012 Added “Stuctures other than signs” to dominant setback
waivers
11-00791zt
13326 06-28-2012 Additional flexibility for parking garages 12-00563zt
13425 12-12-2013 Mechanical roof equipment amendment to T6-12 13-01089zt
13507 03-12-2015 Modification of Illustration 5.6 Urban Core Transect Zone
(T6-24) to include T6-24(b)
14-01198zt
13516 03-26-2015 Modification of Balcony and Facade component
encroachment allowances.
14-01215zt
13669 03-09-2017 T6 building disposition setback requirements. 1690
13695 07-13-2017 Civic space zones density, intensity, and parking
requirements.
2289
13728 12-14-2017 Parking standards and placement for frontages and
underground parking.
3003
MIAMI 21
V.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.1 GENERALLY
5.1.1 This Article sets forth the standards applicable to development within each Transect Zone that are
specific to:
• Building Disposition
• Building Configuration
• Building Function and Density
• Parking Standards
• Architectural Standards
• Landscape Standards
• Ambient Standards
MIAMI 21
V.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.2 NATURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T1) AND RURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T2)
5.2.1. Natural Transect Zones (T1)
A Natural Transect (T1) Zone is a zone for environmental conservation.
a. A T1 Zone is to be left in an essentially natural state. Modification of the natural conditions shall
be according to Local, State and Federal guidelines. Public access to T1 areas may be limited
if it presents a threat to wildlife and plant life within the areas.
b. In a T1 Zone, improvements shall serve solely to protect natural elements. Any paved, graveled,
mulched, boardwalk or otherwise improved surface or any habitable, enclosed or air conditioned
space shall be kept to the minimum scale necessary to fulfill its purpose. Such improvements
including but not limited to: screened or glassed enclosures, pathways, fencing, gatehouses,
lighting, toilet facilities, parking areas, etc. may be allowed by process of Exception. Only activities
and improvements which reinforce the natural character shall be allowed and upon a finding
that there is no negative effect to the environment based on a study of potential environmental
impacts to be provided by the applicant.
c. One Dwelling Unit per five (5) acres allowed.
5.2.2. Rural Transect Zones (T2) – (RESERVED)
MIAMI 21
V.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.3 SUB-URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T3)
5.3.1 Building Disposition (T3)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.3
b. Lot Coverage by Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.3.
c. A Building shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of its Lot according to Illustration 5.3.
d. In Zone T3-R, one Principal Building consisting of one Dwelling Unit at the Frontage may be built
on each Lot as shown in Article 4, Table 8. In Zone T3-L one Principal Building consisting of one
Dwelling Unit at the Frontage and one Outbuilding may be built on each Lot. The Outbuilding
shall be separated from the Principal Building by a minimum of ten (10) feet. A Backbuilding may
connect the Principal Building and the Outbuilding. In Zone T3-O, one Principal Building consisting
of two Dwelling Units at the Frontage may be built on each Lot as shown in Illustration 5.3.
e. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 5.3. Setbacks may otherwise
be adjusted by Waiver by no more than ten percent (10%).
f. Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear Principal Frontage Line or parallel to the tangent
of a curved Principal Frontage Line.
g. Setbacks for Outbuildings, pools, tennis courts or other similar recreational facilities shall be as
shown for Outbuildings in Illustration 5.3.
h. Accessory Structures shall follow the setbacks for Principal Buildings as shown in Illustration
5.3. One (1) Story, non-habitable Accessory Structures, of a maximum of two hundred (200)
square feet or ten (10%) of the Floor Area of the Principal Building, whichever is greater, shall
be located in the Second or Third layer of the property and shall be setback a minimum of five
(5) feet from any side Property Line and ten (10) feet from any rear Property Line. Setbacks for
such structures may be reduced by Waiver.
5.3.2 Building Configuration (T3)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.3. For T3-R and T3-L, second story lot coverage shall not exceed thirty percent (30%).
b. Encroachments shall be allowed as follows: At the First Layer, stairs may encroach up to eight
(8) feet of the depth of the Setback. Open Porches shall be at a minimum seven (7) feet deep
and may encroach up to eight (8) feet of the depth of the Setback. At the First Layer, cantilevered
portions of Awnings, balconies, bay windows and roofs shall be a maximum three (3) feet deep
and may encroach up to three (3) feet of the depth of the Setback. Other cantilevered portions
of the Building shall maintain the required Setback. At the Second and Third Layers, Awnings,
balconies, bay windows, chimneys, roofs and stairs may encroach up to fifty percent (50%) of
the depth of the Side Setback or three (3) feet, whichever is less. At the Third Layer, Awnings
and canopies may encroach up to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the Rear Setback.
c. Unroofed screen enclosures shall be located within the Second or Third Layer only and shall
MIAMI 21
V.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
have a five (5) foot minimum side and rear Setback.
d. All outdoor storage, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and communications equipment and appurtenant
enclosures, shall be located within the Second or Third Layer and concealed from view
from any Frontage. These shall not be allowed as Encroachments, on any required setback,
except for Buildings existing as of the effective date of this Code, where mechanical equipment,
such as air conditioning units, pumps, exhaust fans or other similar noise producing equipment
may be allowed as Encroachments by Waiver.
e. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be as
shown in Illustration 5.3. The first-floor elevation of a Principal Building shall be a maximum of
two and a half (2.5) feet above grade, or as regulated by FEMA, whichever is higher. A flat roof
shall be a maximum of two Stories and twenty-five (25) feet. A pitched roof shall be a maximum
of twenty-five (25) feet to the eave and shall not exceed ten (10) feet overall Height above the
second Story.
f. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of the minimum Height necessary
to conceal it, and a maximum Height of three and a half (3.5) feet. At the roof, other ornamental
Building features may extend up to three and a half (3.5) feet above the maximum Building
Height. Roof decks shall be permitted at the maximum Height. Trellises may extend above the
maximum Height up to eight (8) feet. Extensions above the maximum Height up to four hundred
(400) square feet for either a stair enclosure or ornamental purpose shall be permitted by process
of Waiver. All extensions including attics shall not exceed ten (10) feet above the second Story.
g. Fences and walls may be located up to and including the Frontage Line to the following maximum
Height. Height of fences and walls shall not exceed four (4) feet within the First Layer, except
aluminum or iron picket and post Fences with or without masonry posts shall not exceed six (6)
feet. Within the Second and Third Layers, Fences and walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
5.3.3 Building Function & Density (T3)
a. Buildings in T3 shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article 4,
Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.3. Certain Functions as shown in Article 4, Table 3 shall require
approval by Warrant or Exception. Consult Article 6 for any supplemental use regulations.
b. Religious Facilities requiring additional Height or relief from parking requirements and frontage
requirements may be permitted by process of Exception.
5.3.4 Parking Standards (T3)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. Parking may be accessed by an Alley when such is available.
c. Covered parking and garages and at least fifty percent (50%) of required parking shall be located
within the Second and Third Layers as shown in Article 4, Table 8; in T3-R and T3-L a maximum
thirty percent (30%) of the width of the Facade may be covered parking or garage. In T3-O covered
parking and garages shall be a maximum sixty percent (60%) of the width of the façade.
Covered parking and garages shall align with or be set back from the Facade. Driveways and
MIAMI 21
V.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
drop-offs including parking may be located within the First Layer.
d. The maximum width at the Property Line of a driveway on a Frontage shall be twelve (12) feet
for T3-R and T3-L and twenty (20) feet for T3-O.Two separate driveways on one Lot shall have
a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet in T3-R and T3-L only.
e. Tandem Parking on site is encouraged.
5.3.5 Architectural Standards (T3)
a. Only permanent Structures shall be allowed. Temporary Structures such as mobile homes, construction
trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, and other temporary Structures shall not
be allowed except as per City Code.
b. Roof materials should be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface.
5.3.6 Landscape Standards (T3)
a. A minimum of one shade tree shall be planted within the First Layer for each fifty (50) feet of
Frontage Line.
b. At the First Layer, pavement shall be limited as follows: Impervious pavement shall be limited to
thirty percent (30%) of the area and pervious pavement shall be limited to sixty percent (60%)
of the area; a combination of pervious and impervious pavement shall be limited to sixty percent
(60%) of the area in the First Layer.
c. Green Space shall be a minimum twenty-five (25%) of the Lot area.
5.3.7 Ambient Standards (T3)
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed one (1.0) foot-candle.
c. Lighting of Building and Open Space of First and Second Layers shall be compatible with street
lighting of Abutting public spaces.
MIAMI 21
V.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage 50% max. first floor
30% max. second floor (T3 R & T3
L only)
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback N/A
f. Green Space 25% Lot Area min.
9. Density T3 R = 9 du/ac max.
T3 L = 9 du/ac max.
T3 O = 18 du/ac max.
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 20 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 5 ft. min. 20% Lot Width total min.
d. Rear 20 ft. min.
OUTBUILDING SETBACK (T3 L ONLY)
a. Principal Front 20 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 5 ft. min.
d. Rear 5 ft. min.
ILLUSTRATION 5.3 SUB-URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T3)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn permitted
b. Porch & Fence permitted
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop prohibited
f. Shopfront prohibited
9. Gallery prohibited
h. Arcade prohibited
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Principal Building 2 Stories and 25 ft. to eave max.
b. Outbuilding 2 Stories and 25 ft. to eave max.
PARKING
Facade Width T3 R & T3 L 30 % max.
T3 O 60% max.
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
OUTBUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.4 GENERAL URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T4)
5.4.1 Building Disposition (T4)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.4.
b. Lot Coverage by any Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.4.
c. A Building shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of its Lot according to Illustration 5.4.
d. One Principal Building at the Frontage, and one Outbuilding to the rear of the Principal Building,
may be built on each Lot as shown in Article 4, Table 8. The Outbuilding shall be separated from
the Principal Building by a minimum of ten (10) feet.
e. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 5.4. Setbacks may otherwise
be adjusted by Waiver by no more ten percent (10%).
f. Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear Principal Frontage Line or parallel to the tangent
of a curved Principal Frontage Line, for a minimum fifty percent (50%) of its length.
g. The Setbacks for Outbuildings, pools, tennis courts or other similar recreational facilities shall
be as shown for Outbuildings in Illustration 5.4.
h. Accessory Structures shall follow the setbacks for Principal Buildings as shown in Illustration
5.4. One (1) Story, non-habitable Accessory Structures, of a maximum of two hundred (200)
square feet or ten (10%) of the Floor Area of the Principal Building, whichever is greater, shall
be located in the Second or Third layer of the property and shall be setback a minimum of five
(5) feet from any side Property Line and ten (10) feet from any rear Property Line.
5.4.2 Building Configuration (T4)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.4.
b. Encroachments shall be allowed as follows: At the First Layer, stairs may encroach up to fifty
percent (50%) of the depth of the Setback. Open Porches shall be at a minimum seven (7) feet
deep and may encroach up to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the Setback. At the First Layer,
Cantilevered portions of Awnings, balconies, bay windows and roofs shall be at a maximum
three (3) feet deep and may encroach up to thirty percent (30%) of the depth of the Setback.
Other cantilevered portions of the Building shall maintain the required Setbacks. At the Second
and Third Layers, Awnings, balconies, bay windows, chimneys, roofs, and stairs may encroach
up to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the Setback or three (3) feet, whichever is less. At the
Third Layer, Awnings and canopies may encroach up to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the
Setback.
c. Unroofed screen enclosures shall be located within the Second or Third Layer only and shall
have a five (5) feet minimum side and rear Setback.
d. All outdoor storage, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and communications equipment and apMIAMI
21
V.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
purtenant enclosures, shall be within the Second or Third Layer and concealed from view from
any Frontage or sidewalk by liner buildings, walls, Streetscreens, or opaque gates. These shall
not be allowed as Encroachments on any required setback, except for Buildings existing as of the
effective date of this Code, where mechanical equipment, such as air conditioning units, pumps,
exhaust fans or other similar noise producing equipment may be allowed as Encroachments in
the setback by Waiver.
e. Loading and service entries shall be at the Third Layer and shall be accessed from Alleys when
available. When a Lot has only Principal Frontages, vehicular entries, Loading Docks and service
areas shall be at the Third Layer and shall be permitted on Principal Frontages only by process
of Waiver.
f. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be as
shown in Illustration 5.4. The first-floor Elevation of a Principal Building shall be at average Sidewalk
grade; a first-floor Residential or Lodging Function should be at a minimum Height of two
(2) feet and a maximum Height of three and a half (3.5) feet for privacy reasons or as regulated
by FEMA, whichever is higher. The height of the building shall be up to three (3) Stories, and a
maximum of forty (40) feet to the top of the roof slab.
g. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of the minimum Height necessary
to conceal it, and a maximum Height of five (5) feet. Other ornamental Building features may
extend up to five (5) feet above the maximum Building Height. Roof decks shall be permitted up
to the maximum Height. Trellises may extend above the maximum Height up to eight (8) feet.
Extensions up to ten (10) feet above the maximum Height for a stair, elevator or mechanical
enclosure shall be limited to twenty (20%) of the roof area.
h. Fences and walls may be located at the Frontage Line as shown in Article 4, Table 6. Fences
and walls shall be a maximum Height of four (4) feet at the First Layer, except aluminum or iron
picket and post Fences with or without masonry posts shall not exceed six (6) feet. Within the
Second and Third Layers, Fences and walls shall be a maximum Height of eight (8) feet.
i. All ground floor and roof top utility infrastructure and mechanical equipment shall be concealed
from public view. At the Building Frontage, all equipment such as backflow preventers, siamese
connections, and the like shall be placed within the line of the Facade or behind the Streetscreen.
On the roof, a screen wall shall conceal all equipment except antennas from lateral view. Exhaust
air fans and louvers may be allowed on the Façade only on Secondary Frontages above the first
Floor.
5.4.3 Building Function & Density (T4)
a. Buildings in T4 shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article 4,
Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.4. Certain functions as shown in Article 4, Table 3 shall require
approval by Warrant or Exception. Consult Article 6 for any supplemental use regulations.
5.4.4 Parking Standards (T4)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. Parking may be accessed by an Alley when available.
MIAMI 21
V.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
c. Surface parking lots, covered parking and garages shall be located within the Second and Third
Layers as illustrated in Article 4, Table 8. Surface parking lots, garages, Loading space and service
areas shall be masked from the Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen as specified
in Illustration 5.4. A maximum thirty percent (30%) of the width of the Facade may be surface
parking, covered parking or garage, which shall align with or be set back from the Facade.
Driveways and drop-offs including parking may be located within the First Layer.
d. Underground parking may extend into the Second and First Layers only if it is fully underground
and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the First and Second Layers above that
of the Sidewalk. Ramps to underground parking shall be within the Second and Third Layers.
e. The maximum width at the Property Line of a driveway on a Frontage shall be twelve (12) feet.
Shared driveway width combining ingress and egress shall be a maximum width of twenty (20)
feet at the Property Line and may encroach into Setbacks. Two separate driveways on one Lot
shall have a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet.
f. Tandem Parking on site should be encouraged.
g. Shared Parking shall be calculated according to Article 4, Table 5.
h. In T4-L and T4-O a minimum of one (1) bicycle rack space shall be provided for every twenty
(20) vehicular parking spaces and may be in the Private Frontage.
5.4.5 Architectural Standards (T4)
a. Only permanent structures shall be allowed. Temporary Structures such as mobile homes, construction
trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other temporary structures shall not
be allowed except as per City Code.
b. The Facades on Retail Frontages shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass no
less than seventy percent (70%) of the Sidewalk level Story. Security screens shall be seventy
percent (70%) open.
c. Roof materials should be light-colored, high-Albedo or a planted surface and shall comply with
Article 3, Section 3.13.2 of this Code.
5.4.6 Landscape Standards (T4)
a. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the Lot Area in the First Layer shall be Green Space.
b. In the First Layer, pavement shall be limited as follows: impervious pavement shall be limited
to forty percent (40%) of the area and pervious pavement shall be limited to fifty percent (50%)
of the area; a combination of pervious and impervious pavement shall be limited to fifty percent
(50%) of the area in the First Layer.
c. Open Space shall be a minimum fifteen percent (15%) of the Lot Area.
5.4.7 Ambient Standards (T4)
MIAMI 21
V.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
a. Noise regulation shall be as established by the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed 2.0 fc (foot-candles).
c. Lighting of Building and Open Space of First and Second Layers shall be compatible with street
lighting of Abutting public spaces.
d. The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall
not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area
- With rear vehicular access
5,000 s.f. min.; 20,000 s.f. max.
1,400 s.f. min.; 20,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width
- With rear vehicular access
50 ft min.
16 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage 60% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback 50% minimum
f. Open Space 15% Lot Area min.
9. Density 36 du/ac max.
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. or 5 ft. min. Abutting a Setback
d. Rear 20 ft. min.
OUTBUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 30 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. or 5 ft. min. Abutting a Setback
d. Rear 5 ft. min.
ILLUSTRATION 5.4 GENERAL URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T4)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn permitted
b. Porch & Fence permitted
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T4 L and T4 O only)
9. Gallery prohibited
h. Arcade prohibited
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Principal Building 3 Stories max. and 40 ft. max.
b. Outbuilding 2 Stories max.
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
OUTBUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.5 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5)
5.5.1 Building Disposition (T5)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.5.
b. Lot coverage by any Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.5.
c. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their Lots according to Illustration 5.5.
d. Buildings shall have their principal pedestrian entrances on a Frontage Line or from a Courtyard
at the Second Layer.
e. For the minimum Height, facades shall be built parallel to the Principal Frontage Line along a
minimum of seventy percent (70%) of its length on the Setback Line as shown in Illustration 5.5.
In the absence of a Building along the remainder of the Frontage Line, a Streetscreen shall be
built co-planar with the Façade to conceal parking and service areas.
f. At the first Story, Façades along a Frontage Line shall have frequent doors and windows; pedestrian
entrances shall occur at a maximum spacing of seventy-five (75) feet and vehicular entries
shall occur at a minimum spacing of sixty (60) feet, unless approved by Waiver.
g. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 5.5. Where the property to be developed
abuts aStructure other than a Sign, a Waiver may be granted so the proposed Structure matches
the ground level dominant setback of the block and its context.
h. For sites with three hundred and forty (340) feet Frontage length or more, a cross-block passage
shall be provided as follows: If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point more than three hundred
and forty (340) feet from a Thoroughfare intersection, the Building shall provide a cross Block
Pedestrian Passage. If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point six hundred and fifty (650) feet
from a Thoroughfare intersection, a vehicular cross Block passage shall be provided.
i. Maximum Lot size as shown in Illustration 5.5 may be increased by Exception for Uses that serve
the Neighborhood.
5.5.2 Building Configuration (T5)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.5.
b. Encroachments shall be as follows: At the First Layer, cantilevered Awnings and entry canopies
may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback; except as may
be further allowed by Chapter 54 of the City Code; above the first Story, cantilevered balconies,
bay windows, roofs and Facade components promoting energy efficiency such as shading and
Screening devices that are non-accessible, may encroach a maximum of three (3) feet into the
Setback. Other cantilevered portions of the Building shall maintain the required Setback. At the
Second and Third Layers, no encroachments are permitted.
MIAMI 21
V.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
c. Galleries and Arcades shall be a minimum fifteen (15) feet deep and may encroach up to one
hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback by process of a Special Area Plan.
d. Screen enclosures shall be located within the Second or Third Layer only and shall have a five
(5) feet minimum side and rear Setback when Abutting T3 or T4.
e. Loading and service entries shall be within the Third Layer and shall be accessed from Alleys
when available and otherwise from the Secondary Frontage. When Lots have only Principal
Frontages, vehicular entries, Loading spaces and service areas shall be permitted on Principal
Frontages only by process of Waiver.
f. All outdoor storage, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and communications equipment and appurtenant
enclosures shall be located within the Second or Third Layer and concealed from view
from any Frontage or sidewalk by Liner Buildings, walls, Streetscreens, or opaque gates. These
shall not be allowed as Encroachments.
g. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be as
shown in Illustration 5.5. The first floor elevation shall be at average Sidewalk grade. A first floor
Residential or Lodging Function should be raised a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of
three and a half (3.5) feet above average Sidewalk grade. Existing one Story Structures shall
be considered conforming and may be enlarged.
h. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of the minimum Height necessary
to conceal it, and a maximum Height of five (5) feet. Other ornamental Building features may
extend up to ten (10) feet above the maximum Building Height. Roof decks shall be permitted
up to the maximum Height. Trellises may extend above the maximum Height up to eight (8)
feet. Extensions up to ten (10) feet above the maximum Height for stair, elevator or mechanical
enclosures shall be limited to twenty (20%) of the roof area, unless approved by Waiver.
i. All ground floor and roof top utility infrastructure and mechanical equipment shall be concealed
from public view. At the Building Frontage, all equipment such as backflow preventers, siamese
connections, and the like shall be placed within the line of the Facade or behind the Streetscreen.
On the roof, a screen wall shall conceal all equipment except antennas from lateral view. Exhaust
air fans and louvers may be allowed on the Façade only on Secondary Frontages above the first
floor.
j. Streetscreens shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height and constructed
of a material matching the adjacent building Façade or of masonry, wrought iron or aluminum.
The Streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge or fence. Streetscreens shall have openings no
larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. Streetscreens shall be located
co-planar with the Building Facade Line. Streetscreens more than three (3) feet high shall be
fifty percent (50%) permeable or articulated to avoid blank walls.
k. Within the Second and Third Layers, fences and walls shall not exceed a Height of eight (8) feet.
5.5.3 Building Function & Density (T5)
a. Buildings in T5 shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article 4,
Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.5. Certain Functions as shown in Article 4, Table 3 shall require
MIAMI 21
V.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
approval by Warrant or Exception. Consult Article 6 for any supplemental use regulations.
5.5.4 Parking Standards (T5)
a. Vehicular parking and loading shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each Lot shall be counted
toward the parking requirement of the Building on the Lot.
c. Parking should be accessed by an Alley. Parking shall be accessed from the Secondary Frontage
when available. Where Lots have only Principal Frontages, parking may be accessed from
the Principal Frontages.
d. Primary Frontage. All parking including drop-off drives and porte-cocheres, open parking areas,
covered parking, garages, Loading space and service areas shall be located within the Third
Layer and shall be masked from the Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen as illustrated
in Article 4, Table 8. Parking may extend into the Second Layer above the first Story by Waiver
if an art or glass treatment of a design to be approved by the Planning Director with the recommendation
of the Urban Development Review Board is provided for one hundred percent (100%)
of that portion of the Pedestal Façade. Surface parking may extend into the Second Layer a
maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the length of the Primary Frontage up to a maximum
of fifty (50) feet.
e. Secondary Frontage. All Parking, open parking areas, covered parking, garages, Loading Spaces,
and service areas shall be located in the Third Layer and shall be masked from the Frontage by
a Liner Building or Streetscreen for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the length of the frontage
or height of the pedestal. Above ground Parking may extend into the Second Layer beyond fifty
percent (50%) of the length of the frontage or height of the Pedestal by Waiver if an art or glass
treatment of a design to be approved by the Planning Director is provided for that portion of the
pedestal facade.
f. Underground parking may extend into the Second and First Layers only if it is fully underground
and does not require raising first-floor elevation of the First and Second Layers above that of the
Sidewalk. Ramps to underground parking shall be only within the Second and Third Layers.
g. The vehicular entrance of a parking lot or garage on a Frontage shall be no wider than twentyfive
(25) feet and the minimum distance between vehicular entrances shall be sixty (60) feet,
unless approved by Waiver.
h. Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots and parking structures shall be directly from a Frontage
Line. Underground parking structures should be entered by pedestrians directly from a Principal
Building.
i. Buildings mixing Uses shall provide parking for each Use. Shared Parking shall be calculated
according to Article 4, Table 5.
MIAMI 21
V.21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.5.5 Architectural Standards (T5)
a. Only permanent Structures shall be allowed. Temporary Structures such as mobile homes, construction
trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other temporary Structures shall not
be allowed except as per City Code and this Code.
b. The Facades on Retail Frontages shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass no
less than seventy percent (70%) of the sidewalk-level Story. Security screens shall be seventy
percent (70%) open.
c. Roof materials should be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface and shall comply with
Article 3, Section 3.13.2 of this Code.
d. The Facade of a parking garage that is not concealed behind a Habitable Liner shall be screened
to conceal all internal elements such as plumbing pipes, fans, ducts and lighting. Ramping should
be internalized wherever possible. Exposed spandrels shall be prohibited. The exposed top level
of parking Structures shall be covered a maximum of sixty percent (60%) with a shade producing
Structure such as, but not limited to, a vined pergola or retractable canvas shade Structure.
5.5.6 Landscape Standards (T5)
a. The First Layer as shown in Article 4, Table 8 shall be paved and landscaped to match and extend
the enfronting Public Frontage as shown in Article 8.
b. Open Space shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the Lot Area. Unpaved Green Space
shall be a minimum five percent (5%) of the Lot Area.
5.5.7 Ambient Standards (T5)
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed 5.0 fc (foot-candles).
c. Lighting of Building and contingent Open Spaces shall be compatible with street lighting of Abutting
public spaces as illustrated in Article 8. Interior garage lighting fixtures shall not be visible
from streets.
d. The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall
not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.22
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.23
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area
- With rear vehicular access
5,000 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
1,200 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width
- With rear vehicular access
50 ft min.
16 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage 80% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 65 du/ac max.
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. min.
d. Rear 0 ft. min.
e. Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min
Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth**min. 1st through 2nd
Story 26 ft. min. above 2nd Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.5 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T5 L and T5 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 5 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 1 Story Abutting D1
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.24
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6)
5.6.1 Building Disposition (T6)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.6.
b. Lot coverage by any Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.6.
c. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their Lots according to Illustration 5.6.
d. Buildings shall have their principal pedestrian entrances on a Frontage Line or from a courtyard
at the Second Layer.
e. For the minimum Height, Facades shall be built parallel to the Principal Frontage Line along
a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of its length on the Setback Line as shown in Illustration
5.6. In the absence of Building along the remainder of the Frontage Line, a Streetscreen shall
be built co-planar with the Façade to shield parking and service areas. In the case of two (2) or
three (3) Principal Frontages meeting at Thoroughfare intersections, the Building corner may
recede from the designated Setback up to twenty percent (20%) of the Lot length.
f. At the first Story, Facades along a Frontage Line shall have frequent doors and windows; pedestrian
entrances shall occur at a maximum spacing of seventy five (75) feet and vehicular entries
shall occur at a minimum spacing of sixty (60) feet unless approved by Waiver.
g. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 5.6. Where the property to be developed
abuts a Structure other than a Sign, a Waiver may be granted so the proposed Structure matches
the ground level dominant setback of the block and its context. Frontage Setbacks above the
eighth floor for Lots having one (1) dimension measuring one hundred (100) feet or less may be
a minimum of zero (0) feet by Waiver. For T6-24, T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80, the Frontage
Setbacks above the eighth floor shall not be required for a Frontage facing a Civic Space or a
Right-of-Way seventy (70) feet or greater in width. At property lines Abutting a lower Transect
Zone the Setbacks shall reflect the transition as shown in Illustration 5.6.
h. Above the eighth floor, minimum building spacing is sixty (60) feet, except that where the Building
abuts T5, the sixty (60) feet required spacing shall be above the fifth floor. For T6-24, T6-36,
T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80 Lots having one dimension one hundred (100) feet or less, side and rear
Setbacks above the eighth floor may be reduced to a minimum of twenty (20) feet by Waiver.
For T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80 above the eighth floor in the Second Layer, at a setback of
ten (10) feet, an additional two stories of habitable space may extend a maximum sixty percent
(60%) of the length of the street Frontages. For T6-24, T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80 above
the eighth floor an additional six feet of non-habitable space may be allowed without additional
setback to accommodate depth of swimming pools, landscaping, transfer beams, and other
structural and mechanical systems.
i. For sites with three hundred and forty (340) feet Frontage length or more, a cross-Block passage
shall be provided as follows: If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point more than three hundred
and forty (340) feet from a Thoroughfare intersection, the Building shall provide a cross-Block
Pedestrian Passage. If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point six hundred and fifty (650) feet
MIAMI 21
V.25
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
from a Thoroughfare intersection, a vehicular cross-Block passage shall be provided. Such a
cross-Block Passage may be covered above the first floor by a maximum of twenty-five percent
(25%) of its length with Structures connecting Buildings, such as a terrace, pedestrian bridge or
vehicular bridge. In T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80 a Pedestrian Passage may be roofed and
shall be lined with frequent doors and windows.
j. Maximum Lot size as shown in Illustration 5.6 may be increased by Exception for Uses that serve
the Neighborhood.
5.6.2 Building Configuration (T6)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.6.
b. Above the eighth floor, the Building Floorplate dimensions shall be limited as follows:
1. 15,000 square feet maximum for Residential Uses in T6-8, T6-12 and T6-24
2. 18,000 square feet maximum for Residential Uses in T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80
3. 30,000 square feet maximum for Commercial Uses and for parking
4. 180 feet maximum length for Residential Uses
5. 215 feet maximum length for Commercial Uses
c. Encroachments shall be as follows: At the First Layer, cantilevered Awnings and entry canopies
may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback, except as may
be further allowed by Chapter 54 of the City Code. Above the first Story, cantilevered balconies,
bay windows, roofs, or Facade components promoting energy efficency, such as shading and
Screening devices, that are non-accessible may encroach up to three (3) feet of the depth of the
Setback. Other cantilevered portions of the Building shall maintain the required Setback. Above
the eighth Story when additional setbacks are required as detailed in Illustration 5.6, Facade
components promoting energy efficiency such as shading and Screening devices, that are nonaccessible
or balconies may encroach a maximum of three (3) feet.
d. Galleries and Arcades shall be minimum fifteen (15) feet deep, shall encroach one hundred
percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback and shall overlap the whole width of the Sidewalk to
within two (2) feet of the curb. Permitted by process of a Special Area Plan.
e. All outdoor storage, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and communications equipment and appurtenant
enclosures shall be located within the Second or Third Layer and concealed from view
from any Frontage or Sidewalk by Liner Buildings, walls, Streetscreens, or opaque gates. These
shall not be allowed as Encroachments.
f. Loading and service entries shall be within the Third Layer and shall be accessed from Alleys
when available, and otherwise from the Secondary Frontage. Loading spaces and service areas
shall be internal to the building. Where Lots have only Principal Frontages, vehicular entries,
Loading Docks and service areas shall be permitted on Principal Frontages by Waiver.
g. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be allocated
as required in Illustration 5.6. First-floor elevation shall be at average Sidewalk grade. A
MIAMI 21
V.26
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
first level Residential Function or Lodging Function should be raised a minimum of two (2) feet
and a maximum of three and a half (3.5) feet above average Sidewalk grade. Existing one Story
Structures shall be considered conforming and may be enlarged.
h. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of the minimum Height necessary
to conceal it, and a maximum Height of ten (10) feet. Other enclosures for housing stairs,
elevators or mechanical equipment or for ornamental Building features may extend up to ten (10)
feet above maximum height for T6-8, unless approved by Waiver. There shall be no limitation
for ornamental element, stair, elevator or mechanical equipment extensions above maximum
Height for T6-12, T6-24, T6-36, T6-48, T6-60 and T6-80. Roof decks shall be permitted up to
the maximum Height. Trellises may extend above the maximum Height up to fourteen (14) feet.
i. All ground floor and roof top utility infrastructure and mechanical equipment shall be concealed
from public view. At the building Frontage, all equipment such as backflow preventers, siamese
connections, and the like shall be placed within the line of the Facade or behind the Streetscreen.
On the roof a screen wall shall conceal all equipment except antennas from lateral view. Exhaust
air fans and louvers may be allowed on the Façade only on the Secondary Frontages above the
first floor.
j. Streetscreens or fences shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height and
constructed of a material matching the adjacent building Façade or of masonry, wrought iron or
aluminum. The Streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge. Streetscreens shall have openings
no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. Streetscreens shall be
located coplanar with the Building Facade Line. Streetscreens over three (3) feet high shall be
fifty percent (50%) permeable or articulated to avoid blank walls.
k. Within the Second and Third Layers, fences and walls shall not exceed a Height of eight (8) feet.
l. The ground floor along all Frontages shall contain Habitable Space.
5.6.3 Building Function & Density (T6)
a. Buildings in T6 shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article 4,
Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.6. Certain Functions as shown in Article 4, Table 3 shall require
approval by Warrant or Exception. Consult Article 6 for any supplemental regulations.
b. The calculation of the FLR shall not apply to that portion of the building that is entirely below
base flood elevation.
5.6.4 Parking Standards (T6)
a. Vehicular parking and loading shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each Lot shall be counted
toward the parking requirement of the Building on the Lot.
c. Parking should be accessed by an Alley. Parking shall be accessed from the Secondary Frontage
when available. Where Lots have only Principal Frontages, parking may be accessed from
MIAMI 21
V.27
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
the Principal Frontages.
d. Primary Frontage. All parking, including drop-off drives and porte-cocheres, open parking areas,
covered parking, garages, Loading Spaces and service areas shall be located within the Third
Layer and shall be masked from the Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen as illustrated in
Article 4, Table 8. Parking may extend into the Second Layer above the first (1) Story, by Waiver,
if an art or glass treatment, of a design to be approved by the Planning Director, with the recommendation
of the Urban Development Review Board, is provided for one hundred (100%) percent
of that portion of the Pedestal Façade. Surface parking may extend into the Second Layer a
maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the length of the Primary Frontage up to a maximum
of fifty (50) feet.
e. Secondary Frontage. All Parking, open parking areas, covered parking, garages, Loading Spaces
and service areas shall be located in the Third Layer and shall be masked from the Frontage by
a Liner Building or Streetscreen for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the length of the frontage
or height of the pedestal. Above ground Parking may extend into the Second Layer beyond
fifty percent (50%) of the length of the frontage or height of the Pedestal, by Waiver, if an art or
glass treatment of a design to be approved by the Planning Director is provided for that portion
of the pedestal facade.
f. Underground parking may extend into the Second and First Layers only if it is fully underground
and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the First and Second Layers above that
of the sidewalk. Ramps to underground parking shall be within the Second or Third Layers.
g. The vehicular entrance of a parking Lot or garage on a Frontage shall be no wider than thirty
(30) feet and the minimum distance between vehicular entrances shall be sixty (60) feet, unless
approved by Waiver.
h. Pedestrian entrances to all parking Lots and parking structures shall be directly from a Frontage
Line. Underground parking structures should be entered by pedestrians directly from a Principal
Building.
i. Buildings mixing uses shall provide parking for each Use. Shared Parking shall be calculated
according to Article 4, Table 5.
5.6.5 Architectural Standards (T6)
a. Only permanent structures shall be allowed. Temporary structures such as mobile homes, construction
trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other temporary structures shall not
be allowed except as per City Code and this code.
b. The Facades on Retail Frontages shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass no
less than seventy percent (70%) of the sidewalk-level Story. Security screens shall be seventy
percent (70%) open.
c. Roof materials should be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface and shall comply with
Article 3, Section 3.13.2 of this Code.
MIAMI 21
V.28
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
d. The Façade of a parking garage that is not concealed behind a Habitable Liner and all Elevations
shall be screened to conceal all internal elements such as plumbing pipes, fans, ducts and lighting.
Ramping should be internalized wherever possible. Exposed spandrels shall be prohibited.
The exposed top level of parking structures shall be covered a minimum of sixty percent (60%)
with a shade producing structure such as, but not limited to, a vined pergola or retractable canvas
shade structure.
5.6.6 Landscape Standards (T6)
a. The First Layer as shown in Article 4, Table 8 shall be paved and landscaped to match the Public
Frontage as shown in Article 8.
b. Open Space shall be a minimum ten percent (10%) of the total Lot area. Ten percent (10%) of
the Open Space provided in Second or Third Layer shall be landscaped.
5.6.7 Ambient Standards (T6)
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed 20 fc (foot-candles).
c. Lighting of building and contingent Open Spaces shall be compatible with street lighting of Abutting
public spaces as illustrated in Article 8. Interior garage lighting fixtures shall not be visible
from streets.
d. The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall
not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.29
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 15,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) 5 / 25% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
26 ft. min. above 5th Story
Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth** min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. 3rd through 5th Story
46 ft. min. above 5th Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-8)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-8 L and T6-8 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 8 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 4 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.30
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.31
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.; 70,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 15,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) 8 / 30% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
26 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth** min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. 3rd through 5th Story
46 ft. min. above 5th Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-12)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-12 L and T6-12 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 12 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 8 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.32
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.33
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.; 100,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 15,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) T6-24a: 7 / 30% additional Public Benefit
T6-24b: 16 / 40% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-24)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-24 L and T6-24 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 24 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 24 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.34
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.35
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 18,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) T6-36a: 12 / 40% additional Public Benefit
T6-36b: 22 / 40% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-36)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-36 L and T6-36 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 36 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 24 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.36
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.37
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 18,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) T6-48a: 11 / 50% additional Public Benefit
T6-48b: 18 / 50% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-48)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-48 L and T6-48 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 48 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 32 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.38
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.39
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 18,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) T6-60a: 11 / 50% additional Public Benefit
T6-60b: 18 / 50% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. 6st through 8th Story
30 ft. min. above 8h Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-60)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-60 L and T6-60 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 60 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height unlimited Stories Abutting all Transects
Zones except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.40
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.41
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
- 1-8 Stories 80% max.
- Above 8th Story 18,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) 24 / 50% additional Public Benefit
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-80)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-80 L and T6-80 O only)
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 80 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height unlimited Stories Abutting all Transects
Zones except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.42
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.43
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.7 CIVIC SPACE ZONES (CS) AND CIVIC INSTITUTION ZONES (CI)
5.7.1 Civic Space Zones (CS)
5.7.1.1 Development in a Civic Space Zone should have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of its perimeter
enfronting a Thoroughfare. Civic Space sites shall be entered directly from a Thoroughfare.
5.7.1.2 Development in Civic Space Zones shall be consistent with the standards in Article 4, Tables 3, 4,
and 7.
5.7.1.3 One or more Buildings may be built in each Civic Space. Building floor area shall not exceed twentyfive
percent (25%) of the lot area of the Civic Space, and shall support the principal use of the Civic
Space.
5.7.1.4 In Civic Spaces, Buildings, Fences and walls shall conform to regulations of the most restrictive
Abutting Transect Zone, except as shown by City of Miami’s Parks and Public Spaces Master Plan
or other master plans adopted by the City Commission. Other adjustments to the regulations shall
be approved by process of Exception.
5.7.1.5 All Community facility and Recreational Facility Uses shall be government owned or operated only.
5.7.2 Civic Institution Zones (CI)
5.7.2.1 Development in a Civic Institution Zone shall have a minimum of one (1) Frontage enfronting a
Thoroughfare and should have its primary entrance from a Thoroughfare.
5.7.2.2 Development in Civic Institution Zones shall be consistent with the standards in Article 4, Tables 3
and 4.
5.7.2.3 A Civic Institution Lot may have one (1) or more Buildings.
5.7.2.4 Civic Institution Development shall be permitted by process of Exception and shall conform to the
following regulations:
a. Any property located within a CI Zone may be developed according to the regulations of the most
restrictive Abutting Transect Zone with all Frontage Setbacks considered a minimum.
b. Development in a CI Zone shall follow the regulations of the Abutting Transect Zone, except that
Height restrictions shall be as follows:
1. A CI Zone entirely Abutting T3 shall be developed to no more than the maximum Height allowed
by T4.
2. A CI Zone predominantly Abutting T3 or T4, shall be developed to no more than the maximum
Height allowed by T5.
3. A CI Zone predominantly Abutting T5, T6-8, D1, D2 or D3, shall be developed to no more
than the maximum Height of T6-8.
4. A CI Zone entirely Abutting T6-8 or higher, may conform to the maximum Height of any higher
Abutting Transect Zone.
MIAMI 21
V.44
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
c. A CI Zone may seek higher than Abutting successional Transect Zoning through the process of
Special Area Plan.
d. Adjustments to Building Disposition Requirements, with the exception of Setbacks, shall be allowed
by process of Waiver.
5.7.2.5 The expansion of any existing Civic Institution Use by less than twenty percent (20%) may be permitted
By Right.
5.7.2.6 In the event that a Civic Institution Zone ceases to be used for Civic Institution Uses, it shall be developed
either in accordance with the regulations of the most restrictive Abutting Transect Zone or
by process of rezoning, subject to the limitations of the Comprehensive Plan.
5.8 CIVIC INSTITUTION ZONES – HEALTH DISTRICT (CI-HD)
a. All Development in the CI-HD zone for a structure that exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
in cost and affects the Scale of the street or block front, or that affects the location, relocation or
enlargement of vehicular ways or parking areas outside public Rights-of-Way shall be approved
by Warrant except that any Development exceeding the following thresholds shall be approved
by Exception.
1. Development involving in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of Floor
Area excluding parking and loading.
2. For hospital buildings, any development in excess of eight hundred thousand (800,000)
square feet of Floor Area excluding parking and loading.
3. Any single use or combination of uses requiring or proposing to provide in excess of a net
increase of one thousand (1,000) off-street parking spaces.
5.8.1 Building Disposition (CI-HD)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.8.
b. Lot coverage by any Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.8.
c. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their Lots according to Illustration 5.8.
A CI-HD lot may have more than one building.
d. Principal pedestrian entrances shall generally be along Principal Frontages and vehicular entrances
on streets of less intensity.
e. It is recommended that Facades be built parallel to the Principal Frontage Line.
f. It is recommended at the first Story, Facades along a Frontage Line have frequent doors and
windows.
g. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 5.8. Frontage Setbacks may be adjusted
MIAMI 21
V.45
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
to conform to the ground level dominant Setback of the existing neighborhood or existing thoroughfare
Frontage Setbacks by Waiver.
h. It is recommended that above the eighth floor, minimum Building spacing be sixty (60) feet.
i. Public access to public plazas and walkways shall be provided and pedestrian walkway connections
shall be provided between parallel public streets.
5.8.2 Building Configuration (CI-HD)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.8.
b. It is recommended that above the eighth floor, the Building Floorplate dimensions be limited as
follows:
1. 15,000 square feet maximum for Residential Uses
2. 30,000 square feet maximum for Commercial Uses and for parking
3. 180 feet maximum length for Residential Uses
4. 215 feet maximum length for Commercial Uses
Civil Support and Educational Uses within the CI-HD Transect Zone shall have no maximum Floorplate
dimensions.
c. Encroachments may be as follows: At the First Layer, cantilevered Awnings and entry canopies
may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback, except as may
be further allowed by Chapter 54 of the City Code. Above the first Story, cantilevered portions
of balconies, bay windows, and roofs may encroach up to three (3) feet of the depth of the
Setback. Other cantilevered portions of the Building shall maintain the required Setback. At the
Second Layer no encroachments are permitted, except that façade components promoting energy
efficiency such as shading and Screening devices that are non-accessible may encroach
a maximum of three (3) feet.
d. It is recommended that Galleries and Arcades be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet deep.
e. It is recommended that all ground floor and rooftop utility infrastructure, outdoor storage, electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, and communications equipment and appurtenant enclosures be
concealed from view from any Frontage or Sidewalk.
f. It is recommended that Loading space and service areas be internal to the building or situated
and screened from view to the street and adjacent properties.
g. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be allocated
as required in Illustration 5.8. First-Floor Elevation should be at average Sidewalk grade.
h. Within the Second and Third Layers, Fences and walls shall not exceed a Height of eight (8) feet.
Major Facilities requiring additional Fence or wall Height may be permitted by Waiver, subject to
the Planning Director’s agreement that the applicant has demonstrated that the Use specifically
requires the proposed additional Height.
MIAMI 21
V.46
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.8.3 Building Function & Density (CI-HD)
a. Buildings in CI-HD shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article
4, Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.8. Consult Article 6 for any supplemental regulations.
b. Uses additional to those listed in Article IV, Table 3 are allowed only if they are customarily accessory
and clearly incidental to the university, hospital, research facility or governmentally owned
facilities within the CI-HD Transect Zone. These accessory uses need not occur in Ancillary
structures but can occur throughout the zone. These accessory uses include, but are not limited
to, storage facilities; laundry or cleaning facilities; incinerator facilities; and other uses related
to the operation of the university, hospital, research facility or governmentally owned facilities of
the zone.
c. The calculation of the FLR shall not apply to that portion of the Building that is entirely below
base flood elevation.
5.8.4 Parking Standards (CI-HD)
a. Vehicular parking and loading shall be required as shown in Article 4, Table 4 and loading shall
be required as shown in Article 4, Table 5. All parking spaces available throughout the district
under a single ownership or as a shared component between more than one owner shall be
applicable towards satisfaction of the parking requirements.
The computation of parking requirements for new permits shall be calculated as follows:
1. The Floor Area of all Buildings, excluding parking, within the Zone shall be added to that of
the proposed structure.
2. The ratio shown in Article 4, Table 4 shall be applied to the resulting figure to obtain the total
number of parking spaces required within the Zone.
3. The total number of parking spaces within the Zone shall be deducted from the total number
of required parking spaces. The result shall be the number of parking spaces that must be
provided in connection with the new structure.
4. All handicapped parking spaces available throughout the Zone shall be counted in satisfaction
of the handicapped requirements for all Buildings.
b. Warrants for buildings that share parking shall be approved only if the owner or owners continuously
maintain, on file with the Planning Department, a master plan designating: the location
and number of all present and future parking spaces, together with the location and floor area of
all present and proposed Buildings; the location and number of access drives to public streets;
internal and merging traffic and circulation; the painted or curbed separation of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic; and the arrangement and circulation of parking areas. Materials to be submitted
with applications for Warrants shall include such site plans, landscaping plans, Building
elevations, surveys, and such reports and surveys detailing:
1. Hourly/Daily parking utilization throughout the district;
MIAMI 21
V.47
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
2. Direction of approach;
3. Vehicle Occupancy;
4. Ridership surveys;
5. Shuttle bus/taxi utilization; and
6. Metrorail/Metrobus utilization.
c. On-street parking available throughout the District shall not be counted toward the parking requirement
of the Building on the Lot.
d. Parking should be accessed from the Secondary Frontage when available. Where Lots have
only Principal Frontages, parking may be accessed from the Principal Frontages.
e. It is recommended that Offstreet parking and loading be within enclosed structures which shall
either be underground or, if aboveground, shall be designed to provide a minimal visual impact,
well integrated with the principal structures. Unenclosed vehicular parking and loading in any
location visible from a public street shall be appropriately screened from surrounding rights-ofway.
f. It is recommended that the vehicular entrance of a parking Lot or garage on a Frontage be no
wider than thirty (30) feet and the minimum distance between vehicular entrances should be
sixty (60) feet.
5.8.5 Architectural Standards (CI-HD)
a. Temporary structures shall be allowed as per City Code.
b. It is recommended that the Facades on Retail Frontages be detailed as storefronts and glazed
with clear glass no less than seventy percent (70%) of the Sidewalk-level Story.
c. It is recommended that Roof materials be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface.
d. It is recommended that the Façade of a parking garage that is not concealed behind a Habitable
Liner be screened to conceal all internal elements such as plumbing pipes, fans, ducts and
lighting. It is recommended that Ramping be internalized wherever possible.
e. Rooftop parking or mechanical equipment and utility service areas visible from nearby Buildings
shall be screened with landscape or architectural materials.
5.8.6 Landscape Standards (CI-HD)
a. The First Layer as shown in Article 4, Table 8 shall be paved and landscaped to match the Public
Frontage as shown in Article 8.
b. Open Space shall be a minimum ten percent (10%) of the total Lot area.
MIAMI 21
V.48
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.8.7 Ambient Standards (CI-HD)
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. It is recommended that lighting of building and contingent Open Spaces be compatible with street
lighting of Abutting public spaces as illustrated in Article 8. Interior garage lighting fixtures should
not be visible from streets.
c. It is recommended that the lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking be concealed by a parapet
wall and should not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.49
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 10,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage 80% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) 8
e. Frontage at front Setback N/A
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
9. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.; 20 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 30 ft. min. above 8th Story
* Setbacks above the eighth (8th) Story are encouraged, not required.
ILLUSTRATION 5.8 INSTITUTION ZONE - HEALTH DISTRICT ZONES (CI-HD)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted
9. Gallery permitted
h. Arcade permitted
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 1 Stories
b. Max. Height As regulated by the F.A.A.
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.50
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.51
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.9 DISTRICT ZONES (D1 and D2)
5.9.1 Building Disposition (D)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.9.
b. Lot coverage by Buildings shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.9.
c. A Building shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of its Lot according to Illustration 5.9.
d. One or more Buildings may be built on each Lot as shown in Illustration 5.9.
e. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Article 4, Table 2 and Illustration 5.9.
5.9.2 Building Configuration (D)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Article 4, Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration
5.9.
b. Encroachments shall be as follows: At the First Layer, cantilevered Awnings and entry canopies
may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback, except as may be
further allowed by Chapter 54 of the City Code; cantilevered portions of balconies, bay windows,
and roofs shall be a maximum three (3) feet deep and may encroach up to a three (3) feet depth
of the Setback. Other cantilevered portions of the Building shall maintain the required Setback. At
the Second Layer no Encroachments are permitted except that Façade components promoting
energy efficiency such as shading and screening devices that are non-accessible may encroach
a maximum of three (3) feet.
c. Galleries and Arcades shall be a minimum fifteen (15) feet deep and may encroach up to one
hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback and may be required as a part of a Special
Area Plan.
d. All storage, utility and infrastructure elements including service areas, Loading space, transformers,
telephone boxes, garbage cans, dumpsters, condensers, meters, backflow preventers, siamese
connections and the like shall be located within the Second or Third Layer and concealed
from view from any Frontage or sidewalk by Streetscreens, and opaque gates. Loading and
service entries shall be accessed from Alleys when available.
e. Vehicular entries, Loading space and service areas shall be permitted on Principal Frontages.
f. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be
allocated as required in Illustration 5.9. Industrial uses requiring additional Height in D2 may be
permitted by Waiver, subject to the Planning Director’s agreement that the applicant has demonstrated
that the use specifically requires the proposed Height.
g. Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets of a minimum Height required to conceal mechanical
equipment. Other ornamental Building features may extend up to three and a half (3.5) feet
above the maximum Building Height. Roof decks shall be permitted up to the maximum Height.
MIAMI 21
V.52
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
Trellises may extend above the maximum Height up to eight (8) feet. Extensions above the
maximum Height for stair, elevator and mechanical enclosures or ornamental purposes only
shall be permitted by process of Waiver.
h. Streetscreens shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height. The Streetscreen
may be replaced by a hedge or fence. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary
to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
5.9.3 Building Function & Density (D)
a. Buildings in Districts shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article
4, Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.9 and Article 6.
5.9.4 Parking Standards (D)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each Lot shall be counted
toward the parking requirement of the Building on the Lot.
c. All parking, including open parking areas, covered parking, garages, loading docks and service
areas shall be masked from the Frontage by a Streetscreen as illustrated in Article 4, Table 8.
Underground parking may extend into the Second and First Layers only if it is fully underground
and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the First and Second Layers above that
of the Sidewalk.
d. Buildings mixing uses shall provide parking required for each use. Shared Parking shall be calculated
according to Article 4, Table 5.
5.9.5 Architectural Standards (D)
a. Temporary structures shall be permitted only as per City Code.
b. Roof materials should be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface.
5.9.6 Landscape Standards (D)
a. The First Layer as shown in Article 4, Table 6 shall be paved and landscaped to match the Public
Frontage as shown in Article 8, Table B.
b. Unpaved Open Space shall be a minimum five percent (5%) of the Lot Area.
5.9.7 Ambient Standards (D)
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed 1.0 fc (foot-candles).
MIAMI 21
V.53
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
c. Lighting of Building and Abutting Open Spaces shall be compatible with street lighting of Abutting
public spaces as illustrated in Article 8. Interior garage lighting fixtures shall not be visible from
streets.
d. The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall
not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.54
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.55
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage 80% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback None
f. Open Space 5% Lot Area min.
9. Density 36 du/ac max.
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. min.
d. Rear 0 ft. min.
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. above 5th Story
30 ft. min. above 6h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 3rd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth** min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.9 DISTRICT ZONES - WORK PLACE (D1)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height None
b. Max. Height 8 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 2 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.56
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.57
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage 90% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback None
f. Open Space 5% Lot Area min.
9. Density N/A
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 5 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. min.
d. Rear 0 ft. min.
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 0 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
10 ft. min. above 5th Story
30 ft. min. above 6h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 3rd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth** min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.9 DISTRICT ZONES - INDUSTRIAL (D2)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height None
b. Max. Height 8 Stories max.
c. Max. Benefit Height N/A
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.58
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.59
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.10 WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ZONES (D3)
5.10.1 Building Disposition (D3)
a. Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Illustration 5.10.
b. Lot coverage by Building shall not exceed that shown in Illustration 5.10.
c. A Building shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of its Lot according to Illustration 5.10.
d. One or more Buildings may be built on each Lot as shown in Illustration 5.10.
e. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Article 4, Table 2 and Illustration 5.10.
5.10.2 Building Configuration (D3)
a. Development within Private Frontages shall comply with Tables 2 and 6 and Illustration 5.10.
b. Encroachments shall be as follows: At the First Layer, cantilevered Awnings and entry canopies
may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback, except as may
be further allowed by Chapter 54 of the City Code; cantilevered balconies, bay windows, and
roofs may encroach up to a three (3) feet depth of the Setback. Other cantilevered portions of
the Building shall maintain the required Setback. At the Second Layer no encroachments are
permitted except that Facade components promoting energy efficiency such as shading and
screening devices that are non-accessible may Encroach a maximum of three (3) feet.
c. Galleries and Arcades shall be a minimum fifteen (15) feet deep and may encroach up to one
hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the Setback and may be required as a part of a Special
Area Plan.
d. Except for the Waterfront Frontage, all storage, utility and infrastructure elements including service
areas, Loading space, transformers, telephone boxes, garbage cans, dumpsters, condensers,
meters, backflow preventers, siamese connections and the like shall be located within the Second
or Third Layer and concealed from view from any Frontage or Sidewalk by Streetscreens, and
opaque gates. Loading and service entries shall be accessed from Alleys when available.
e. Vehicular entries, Loading space and service areas shall be permitted on Principal Frontages.
f. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall conform to Article 4, Table 2 and be
allocated as required in Illustration 5.10. Industrial uses requiring additional Height in D3 may
be permitted by Waiver, subject to the Planning Director’s agreement that the applicant has
demonstrated that the use specifically requires the proposed Height.
g. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of a minimum Height required
to conceal mechanical equipment. Other ornamental Building features may extend above the
maximum Building Height. Roof decks shall be permitted up to the maximum Height. Trellises may
extend above the maximum Height up to eight (8) feet. Extensions above the maximum Height
MIAMI 21
V.60
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
for stair, elevator and mechanical enclosures or ornamental purposes only shall be permitted by
process of Waiver.
h. Streetscreens shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height. The Streetscreen
may be replaced by a hedge or fence. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary
to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
i. Parking, loading, service, utility, and storage areas and uses shall be screened from view of abutting
zoning districts (other than D1 and D2 Zones), including shade trees spaced a minimum of
thirty (30) feet on center. Screening shall not be required along the waterfront.
5.10.3 Building Function & Density (D3)
a. Buildings in Districts shall conform to the Functions, Densities, and Intensities described in Article
4, Tables 3 and 4 and Illustration 5.10 and Article 6.
5.10.4 Parking Standards (D3)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Article 4, Tables 4 and 5.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each Lot shall be counted
toward the parking requirement of the Building on the Lot.
c. All parking, including open parking areas, covered parking, garages, Loading spaces and service
areas shall be masked from the Frontage by a Streetscreen as illustrated in Article 4, Table 8.
Underground parking may extend into the Second and First Layers only if it is fully underground
and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the First and Second Layers above that
of the Sidewalk.
d. Buildings mixing uses shall provide parking required for each Use. Shared Parking shall be
calculated according to Article 4, Table 5.
5.10.5 Architectural Standards (D3)
a. Temporary structures shall be permitted only as per City Code.
b. Roof materials should be light-colored, high Albedo or a planted surface.
5.10.6 Landscape Standards (D3)
a. The First Layer as shown in Article 4, Table 6 shall be paved and landscaped to match the Public
Frontage as shown in Article 8, Table B.
b. Unpaved green space shall be a minimum five percent (5%) of the total Lot Area.
5.10.7 Ambient Standards (D3)
MIAMI 21
V.61
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
a. Noise regulations shall be as established in the City Code.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the Building Frontage shall not exceed 1.0 fc (foot-candles).
c. Lighting of Building and Abutting Open Spaces shall be compatible with street lighting of Abutting
public spaces as illustrated in Article 8. Interior garage lighting fixtures shall not be visible from
streets.
d. The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall
not be seen from surrounding streets.
MIAMI 21
V.62
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
V.63
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 10,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage 90% max.
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback None
f. Open Space 5% Lot Area min.
9. Density N/A
BUILDING SETBACK*
a. Principal Front 5 ft. min.
b. Secondary Front 5 ft. min.
c. Side 0 ft. min. or abutting zone
d. Rear 0 ft. min. or abutting zone
e. Abutting Side or Rear T5 & T6 10 ft. min. 1st through 6th Story
30 ft. min. above 6h Story
Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 3rd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
Abutting Side or Rear T3 6 ft. min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. above 3rd Story
ILLUSTRATION 5.10 DISTRICT ZONES - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL (D3)
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. permitted
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted
9. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height None
b. Max. Height 8 Stories max.
c. Max. Benefit Height N/A
* Please see Article 3, Section 3.11 for additional Waterfront Setbacks regulations.
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
MIAMI 21
V.64
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 5. SPECIFIC TO ZONES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
VI.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
6.1 INTENT AND EXCLUSIONS VI.5
TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS VI.6
6.2 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND SIMILAR HOMES/FACILITIES VI.22
6.3 COMMERCIAL USES VI.23
6.4 INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES VI.29
6.5 INDUSTRIAL VI.32
MIAMI 21
VI.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
VI.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Amendments to Article 6
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13176 05-13-2010 D1 Density 10-00361zt
13177 05-23-2010 “Green” ordinances carried into Miami 21 10-00519
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
13238 12-16-2010 Requirements for sheds and other structures;
loading berth substitutions; requirements for
child are facilities; requirements for public and
commercial storage facilities; distance separation
requirements for ALF’s; distance separation
requirements for uses and structures
10-00963zt
13241 12-16-2010 Required process for large-scale commercial
establishments
10-00969zt
13243 12-16-2010 Requirements and limitations for freestanding
signs, painted wall signs, establish regulations for
CI-HD and D3
10-00971zt
13260 03-24-2011 Adding an exception process for extensions of
dock or piers
11-00018zt
13282 07-28-2011 Modifications to drive-in and drive-through regulations
in T4
11-00584zt
13281 07-28-2011 Regional Activity Complex permissibility and sign
regulations in T4
11-00588zt
13307 01-26-2012 Public Storage Facilities modifications 11-00875zt
13464 05-22-2014 Sign Regulations Amendment 12-00941zt1
13485 09-29-2014 Update to Regional Activity Complex language 14-00664zt
13494 01-22-2015 Update to Live Work language on Table 13 14-01074zt
13541 07-23-2015 Deleting, Striking and Repealing Media Tower
Language
15-00778zt
13641 10-13-2016 Creation of concrete batching supplemental
regulations
1058
13653 12-08-2016 Microbrewery definition and supplemental regulations
1231
13673 03-23-2017 Crew Quarters definition and supplemental
regulations
1233
13674 03-23-2017 Public storage facility regulations for T5 - Urban
Center Zone and T6 - Urban Core Zone
1131
13729 12-14-2017 Micro dwelling units defintions, and residential
density intensity and parking requirements
3108
13743 01-25-2018 Alcohol Service Establishment, Food Service
Establishment, and supplemental regulations
1972
MIAMI 21
VI.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
VI.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.1 INTENT AND EXCLUSIONS
The supplemental regulations of this article apply to the specific uses listed below within the broader Use
categories identified in Article 4, Table 3 and Article 5. These regulations supplement other standards
listed elsewhere in this code. No permit or Certificate of Use may be granted for any Use, unless the
Use complies with the requirements of these supplemental regulations and any other applicable standards
of the Miami 21 Code.
Specifically excluded from all Transect Zones in the City are stockyards, slaughterhouses, wrecking
yards, rag shops, cement plants, paper factories, ammunition plants, fireworks manufacturing, house
barges, refining, smelting, forging, and unattended donation collection bins.
The regulations of Article 6, Table 13 are arranged by Transect Zone and in the same order in which
they appear in Article 4, Table 3. These regulations may be further supplemented by Article 6, Sections
6.2 to 6.4.
When calculating distance separation requirements, measurement shall be made from the nearest
point of the Lot of the existing facility, Use, or Structure to the nearest point of the Lot of the proposed
facility, Use, or Structure.
A blank cell in Table 13 signifies that the Use is prohibited.
MIAMI 21
VI.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 9 UNITS PER ACRE 9 UNITS PER ACRE 18 UNITS PER ACRE
DWELLING UNIT Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
ANCILLARY UNIT Maximum size of unit 450 square feet excluding
garage.
Shall only be used as Single-Family Residence
dwelling.
May only be rented if the principal dwelling owner is in
residence on site.
Unit Structure shall be architecturally harmonious with
the Principal Building.
Any Facade abutting another property shall provide only
clerestory windows along that corresponding Facade.
Prohibited as a third unit.
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
BOAT HOUSE Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high.
BOAT SLIP Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35%
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
1-6 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
7-14 RESIDENTS
Prohibited within 500 feet of any T3-R or T3-L.
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
ADULT FAMILY
CARE HOME
1-5-RESIDENTS
Prohibited within 1000 feet of another such residence.
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
Prohibited within 1000 feet of another such residence.
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
Prohibited within 1000 feet of another such residence.
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
T3 - SUB-URBAN ZONE
MIAMI 21
VI.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
T3 - SUB-URBAN ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 9 UNITS PER ACRE 9 UNITS PER ACRE 18 UNITS PER ACRE
HOME OFFICE Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
MIAMI 21
VI.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE
DWELLING UNIT Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
BOAT HOUSE Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high.
BOAT SLIP Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35%
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks or Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet . Further extension of docks or Piers into
Biscayne Bay permitted by Exception, when required by
applicable agency.
Extension of docks or Piers into other waterways limited
to 10 feet or 10% of waterway width, whichever is less.
Further extensions permitted by Exception, when required
by applicable agency.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
1-6 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
7-14 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
ADULT FAMILY
CARE HOME
1-5 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
T4 - GENERAL URBAN ZONE
MIAMI 21
VI.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
T4 - GENERAL URBAN ZONE
HOME OFFICE Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Occupations limited to individual tutoring; nonamplified
individual instrument instruction; authors and
composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors; and
uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
LIVE WORK Shall be located within ground floor or Liner units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located within ground floor or Liner units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
BED AND BREAKFAST Subject to City Code Chapter 23.
DRIVE-THROUGH AND
DRIVE-IN
May only be permitted by Warrant.
Available only when site’s Primary Frontage is along a
County designated primary arterial road.
Whenever possible, all ingress and egress to and from
the site shall be from a County designated primary
arterial road.
Principal Frontage access may be allowed.
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
One (1) at window, three (3) before service window,
one (1) after service window.
ADULT DAYCARE For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 sq feet of indoor activity area.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 sq feet of indoor activity area.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
CHILDCARE For 6 to 10 children maximum:
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for children
under one year of age.
For 6 to 10 children maximum:
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for children
under one year of age.
For 6 to 10 children maximum:
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for children
under one year of age.
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE 36 UNITS PER ACRE
MIAMI 21
VI.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE *
DWELLING UNIT Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Micro Dwelling Unit: 275 square feet min. Only permitted
within a TOD area. Permitted by Warrant. Prohibited on
a Lot Abutting T3.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Micro Dwelling Unit: 275 square feet min. Only permitted
within a TOD area. Permitted by Warrant. Prohibited on
a Lot Abutting T3.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
BOAT HOUSE Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high.
BOAT SLIP Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35%
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from all
applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure crafts may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock / Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from all
applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock / Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from all
applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock / Pier Setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
1-6 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
7-14 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
ADULT FAMILY
CARE HOME
1-5 RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
HOME OFFICE Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
Office uses, excluding medical and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
Office uses, excluding medical and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of Home Office shall be 25% of the size of
the Dwelling Unit based on county property records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
Office uses, excluding medical and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
MIAMI 21
VI.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE *
LIVE WORK Shall be located within ground floor or Liner units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located within ground floor or Liner units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
AUTO RELATED
COMMERCIAL
Car Wash:
Subject to City Code Chapter 23
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline
shall provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking
reservoir spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1
parking reservoir spaces before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Gas Stations:
Subject to City Code Chapter 23
Principal Frontage access may be allowed.
Frontage requirement may be reduced maximum 30% by
Waiver. Building Facade may be a colonnade.
All vending machines shall be located indoors. Only
vehicles awaiting service, permitted rental vehicles and
staff vehicles parked while working shall be allowed. All
repairs, change of tires, greasing/lubricating shall be
conducted within building. Outdoor display of products
incidental to normal refueling is prohibited closer to the
street than pump islands. Outdoor display or storage of
tires is prohibited.
Vehicle Rental Facilities:
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental passenger vehicle facilities there
shall be 10 parking spaces provided for first 10,000
square feet of Floor Area and 1 space for each additional
500 square feet .
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental cargo vehicle facilities 1 parking
space per staff member and 1 space for each 8 vehicles
stored on the premises.
All access to site shall be from a County designated
primary arterial road.
Building designated for customer service must be located
where it is easily accessible from site access point.
All transactions must be conducted indoors.
All vehicle storage areas must be lighted without causing
spillover onto Abutting properties.
On-site vehicle service must be conducted indoors and
is limited to minor repairs and maintenance.
DRIVE-THROUGH AND
DRIVE-IN
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
One (1) at window, three (3) before service window, one
(1) after service window.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
MIAMI 21
VI.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
PUBLIC STORAGE
FACILITY
Allowed by Warrant and subject to the following
additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet radius
between proposed facility and another existing facility
within any T5 or T6 Zone.
Waiver for reduction in distance requirement is not
permissible.
Public Storage Facilities shall have ground floor retail
along principal frontage. A minimum of 50% of the
proposed ground floor retail shall be unrelated to the
Public Storage Facility.
The maximum size of any individual storage rental
space shall be 400 square feet
Controlled access and adequate security surveillance
shall be provided throughout facility.
Any boat or vehicle stored in these facilities shall not
exceed an overall length of 25 feet and shall be stored
within a completely enclosed and ventilated Structure.
Hours of operation shall be limited to 5:00 am to 11:00 pm .
OPEN AIR RETAIL Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of onsite restroom facilities.
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of onsite restroom facilities.
ADULT DAYCARE For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FACILITY
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Maximum number of residents 50.
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed Facility or Assisted Living Facility and any T3
or T4-R Zone.
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Maximum number of residents 50.
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4-R Zone.
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Maximum number of residents 50.
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4-R Zone.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
CHILDCARE Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE * 65 UNITS PER ACRE *
T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
MIAMI 21
VI.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 – 1,000 UNITS PER ACRE *
DWELLING UNIT Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Micro Dwelling Unit: 275 square feet min. Only permitted
within a TOD area. Permitted by Warrant. Prohibited on
a Lot Abutting T3.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
Micro Dwelling Unit: 275 square feet min. Only permitted
within a TOD area. Permitted by Warrant. Prohibited on
a Lot Abutting T3.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400 square feet min.
One bedroom Dwelling Unit: 550 square feet min.
Two bedroom Dwelling Unit: 650 square feet min.
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted 10-24-1991.
BOAT HOUSE Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high. Maximum size: 20 feet wide, 40 feet long, 15 feet high.
BOAT SLIP Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35% Maximum coverage of waterfront setback: 35%
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property Adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property Adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting
property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of
3 ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat
ramps, and commercial hauling and fueling.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is limited
to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway, whichever
is less. However, by Exception further extension may be
approved, subject to approval from all applicable agencies.
Only private pleasure craft may be docked or moored on
property Adjacent to T3-R, T4-R, T5-R, T6-R.
Dock/ Pier setbacks: 10 feet from any Abutting property
Vessel setback: 5 feet from any Abutting property.
Prohibited uses or appurtenances: davits in excess of 3
ton capacity, commercial vessels, commercial boat ramps,
and commercial hauling and fueling.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
1-6-RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
COMMUNITY
RESIDENCES
7-14-RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
ADULT FAMILY
CARE HOME
1-5-RESIDENTS
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.2.
HOME OFFICE Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of home office shall not exceed 25% of
the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county property
records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
and uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of home office shall not exceed 25% of
the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county property
records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
and uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must
reside on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located wholly within Dwelling Unit.
Maximum size of home office shall not exceed 25% of
the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county property
records.
Home Office occupations limited to individual tutoring;
non-amplified individual instrument instruction; authors
and composers; artists; designers; seamstresses; tailors;
and uses similar in impact. Office uses, excluding medical
and dental offices.
Maximum of one client at a time.
Maximum of two staff members, one of which must reside
on premises.
Hours of operation limited to Monday through Saturday
8:00 AM to 6 PM.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
MIAMI 21
VI.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 – 1,000 UNITS PER ACRE *
LIVE WORK Shall be located within ground floor or Liner Units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
Shall be located within ground floor or Liner Units.
Maximum size of work occupation shall not exceed
50% of the size of the Dwelling Unit based on county
property records.
Live Work occupations limited to those allowed in
Transect Zone.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
undue noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable
to normal senses off the property.
Certificate of Use required.
AUTO RELATED
COMMERCIAL
Car Wash:
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline
shall provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking
reservoir spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1
parking reservoir spaces before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Gas Stations:
Principal Frontage access may be allowed.
Frontage requirement may be reduced maximum 30% by
Waiver. Building Facade may be a colonnade.
All vending machines shall be located indoors. Trash
facilities shall be completely enclosed and shielded
from Primary Frontages. Only vehicles awaiting service,
permitted rental vehicles and staff vehicles parked while
working shall be allowed. All repairs, change of tires,
greasing/lubricating shall be conducted within building.
Outdoor display of products incidental to normal refueling is
prohibited closer to the street than pump islands. Outdoor
display or storage of tires is prohibited.
Vehicle Rental Facilities:
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental passenger vehicle facilities there
shall be 10 parking spaces provided for first 10,000
square feet of Floor Area and 1 space for each additional
500 square feet.
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental cargo vehicle facilities 1 parking
space per staff and 1 space for each 8 vehicles stored
on the premises.
All access to site shall be from a County designated
primary arterial road.
Building designated for customer service must be located
where it is easily accessible from site access point.
All transactions must be conducted indoors.
All vehicle storage areas must be lighted without causing
spillover onto Abutting properties.
On-site vehicle service must be conducted indoors and
is limited to minor repairs and maintenance.
Car Wash:
Subject to City Code Chapter 23
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline
shall provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking
reservoir spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1
parking reservoir spaces before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Gas Stations:
Subject to City Code Chapter 23
Principal Frontage access may be allowed.
Frontage requirement may be reduced maximum 30% by
Waiver. Building Facade may be a colonnade.
All vending machines shall be located indoors. Trash
facilities shall be completely enclosed and shielded
from Primary Frontages. Only vehicles awaiting service,
permitted rental vehicles and staff vehicles parked while
working shall be allowed. All repairs, change of tires,
greasing/lubricating shall be conducted within building.
Outdoor display of products incidental to normal refueling
is prohibited closer to the street than pump islands.
Outdoor display or storage of tires is prohibited.
Vehicle Rental Facilities:
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental passenger vehicle facilities there
shall be 10 parking spaces provided for first 10,000
square feet of Floor Area and 1 space for each additional
500 square feet.
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental cargo vehicle facilities 1 parking
space per staff and 1 space for each 8 vehicles stored
on the premises.
All access to site shall be from a County designated
primary arterial road.
Building designated for customer service must be located
where it is easily accessible from site access point.
All transactions must be conducted indoors.
All vehicle storage areas must be lighted without causing
spillover onto Abutting properties.
On-site vehicle service must be conducted indoors and
is limited to minor repairs and maintenance.
DRIVE-THROUGH AND
DRIVE-IN
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
One (1) at window, three (3) before service window, one
(1) after service window.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
LARGE SCALE RETAIL Subject to the requirements of Section 6.3.
MIAMI 21
VI.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 – 1,000 UNITS PER ACRE *
T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
* Or as modified in Article 4, Diagram 9
PUBLIC STORAGE
FACILITY
Allowed by Warrant and subject to the following
additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet radius
between proposed facility and another existing facility
within any T5 or T6 Zone.
Waiver for reduction in distance requirement is not
permissible.
Public Storage Facilities shall have ground floor retail
along principal frontage. A minimum of 50% of the
proposed ground floor retail shall be unrelated to the
Public Storage Facility.
The maximum size of any individual storage rental
space shall be 400 square feet
Controlled access and adequate security surveillance
shall be provided throughout facility.
Any boat or vehicle stored in these facilities shall not
exceed an overall length of 25 feet and shall be stored
within an enclosed and ventilated Structure.
Hours of operation shall be limited to 5:00 am to 11:00 pm.
OPEN AIR RETAIL Subject to the following additional requirements:
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking spaces.
Provision of onsite restroom facilities.
Subject to the following additional requirements:
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking spaces.
Provision of onsite restroom facilities.
ADULT DAYCARE Allowed by Warrant per Article 4 Table 3.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
Allowed by Warrant per Article 4 Table 3.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FACILITY
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed Facility and any T3 or T4 R Zone.
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4-R Zone.
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and are
subject to the following additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4-R Zone.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
HELICOPTER LANDING
SITE
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire,
and hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted
to Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on
parcels Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
MIAMI 21
VI.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 UNITS PER ACRE * 150 – 1,000 UNITS PER ACRE *
CHILDCARE Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor
space per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play
area per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for
one half of license capacity. In no event shall any
outdoor play area be less than 450 square feet. The
minimum standard of outdoor play area does not
apply for children under one year of age.
Minimum of 1 drop off parking space for every 10
children. Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet
of arterial road.
REGIONAL ACTIVITY
COMPLEX
Regional Activity Complex: Allowed by Exception
with City Commission approval and are subject to the
following additional requirements:
Regional Activity Complexes are not allowed in
Transect Zones T6-8 and T6-12.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4 Zones.
Transect regulations pertaining to Building Disposition,
and Building Configuration shall be considered
referential guidelines for Regional Activity Complexes.
Any exemption from these guidelines must comply
with the following criteria:
1. exemptions shall be justified by functional
requirements connected to the uses proposed; and
2. exemptions shall be reduced to the minimum
required to achieve the required functionality; and
3. exemptions in the aggregate shall be evaluated
for compliance with the Transect’s intent regarding
intensity and scale; and
4. exemptions shall be evaluated for compliance with
criteria set forth in Article 4, Table 12, as applicable;
and
5. specific findings shall be made by the Planning
Director regarding the nature and extent of each
proposed exemption and said findings shall be
contained in the recommendation report for the
Exception which ma be considered as substantial and
competent evidence b the PZAB and City Commission
respectively.
T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
MIAMI 21
VI.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
CS – CIVIC SPACE CI – CIVIC INSTITUTION CI-HD – CIVIC INSTITUTION HEALTH DISTRICT
DENSITY (UPA) N/A DENSITY OF ABUTTING ZONE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from all
applicable agencies.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from all
applicable agencies.
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
OPEN AIR RETAIL Subject to the following additional requirements:
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any open air retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of on-site restroom facilities.
Subject to the following additional requirements:
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zone.
Operation limited to weekends and legal holidays for a
maximum of 3 consecutive days between the hours of
7:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of on-site restroom facilities.
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.3.4
ADULT DAYCARE For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FACILITY
Assisted Living Facilities: Allowed by Exception and
are subject to the following additional requirements:
Minimum distance requirement of 2,500 feet between
proposed facility and another existing facility.
Minimum distance requirement of 1000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4-R Zone.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
HELICOPTER LANDING
SITE
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R Zones.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R Zones.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R Zones.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
CHILDCARE Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet of arterial road.
Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor
space per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet of arterial road.
MAJOR SPORTS
FACILITY
Modifications in Setbacks up to a maximum of fifty percent
(50%) of the required Setbacks may be approved by
Waiver when Liner Uses are provided along parking
Structures.
Commercial Uses may exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the Building area by Warrant.
C - CIVIC
MIAMI 21
VI.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
CS – CIVIC SPACE CI – CIVIC INSTITUTION CI-HD – CIVIC INSTITUTION HEALTH DISTRICT
DENSITY (UPA) N/A DENSITY OF ABUTTING ZONE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
REGIONAL ACTIVITY
COMPLEX
Regional Activity Complex: Allowed by Exception
with City Commission approval and are subject to the
following additional requirements:
Regional Activity Complexes are not allowed in
Transect Zones T6-8 and T6-12.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4 Zones.
Transect regulations pertaining to Building Disposition,
and Building Configuration shall be considered
referential guidelines for Regional Activity Complexes.
Any exemption from these guidelines must comply with
the following criteria:
1. exemptions shall be justified by functional
requirements connected to the uses proposed; and
2. exemptions shall be reduced to the minimum
required to achieve the required functionality; and
3. exemptions in the aggregate shall be evaluated
for compliance with the Transect’s intent regarding
intensity and scale; and
4. exemptions shall be evaluated for responsiveness
to criteria set forth in Article 4, Table 12, as applicable;
and
5. specific findings shall be made by the Planning
Director regarding the nature and extent of each
proposed exemption and said findings shall be
contained in the recommendation report for the
Exception which may be considered as substantial
and competent evidence by the PZAB and City
Commission respectively.
Regional Activity Complex: Allowed by Exception
with City Commission approval and are subject to the
following additional requirements:
Regional Activity Complexes are not allowed in
Transect Zones T6-8 and T6-12.
Minimum distance requirement of 1,000 feet between
proposed facility and any T3 or T4 Zones.
Transect regulations pertaining to Building Disposition,
and Building Configuration shall be considered
referential guidelines for Regional Activity Complexes.
Any exemption from these guidelines must comply
with the following criteria:
1. exemptions shall be ‘ustified b functional
requirements connected to the uses proposed; and
2. exemptions shall be reduced to the minimum
required to achieve the required functionality; and
3, exemptions in the aggregate shall be evaluated
for compliance with the Transect’s intent regarding
intensity and scale; and
4. exemptions shall be evaluated for compliance with
criteria set forth in Article 4, Table 12, as applicable;
and
5. specific findings shall be made by the Planning
Director regarding the nature and extent of each
proposed exemption and said findings shall be
contained in the recommendation report for the
Exception which may be considered as substantial
and competent evidence by the PZAB and City
Commission respectively.
C - CIVIC
MIAMI 21
VI.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
D - DISTRICT
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
BOATS
HOUSEBOAT
HOUSE BARGE
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
Occupancy of private pleasure crafts and houseboats
or house barges shall not be allowed except for those
specifically grandfathered and regulated by Ordinance
#10932, adopted October 24, 1991.
DOCKS
PIERS
Extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are
limited to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet
maximum extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne
Bay may be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
Extension docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet maximum
extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay may
be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
Extension docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay are limited
to 35 feet. However, by Exception a 600 feet maximum
extension of docks and Piers into Biscayne Bay may
be allowed.
Extension of docks and Piers into other waterways is
limited to 10 feet or 10% of the width of the waterway,
whichever is less. However, by Exception further
extension may be approved, subject to approval from
all applicable agencies.
WORK LIVE Maximum size of Dwelling shall not exceed 50% of
the size of the Structure based on the total size of the
Structure.
Certificate of Use required.
AUTO RELATED
INDUSTRIAL
Car Wash:
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline shall
provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking reservoir
spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1 parking
reservoir spaces before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Gas Stations:
Principal Frontage Access may be allowed.
Frontage requirement may be reduced maximum 30% by
Waiver. Building Facade may be a colonnade.
All vending machines shall be located indoors. Trash
facilities shall be completely enclosed and shielded
from Primary Frontages. Only vehicles awaiting service,
permitted rental vehicles and staff vehicles parked while
working shall be allowed. All repairs, change of tires,
greasing/lubricating shall be conducted within building.
Outdoor display of products incidental to normal refueling
is prohibited closer to the street than pump islands.
Outdoor display or storage of tires is prohibited.
Vehicle Rental Facilities:
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table 4
for lease or rental passenger vehicle facilities there shall
be 10 parking spaces provided for first 10,000 square
feet of Floor Area and 1 space for each additional 500
square feet.
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental cargo vehicle facilities 1 parking
space per staff and 1 space for each 8 vehicles stored
on the premises.
All access to site must be from a County designated
primary arterial road.
Building designated for customer service must be located
where it is easily accessible from site access point.
All transactions must be conducted indoors.
All vehicle storage areas must be lighted without causing
spillover onto Abutting properties.
On-site vehicle service must be conducted indoors and
is limited to minor repairs and maintenance.
Car Wash:
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline shall
provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking reservoir
spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1 parking
reservoir space before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Gas Stations:
Principal Frontage Access may be allowed.
Frontage requirement may be reduced maximum 30% by
Waiver. Building Facade may be a colonnade.
All vending machines shall be located indoors. Trash
facilities shall be completely enclosed and shielded
from Primary Frontages. Only vehicles awaiting service,
permitted rental vehicles and staff vehicles parked while
working shall be allowed. All repairs, change of tires,
greasing/lubricating shall be conducted within building.
Outdoor display of products incidental to normal refueling
is prohibited closer to the street than pump islands.
Outdoor display or storage of tires is prohibited.
Vehicle Rental Facilities:
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental passenger vehicle facilities there
shall be 10 parking spaces provided for first 10,000
square feet of Floor Area and 1 space for each additional
500 square feet.
In addition to the parking requirements in Article 4 Table
4 for lease or rental cargo vehicle facilities 1 parking
space per staff and 1 space for each 8 vehicles stored
on the premises.
All access to site must be from a County designated
primary arterial road.
Building designated for customer service must be located
where it is easily accessible from site access point.
All transactions must be conducted indoors.
All vehicle storage areas must be lighted without causing
spillover onto Abutting properties.
On-site vehicle service must be conducted indoors and
is limited to minor repairs and maintenance.
Car Wash:
Self-service, semiautomatic, and automatic dragline shall
provide for each of the first 3 wash stalls, 3 parking reservoir
spaces before and 3 after. Beyond 3 stalls, 1 parking
reservoir space before and 2 after each stall.
Custom hand car wash shall provide for each wash stall,
1 parking reservoir space before each stall and 1 after,
and 5 additional parking spaces.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
MIAMI 21
VI.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT
A minimum distance of 1,000 feet shall be required from
any public park, school, or property zoned for Residential
Use; including such public park or school properties
outside City limits or properties zoned residential by the
external jurisdiction.
The distance shall be measured from the front door of
the proposed Adult Entertainment Establishment to the
closest property line of the protected Use.
Any application shall be accompanied by a survey
certified by a land surveyor registered in the State of
Florida showing compliance with all minimum distance
requirements.
Discontinued or abandoned Adult Entertainment Establishments
may not resume the use until all requirements
of this Code and the City Code are met.
No Variances shall be permitted.
DRIVE-THROUGH AND
DRIVE-IN
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
Minimum reservoir parking spaces required shall be 1
space at window, 3 spaces before service window, and
1 space after service window.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver.
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
Minimum reservoir parking spaces required shall be 1
space at window, 3 spaces before service window, and
1 space after service window.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver. May be allowed by Warrant subject to the
requirements of Article 6, Section 6.3.
Reservoir parking spaces shall be required as follows:
Minimum reservoir parking spaces required shall be 1
space at window, 3 spaces before service window, and
1 space after service window.
One (1) reservoir parking space may be reduced by
Waiver. May be allowed by Warrant subject to the
requirements of Article 6, Section 6.3.
LARGE SCALE RETAIL Subject to the requirements of Section 6.3. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.3. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.3.
OPEN AIR RETAIL Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zones.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of on-site restroom facilities.
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zones.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of on-site restroom facilities.
Access to site must be from a major Thoroughfare.
Distance separation of any Open Air Retail shall be a
minimum of 75 feet measured from any property within
T3, T4-R, T5-R, or T6-R Zones.
Provision of paving striping for stalls and parking
spaces.
Provision of on-site restroom facilities.
ADULT DAYCARE For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
For 6 to 9 adults:
Minimum of 350 square feet of indoor activity area.
For 10 or more adults:
Minimum of 35 square feet of indoor activity area per
adult.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FACILITY
Residential Facilities not allowed. Residential Facilities not allowed. Residential Facilities not allowed.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY
Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4. Subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
HELICOPTER LANDING
SITE
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R Zones.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
Helicopter landing sites as regulated by federal and state
law may be permitted by Warrant subject to the following
additional requirements:
May only be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
dropping off and picking up passengers and cargo, and
may not include fueling, repair, or long term parking or
storage of helicopters.
Unless used for emergency operations (police, fire, and
hospital) landings and takeoffs shall be restricted to
Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5 PM on parcels
Abutting T3, T4, T5-R, and T6-R.
Ground level sites shall be located away from Buildings,
trees, or significant terrain features to avoid possible
air turbulence.
Rooftop sites shall be given priority over ground level
sites in congested areas.
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
D - DISTRICT
MIAMI 21
VI.21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. TABLE 13 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS (CONTINUED)
CHILDCARE Minimum of 35 square feet of usable indoor floor space
per child on license.
Minimum of 45 square feet of usable outdoor play area
per child.
A minimum outdoor play area shall be provided for one
half of license capacity. In no event shall any outdoor
play area be less than 450 square feet. The minimum
standard of outdoor play area does not apply for
children under one year of age.
Vehicular entrance must be within 300 feet of arterial road.
INDUSTRIAL USES It is intended that the provision of Industrial Products and
Services be permissible, as appropriate, within the D1
Zone. The D1 Zone allows limited Residential Uses and is
generally intended to contain light industrial Uses.
The D1 Zone generally allows Industrial, Commercial
and Office activities which serve the needs of other
businesses, may require extensive loading facilities and
often benefit from proximity to Industrial areas. This
Zone also includes the following Uses: wholesaling,
warehousing, light assemblage and distribution and
minor repairs and fabrication of materials and equipment.
Residential Use is limited.
This type of Zone specifically excludes the following
activities:
• Any uses that involve the manufacturing processing
generation or storage of materials that constitute a
physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those
found in the Florida Building Code, Section 307 – High-
Hazard Group H.
It is intended that the provision of Industrial Products and
Services be permissible within the D2 Zone. The heavier
Industrial Uses are limited to the D2 Zone.
Concrete Batching Plants may be allowed by Warrant and
subject to the requirements of Section 6.5.1.
It is intended that the provision of Industrial Products and
Services be permissible within the D3 Zone. The heavier
Industrial Uses are limited to the D2 Zone.
The D3 Zone allows all Industrial activities such as
manufacturing, processing, assembly, auto-related
and storage activities and restricts activities generating
adverse impacts such as such as excessive amounts of
noise, fumes, illumination and hazardous wastes. This
Zone shall generally be located where directly served by
major transportation facilities and shall be buffered from
Residential areas.
CREW QUARTERS Crew Quarters shall be reviewed by process of Warrant.
The proposed Crew Quarters shall receive comments
from the Miami River Commission prior to Warrant
Final Decision.
Crew Quarters shall be reviewed by process of Warrant.
The proposed Crew Quarters shall receive comments
from the Miami River Commission prior to Warrant
Final Decision.
Crew Quarters shall be reviewed by process of Warrant.
The proposed Crew Quarters shall receive comments
from the Miami River Commission prior to Warrant
Final Decision.
CONTAINER YARDS Container yards and any facilities for the outdoor storage,
stacking and processing of containers intended for
shipment. Permissible only by Exception.
• No more than 3 containers shall be stacked vertically
• A 10 to 15 foot high wall Setback a minimum of 10 feet
from the Property Line must surround the property.
• All Setback yards must be appropriately landscaped.
• Security floodlights must be shielded or deflected from
surrounding Residential neighborhoods so as to prevent
light spillover.
• All crane operations are limited to daylight hours between
8:00 am and 6:00 pm.
• Appropriate measures are required to minimize any
adverse effect of use including noise generation; dust;
vibrations; street capacity and maneuverability; traffic
and negative visual impact.
Container yards and any facilities for the outdoor storage,
stacking and processing of containers intended for
shipment. Permissible only by Exception.
• No more than 3 containers shall be stacked vertically
• A 10 to 15 foot high wall Setback a minimum of 10 feet from
the Property Line must surround the property.
• All Setback yards must be appropriately landscaped.
• Security floodlights must be shielded or deflected from
surrounding Residential neighborhoods so as to prevent
light spillover.
• All crane operations are limited to daylight hours between
8:00 am and 6:00 pm.
• Appropriate measures are required to minimize any
adverse effect of use including noise generation; dust;
vibrations; street capacity and maneuverability; traffic
and negative visual impact.
Container yards and any facilities for the outdoor storage,
stacking and processing of containers intended for
shipment. Permissible only by Exception.
• No more than 3 containers shall be stacked vertically
• A 10 to 15 foot high wall Setback a minimum of 10 feet from
the Property Line must surround the property.
• All Setback yards must be appropriately landscaped.
• Security floodlights must be shielded or deflected from
surrounding Residential neighborhoods so as to prevent
light spillover.
• All crane operations are limited to daylight hours between
8:00 am and 6:00 pm.
• Appropriate measures are required to minimize any
adverse effect of use including noise generation; dust;
vibrations; street capacity and maneuverability; traffic and
negative visual impact.
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
D - DISTRICT
MIAMI 21
VI.22
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.2.1 Community Residence Standards
LOCATION
STANDARDS
Community Residences of six (6) or fewer residents shall not be located within a radius of one-thousand (1,000) feet of another.
Distance shall be measured from nearest point of Property Line of proposed Community Residence to nearest point of Property Line of existing Community Residence within
a T3-R or T3-L property.
Homes of six (6) or fewer residents which otherwise meet the definition of a community residential home shall be deemed a single-family residence dwelling and a non-Commercial
Use, for the purpose of this code. Homes of six (6) or fewer residents that otherwise meet the definition of a community residential home shall be allowed in T3, T4, T5 or T6, ,
provided that such homes shall not be located within a radius of one-thousand (1,000) feet of another existing such home with six or fewer residents. Such homes with six (6)
or fewer residents shall not be required to comply with the notification provisions of this section; provided that, prior to licensing, the sponsoring agency provides the Office
of Zoning with the most recently published data compiled from the licensing entities that identifies all community residential homes within the jurisdictional limits of the City
in order to show that no other community residential home is within a radius of one-thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed home with six (6) or fewer residents. At the time of
home occupancy, the sponsoring agency must notify the City of Miami Office of Zoning that the home is licensed by the licensing entity.
PARKING See Article 3 and Article 4, Table 4 and Table 5.
LOCATION
STANDARDS
Prohibited in all T3 - R and L and within five-hundred (500) feet thereof.
Community Residences servicing seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents shall not be located within a radius of twelve-hundred (1,200) feet of another.
Distance shall be measured from nearest point of Property Line of proposed Community Residence to nearest point of Property Line of existing Community Residence or
T3-R or T3-L.
When a site for a community residential home servicing seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents or similar assisted living facility has been selected by a sponsoring agency in an
area that allows multifamily, the agency shall notify the Planning Director in writing and include in such notice the specific address of the site, the residential licensing category,
the number of residents, and the community support requirements of the program. Such notice shall also contain a statement from the licensing entity indicating the licensing
status of the proposed assisted living facility or community residential home and specifying how the home meets applicable licensing criteria for the safe care and supervision
of the clients in the home. The sponsoring agency shall also provide to the City the most recently published data compiled from the licensing entities that identifies all assisted
living facilities, adult family-care homes, or community residential homes within the jurisdictional limits of the City. The Office of Zoning shall review the notification of the
sponsoring agency in accordance with Transect regulations.
• Pursuant to such review by the Planning Department, the City may:
1. Determine that the siting of the assisted living facility or community residential home is in accordance with this code and approve the siting. If the siting is approved, the
sponsoring agency may establish the home at the site selected.
2. Fail to respond within sixty (60) days. If the City fails to respond within such time, the sponsoring agency may establish the home at the site selected.
3. Deny the siting of the home.
• The City shall not deny the siting of an assisted living facility or community residential home unless the City establishes that the siting of the home at the site selected:
1. Does not otherwise conform to regulations of this code applicable to other multifamily uses in the area.
2. Does not meet applicable licensing criteria established and determined by the licensing entity, including requirements that the home be located to assure the safe care and
supervision of all clients in the home.
3. Would result in such a concentration of community residential homes, assisted living facilities, and adult family-care in the area in proximity to the site selected, or would
result in a combination of such homes with other residences in the community, such that the nature and character of the area would be substantially altered. A home that is
located within a radius of twelve-hundred (1,200) feet of another existing community residential home in a multifamily zone shall be an over concentration of such homes that
substantially alters the nature and character of the area. A home that is located within a radius of five-hundred (500) feet of a property designated T3R or T3L substantially
alters the nature and character of the area.
4. All distance requirements in this section shall be measured from the nearest point of the existing home or property designated T3-R or T3-L to the nearest point of the
proposed home.
If agreed to by both the City and the sponsoring agency, a conflict may be resolved through informal mediation. The City shall arrange for the services of an independent
mediator or may utilize the dispute resolution process established by a regional planning council pursuant to Fla. Stat. s. 186.509. Mediation shall be concluded within fortyfive
(45) days of a request therefore. The resolution of any issue through the mediation process shall not alter any person’s right to a judicial determination of any issue if that
person is entitled to such a determination under statutory or common law.
PARKING See Article 3 and Article 4, Table 4 and Table 5.
1 to 6 Residents
LOCATION T3 - R, L & O | T4 - R, L & O | T5 - R, L & O | T6 - R, L & O
7 to 14 Residents
LOCATION T3 - R, L & O | T4 - R, L & O | T5 - R, L & O | T6 - R, L & O
6.2 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND SIMILAR HOMES/FACILITIES
The purpose of a Community Residence is to integrate its residents into the community; over concentration
of such facilities within a Neighborhood causes the area to lose its character, thereby defeating the
purpose of locating Community Residences in the Neighborhood. A Zoning verification shall be required
in order to confirm State established distance requirements outlined in this section. All such facilities
shall be required to provide a signed and sealed survey to the Office of Zoning which demonstrates that
the distance limitations required below pursuant to state statutes are met. Failure to comply with this
requirement will deem the facility in non-compliance with state and City regulations.
To the extent applicable by state law, location of a facility may be denied if it results in an over concentration
of Community Residences in proximity to the site selected such that the nature and character of
the Neighborhood would be substantially altered. Any facility exceeding the thresholds outlined in this
section shall refer to the requirements of Community Support Facility.
MIAMI 21
VI.23
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.2.2 Adult Family-Care Homes Standards
1 to 6 Residents
LOCATION T3 - R, L & O | T4 - R, L & O | T5 - R, L & O | T6 - R, L & O
LOCATION
STANDARDS
Adult Family-Care Homes of five (5) or fewer residents shall not be located within a radius of one-thousand (1,000) feet of another.
Distance shall be measured from nearest point of Property Line of proposed Community Residence to nearest point of Property Line of existing Community Residence.
PARKING See Article 3 and Article 4, Table 4 and Table 5.
6.3 COMMERCIAL USES
6.3.1 Large Scale Commercial
Except for Public Storage Facilities which must comply with the criteria set forth under Article 6, Table 13, a
single commercial establishment occupying more than 55,000 square feet of Floor Area in any T6-O, D1 or
D2 shall be permitted subject to the following requirements:
LOCATION By Exception in T6-O and shall be located only on Lots having Frontage on one (1) or more arterial roads. Ingress and egress to the Lot must be provided from these arterials
and not from secondary roads or collectors. The Lots shall also be served and be readily accessible by collective transportation systems.
By Warrant in D1
By Right in D2. Section 6.3.1 “Additional Requirements” shall not apply.
LOT SIZE As required by Transect Zone
COMMERCIAL AREA
LIMITATIONS
Minimum: 55,000 square feet
REQUIREMENTS WHEN
ABUTTING A MORE
RESTRICTIVE TRANSECT
• A minimum of one (1) shade tree with a minimum Height of twelve (12) feet shall be planted at twenty-five (25) feet on center along the perimeter of the wall
• Additional landscaping in the form of shrubs and Buffer plant material shall also be required.
PARKING • All required Parking shall conform to Transect Zone and in addition it shall be provided onsite within an enclosed Structure
• Parking Structures and parked vehicles shall be concealed from exterior street view and may only be located within the Third Layer
ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS
• At ground level: Habitable Space such as Liners to conceal Parking Structures or Parking Areas, must be provided for at least sixty-five (65%) percent of linear street
Frontages.
• Second floor level: Habitable Space such as Liners to conceal Parking Structure, with a combination of architectural articulation for all linear street Frontages shall be required;
however, in no case shall the Habitable Space Liners be less than forty percent (40%) of all linear street Frontages.
• Third floor level and above: Habitable Space such as Liners to conceal Parking Structure, with a combination of architectural articulation for all linear street Frontages shall
be permitted; however, in no case will the Habitable Space Liners be less than twenty-five percent (25%) of all linear street Frontages.
Large Scale Commercial
6.3.2 Vending Carts in Open Air Retail
Within open space, or partially open space, the following uses may be permitted pursuant to the Warrant
process:
1. Outdoor dining areas;
2. Display and sale of the following items from vending carts:
(a) Flowers, plants and shrubs; vegetables, produce, citrus or other unpackaged foods, not requiring
refrigeration or further preparation, subject to applicable state health regulations; and
(b) Arts and Crafts.
Within open space, or partially open space, display and sale of other merchandise or food products
allowed to be sold generally within the district, and subject to the restrictions set forth herein, may be
permitted by Exception.
MIAMI 21
VI.24
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
However, no Warrant or Exception shall be granted allowing existing uses to expand their retail activity
or to display their merchandise into existing open or partially open space.
All exhibits, displays and sales of items from vending carts shall be subject to the following limitations:
1. All such carts shall be located completely within private property, or, on undedicated right-of-way
with an approved agreement specifying terms of removal upon required dedication;
2. Prior to the approval of any vending cart, a master site plan shall be submitted for review and
approval; said master plan shall specify the locations and approximate footprints of all future
carts;
3. The merchandise and method of display shall reflect and complement the existing mix of uses
within the district and shall be consistent with the unique physical layout, cultural traditions and
historic character of the neighborhood.
4. There shall be no more than 1 (one) cart per each thirty-five (35) linear feet of street frontage
except that, within courtyards, there may be more upon compliance with the distance separation
requirements specified below;
5. All such carts shall conform with the following distance limitations unless an alternate proposal
is justified due to existing established pedestrian patterns or other special site conditions:
(a) All carts, whether located within completely enclosed plazas or courtyards, or within linear
building frontage setbacks, shall be separated from each other by a minimum of ten (10) feet
and from any adjacent permanent structures by a minimum of five (5) feet; (i.e. there shall
be a minimum five (5) foot clear radius surrounding all such carts);
(b) All carts located within linear building frontage setbacks shall be setback from any adjacent
public right-of-way by a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
6. Total signage shall be limited to eight (8) square feet in area, however no individual sign may
exceed four (4) square feet in area and there shall be no more than 2 signs per cart;
7. Lighting shall be limited to task lighting as necessary for the conduct of business;
8. All vending carts shall be limited to a maximum size of forty (40) square feet in area and shall
not exceed a maximum height of ten (10) feet;
9. All vending carts shall be securely anchored during business hours, however, they must have
wheels in order to enable them to be removed within 24 hours in case of an emergency.
Deviations from these standards may be approved by the Planning, Zoning, and Appeals Board pursuant
to an Exception Permit upon finding that the requested modifications are justified due to one or more
of the following special conditions:
1. Established pedestrian flow patterns,
2. Existing landscape features
3. Governmental action which creates a peculiar configuration on the subject property.
MIAMI 21
VI.25
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.3.3 Biscayne Boulevard Open Air Markets
Properties with frontage along Biscayne Boulevard between NE 51st Street and NE 77th Street within
the Biscayne Boulevard MiMo Historic District, by process of Warrant may conduct open air markets
subject to the following:
a. Open air markets shall be defined as outdoor farmer’s markets or craft markets, where only handmade
crafts, fresh fruits and vegetables, prepared raw foods and drinks derived from fresh fruits
and vegetables are sold.
b. The outdoor market must be located on a parcel of no less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet of lot area.
c. The display area of the outdoor market shall be limited to no more than sixty-five percent (65%) of
the parcel area.
d. All display tables and other such materials must be removed at the end of the permitted time of
operation.
e. The outdoor market display area shall be set back no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any abutting
T-3 Transect.
f. Outdoor markets may operate only between the hours of 8:00 a. m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays or
Sundays only.
g. No outdoor market may be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from another
outdoor market.
6.3.4 Health District Green Market
Outdoor green markets are permitted within the CI-HD Transect Zone after mandatory referral to the
district NET Administrator and subject to all of the following conditions, regulations, and limitations. In
addition to these requirements, an operational plan and vendor guidelines shall be required at the time
of application:
a. Only handmade crafts, live plants and flowers, fresh fruits and vegetables, honey and pollen products,
cheeses, jams and jellies, baked goods, prepared foods and drinks derived from fresh fruits
and vegetables, soaps, and candles may be sold on any outdoor green market within this district.
b. Outdoor green markets must be located within an improved site which shall consist of developed
open space or plaza of no less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. Outdoor markets may
not be located within parking lots or structures.
c. Outdoor green markets may not be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from
another outdoor green market.
MIAMI 21
VI.26
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
d. Outdoor green market vending activities must take place on private property; vending within the
right-of-way and obstruction of the right of way is not permissible under this section of the zoning
code.
e. Outdoor green markets may operate once a week only based on a pre-determined weekday. The
green market permit shall include the day of the week and location for said permit.
f. The applicant shall submit, at the time of application, the selected week date and location for the
outdoor green market.
g. The hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
h. Outdoor green markets shall have a minimum of 12 vendors.
i. Each vendor shall conduct business within a 10’ x 10’ white and/or green movable canopy which
shall be removed at the end of each market day. Any table placed within the canopy area shall be
covered with a green table skirt.
j. All vending activity must be conducted within a vendor’s canopy area which shall be kept in clean
and good condition at all times. Broken, faded or dirty canopies shall not be allowed.
k. All garbage and trash shall be removed from the market site and disposed as required by law at the
end of each market day.
I. The market area shall be cleaned and left in a sanitary condition at the end of each market day.
m. All signs shall be submitted for approval as part of the application.
n. Noisemaking or flashing devices shall not be allowed.
6.3.5 Central Coconut Grove Green Market
Outdoor green markets are permitted within the district subject to obtaining a Warrant
with mandatory referral to the district NET Administrator only; and subject to all of the following
conditions, regulations, and limitations:
The Coconut Grove Central Commercial District consists of three general areas. Area A generally
consists of both sides of S.W. 37th Avenue from Oak Avenue to Grand Avenue, and both sides of
Grand Avenue from Brooker Street to Hibiscus Street. Area B is generally bound to the North by Oak
Avenue from Allamanda Street to Mary Street, Mary Street to the East, includes both sides of Grand
Avenue from Margaret Street to Mary Street, both sides of McFarlane Road from Grand Avenue to
South Bayshore Drive, both sides of Main Highway from Grand Avenue to Commodore Plaza including
both sides of Commodore Plaza and Fuller Street. Area C includes the North Side of Main Highway
from Charles Avenue to Franklin Avenue.
MIAMI 21
VI.27
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
a. Only live plants and flowers, fresh fruits and vegetables, honey and pollen products,
cheeses, jams and jellies, baked goods, prepared foods and drinks derived from fresh fruits and
vegetables, soaps, candles, handmade crafts, antiques, collectibles, paintings, and objects d’art
may be sold on any outdoor green market within this district.
b. Outdoor green markets must be located within an improved site which shall consist of ground level
developed open space or plaza of no less than nine-thousand (9,000) square feet.
c. Outdoor green markets shall not be located within parking lots or parking structures.
d. Outdoor green markets vending activities must take place on private property; vending within the
right-of-way and obstruction of the right-of-way is not permissible under this section of this Code.
e. Outdoor green markets may operate two (2) days a week only based on predetermined day(s) of the
week. The outdoor green market permit shall include the specific day(s) of the week and location
for said permit.
f. The applicant shall submit at the time of application the selected weekday(s) and location of the
outdoor green market.
g. The hours of operation including set-up and take-down shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
h. Outdoor green markets shall have a minimum of six (6) vendors.
i. Each vendor shall conduct business within a 10’ x 10’ white or green movable canopy which shall be
removed at the end of each market day. Any table placed within the canopy area shall be covered
with a white and/or green fabric table skirt.
j. All vending activity, display, or exhibit must be conducted within a vendor’s canopy area which shall
be kept in good condition at all times. Broken, faded and/or dirty canopies shall not be allowed.
k. All garbage and trash shall be removed from the market site and disposed as required by law at the
end of each market day.
l. The market area shall be cleaned and left in a sanitary condition at the end of each market day.
m. Outdoor green market signs shall be submitted for approval as part of the Warrant application.
n. Noisemaking or flashing devices shall not be allowed.
MIAMI 21
VI.28
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.3.6 Microbreweries
The purpose and intent of these regulations are to: Establish baseline nuisance abatement standards
beyond those prescribed in Miami 21 Code; to allow Microbreweries in mixed-use areas; to encourage
beer manufacturers and distributors to provide retail sales and/or an opportunity to consume on
premises; and to promote compatibility of Microbreweries and the surrounding land uses.
a. Building disposition and configuration
1. Microbreweries will be limited to the first story of the Principal Building and a maximum area of
20,000 square feet.
2. The retail and/or consumption component of a Microbrewery shall be located on a Principal
Frontage.
3. The manufacturing and distribution functions of a Microbrewery shall be within a fully enclosed
structure or Building.
4. Unless otherwise stated herein, Microbreweries shall be subject to the regulations of the underlying
Transect Zone.
b. Permitting
Microbreweries may be permitted as Alcohol Service Establishments provided that they are located
within a cultural specialty district, as defined in Chapter 4 of the Code of the City of Miami,
Florida, as amended (“City Code”). All proposed Microbreweries shall be required to obtain a Certificate
of Use for the appropriate alcohol category as defined in Sec. 4-2 of the City Code.
c. Offsite impact standards
1. Vibration standard – In general; a person of normal sensitivities should not be able to feel any
vibrations. (0.002g peak)
(a) Vibrations lasting less than five (5) minutes per day are exempt.
(b) Vibrations from vehicles that leave the site are exempt.
2. Odor standard – In general; continuous, frequent, or repetitive odors may not be produced.
The odor threshold is the point at which an odor may just be detected.
3. Sound standard – In general; continuous, frequent, or repetitive sounds may not be produced.
Sound standards are further defined in Chapter 36 of the City Code.
4. Measurements for compliance with these standards are made from the property line of abutting
properties
MIAMI 21
VI.29
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.4 INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES
6.4.1 Personal Wireless Service Facilities (PWSF)
The purpose and intent of these performance standards for the location, siting and design of PWSF
are to:
• Allow for alternative types of PWSF in locations pursuant to these standards.
• Encourage the use of existing structures not originally built as antenna mounts such as rooftops,
utility poles, and church steeples for deploying PWSF. Discourage new PWSF mounts
where co-location and mounts on existing structures are possible;
• Expedite the review process for applications choosing the least intrusive alternative of deploying
PWSF as permitted by these standards;
• Encourage users of mounts to locate, site and design them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the mounts and associated equipment;
• To promote compatibility of PWSF with surrounding land uses, and protect the attractiveness,
health, safety, general welfare, and property values of the community.
1. Collocation
a. Collocation of antennae, equipment enclosures, and ancillary facilities (“facilities”) on existing
towers as specified on FS 365.172 (12)(a)1.a., or on other structures as specified in FS
365.172(12)(a)1.b, shall be allowed by right, subject to the land development regulations in
effect at the time of the initial PWSF placement approval, when the collocation:
• Does not increase the height of the tower or other structure, as applicable, to which the
facilities are to be attached; and
• Does not increase the ground space area approved in the site plan; and
• Consists of antennae, equipment enclosures, and ancillary facilities that conform to the
land development regulations applied to the initial facilities placed on tower, and the tower
supporting the facilities. However, the land development regulations at the time of the collocation
application (other than regulation of the number of collocations) may be applied to
the facilities if they do not conflict with land development regulations applied to the initial
PWSF; and
• Is not located within a historic building, structure, site, object, or district, except for the
collocation on existing towers.
b. If only a portion of the collocation does not meet the requirements specified above, where all
other portions of the collocation meet the requirements, that portion of the collocation may
be allowed subject to a Warrant or Exception, as applicable. Further, HEP approval shall be
required if applicable, except for collocation on existing towers.
c. By right and to allow collocation, an existing tower may be structurally modified, or may be
replaced with a monopole tower, or an existing camouflaged tower may be replaced with a likeMIAMI
21
VI.30
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
T3 35 feet 20 feet 35 feet 13 feet
T4 60 feet 20 feet 35 feet 13 feet
ALL OTHER 100 feet single carrier
125 feet multiple
20 feet 35 feet 13 feet
ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS
• All freestanding monopole or tower facilities shall be designed to include
sufficient landscape as to screen the proposed facility from any adjacent
right-of-ways. Sufficient landscape shall include trees, shrubs and ground
cover in a tiered configuration.
• All freestanding monopole or tower facilities shall be designed to
accommodate up to three co-locations of other antennas by future carriers.
Any applicant of new device shall show proof that co-location to existing
devices serving the area is not available.
• The mount shall not be visible from the ground from a distance of 600 feet;
Screening from ground view may be provided by a parapet or some other
type wall or Screening.
• No part of the mount shall be located closer than eight (8) feet to any
power line.
• Mounts may not exceed three (3) separate areas per rooftop
STANDARDS In the event that a specific facility cannot comply with the standards set forth above, an application for modifications as to such standards shall only be
permissible by Exception. Such applications shall be accepted upon compliance with the following:
• The applicant for each such facility shall submit a justification report prepared by an engineer qualified in the technological aspects (such as a “radio
frequency [RF] engineer”) as to why the facility must be modified in terms of height or location; such report shall be accompanied with a review fee
as set forth in Chapter 62 of the City Code.
• The applicant for each such facility shall include, as part of the application, line of sight studies that depict the three dimensional view of such facility
from all adjacent right-of-ways; photo montages shall be considered an acceptable form of line of sight studies.
• The applicant for each such facility shall include, as part of the application, a mitigation plan that depicts proposed Buffering and Screening of such
facility from all adjacent right-of-ways; such mitigation plan shall be in compliance with the criteria and standards set forth for PWSF applications
unless the relief being sought is from one or more of such standards.
• For any such facility that is proposed to be located within a property zoned T3, T4-R, T5-R or T6-R, the mitigation plan shall be required to either
conceal, camouflage or disguise the proposed facility, or if possible, replace a monopole or tower structure with a series of short mounts that are
camouflaged within the area so as to reduce the negative visual impact of a possible larger structure.
T3 By Exception subject to conditions and limitations. By Exception subject to conditions and limitations.
T4 By Exception subject to conditions and limitations. By Warrant subject to conditions and limitations.
ALL OTHER By Exception subject to conditions and limitations; including min. 500 feet distance
requirement from any T3 or T4 designated Zone measured from nearest property line
of PWSF site to the property line of the nearest parcel zoned as T3 or T4.
By Warrant subject to conditions and limitations.
MONOPOLE OR TOWER DEVICES ROOFTOP OR ANCHORED DEVICES
MAXIMUM DEVICE HEIGHT MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIRED STRUCTURAL HEIGHT MAXIMUM DEVICE HEIGHT ABOVE ROOF
camouflaged tower, if the overall height of the modified or replaced tower is not increased.
2. Replacement or Modification
Replacement of or modification to PWSF, except for a tower, shall be as of right when, as reasonably
determined by the City:
• The resulting PWSF is not readily discernibly different in size, type and appearance when
viewed from ground level from surrounding properties, or
• The replacement or modification of equipment is not visible from surrounding properties.
3. New Placement and Substantial Modifications
MIAMI 21
VI.31
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES An application is deemed submitted or re-submitted on the date it is received by the City.
• The City shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is not complete and in compliance with regulations for administrative purposes within
20 days after the application is submitted, or after additional information resubmitted.
Collocation Applications:
• A building permit shall be granted or denied no later than 45 business days after the date the application is determined to be properly completed.
Other wireless facility applications:
• Other applications shall be granted or denied no later than 90 business days after the date the application is determined to be properly completed.
If a properly completed application is not granted or denied within the timeframe set forth above, the application shall be deemed automatically approved
and the applicant may proceed with the placement of the facility, as set forth in FS 365.172( 12) (d), unless:
• the timeframe is voluntarily extended by the applicant; or
• the City’s procedures generally applicable to all other similar types of applications require City Commission action, in which case the City Commission
must act on the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting; or
• an extension is required because of a declared local, state of federal emergency that directly affects administration of all permitting activities
6.4.1.1 Personal Wireless Service Facilities (PWSF) Procedures
DEFINITIONS Camouflage shall mean a way of designing or installing and mounting a PWSF that creates the effect that the PWSF is part of its surroundings.
Carrier shall mean a company licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that provides wireless services. A tower builder or owner is
not a carrier unless licensed to provide personal wireless services.
Co-location shall mean the use of a common mount by two (2) or more wireless carriers.
Conceal shall mean to enclose a PWSF within a natural or man-made feature resulting in the facility being either invisible or made part of the feature
enclosing it.
Design shall mean the appearance of PWSF such as their materials, color and shape.
Disguise shall mean to design a PWSF to appear to be something other than a PWSF.
Landscape Buffer shall mean an area of landscaping separating two (2) distinct land uses or a land use and a public right-of-way, which acts to soften
or mitigate the effects of one use on another. It can be considered a form of camouflage.
Lattice Tower shall mean a type of mount that consists of multiple legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.
Mitigation shall mean the reduction or elimination of visual impacts by the use of one or more methods, including concealment, camouflage and
disguise.
Monopole shall mean one type of self-supporting mount consisting of a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete and antennas at the top or along the
shaft.
Mount shall mean the Structure or surface to which antennas are attached.
Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF) shall mean any a facility for the provision of personal wireless services, as defined by Section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. A PWSF is any facility for the transmission or reception of personal wireless services, which may consist of an antenna
array, transmission cables, equipment shelter or Building, access road, mount, and a guy system. Such facilities may include “monopole” or “lattice tower
(tower)” structures.
Radio Frequency (RF) engineer shall mean someone with a background in electrical engineering or microwave engineering who specializes in the study
of radio frequencies.
Screening shall mean visually shielding or obscuring one Abutting nearby Structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted
vegetation. Screening can be considered a form of camouflage.
Short Mounts shall mean alternatives to monopoles or lattice towers, such as masts or poles. For example, two (2) poles or three (3) masts might be
an alternative to one lattice tower.
Standards shall mean guidelines or measures provided in this section by which acceptability is determined. PWSF shall be measured by standards
for visibility and safety. This code generally regulates these facilities on three levels: location (where the facility can go), siting (how the facility is placed
within its setting) and design (what the facility looks like).
Tower shall mean a mount constructed for the primary purpose of supporting antennas and other PWSF components.
Visual impact shall mean a modification or change that could be incompatible with Scale, form, texture, or color of the existing natural or man-made
landscape.
6.4.1.2 Personal Wireless Service Facilities (PWSF) Definitions
MIAMI 21
VI.32
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 6. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
6.5 INDUSTRIAL
6.5.1 Concrete Batching Plants
Permissibility
Concrete Batching Plants shall be reviewed by process of Warrant and apply Article 4, Table 12 Design
Review Criteria, as applicable. Environmental considerations include, but are not limited to, siting, air
quality, water quality, noise, and waste minimization. To ensure the permitting of a Concrete Batching
Plant does not have adverse impacts on the environmental quality of any neighborhood, permitting
and operations shall be subject to the following limitations:
a. Concrete Batching Plants shall not be located within 500 feet from Residential Uses. Siting shall
consider the current and future proximity of sensitive land uses.
b. Concrete Batching Plants must be sited on land that is not flood prone.
c. Vehicle access routes which minimize impacts to the surrounding neighborhoods must be provided.
d. Sand and aggregate must be kept continuously damp.
e. Conveyor belts and hoppers must be covered or enclosed.
f. Cement silos must be fitted with high level alarms, multi-bag pulse jet filters, airtight inspection
hatches, and automatic cutoff switches on the filter lines.
g. Duct work must be kept airtight and loading bays must be enclosed. An inspection regime for all
dust control components must be developed and implemented.
h. Spills must be cleaned up immediately.
i. Concrete Batching Plants must utilize quieter equipment and alter or enclose equipment to reduce
noise at the source with sound absorbing materials.
j. Concrete Batching Plants must ensure alarms are used for emergencies only.
k. Concrete Batching Plants must have an established waste minimization management policy to
include:
i. A waste management team.
ii. A waste audit must to be conducted annually.
iii. Viable waste minimization projects.
iv. A waste management plan to be prepared and implemented. The plan must be monitored and
evaluated for effectiveness.
l. Site design must minimize the area of the site which generates contaminated storm water runoff.
Concrete Batching Plants must have a separate dedicated drainage system to discharge clean
storm water from the site.
m. All contaminated storm water and process wastewater must be drained to a collection pit for
recycling. Solids that accumulate in the pit must be regularly cleaned out. The wastewater recycling
system must be able to store the contaminated runoff generated by 1 inch of rain in 24 hours. Use
wastewater stored in the recycling system at the earliest possible opportunity. Refer to the United
States Environmental Protection Agency’s “Stormwater Best Management Practice for Concrete
Washout”.
n. There must be no dry weather wastewater discharges from the site. Wet weather discharges must
be monitored for pH and suspended solids and the records must be retained.
VII.1
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
7.1 PROCEDURES VII.6
7.1.1 Authorities VII.6
7.1.2 Permits VII.15
7.1.3 Application and Review Process VII.34
7.1.4 Quasi-Judicial Procedures VII.41
7.1.5 Appeals VII.45
7.1.6 Notice of Hearings VII.46
7.1.7 Unity of Title VII.46
7.2 NONCONFORMITIES: STRUCTURES; USES; LOTS; SITE IMPROVEMENTS; SIGNS VII.50
7.2.1 Generally VII.50
7.2.2 Structures and Uses in the Event of Disaster VII.50
7.2.3 Alterations and Expansion of Nonconforming Structures VII.52
7.2.4 Moving a Nonconforming Structure on the Same Lot VII.53
7.2.5 Locally Designated Historic Resources—Nonconformities VII.53
7.2.6 Nonconforming Uses VII.53
7.2.7 Nonconforming Lots VII.55
7.2.8 Nonconforming Site Improvements VII.56
7.2.9 Nonconforming signs VII.57
VII.2
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
VII.3
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Miami 21
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13159 04-22-2010 Requirements for PZAB members 10-00287zt
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
13238 12-16-2010 Requirements for sheds and other structures;
loading berth substitutions; requirements for
public and commercial storage facilities; distance
separation requirements for ALF’s; distance
separation requirements for uses and structures
10-00963zt
13240 12-16-2010 Modification of door spacing requirements and
removal of public easement requirements
10-00968zt
13251 01-27-2011 To add procedures for Unity of Title 10-01335zt
13265 05-12-2011 Incentives for construction of Affordable
Housing
11-00022zt
13269 05-26-2011 Modification to non-conformities 11-00151zt
13362 02-28-2013 Atlas amendment dates 12-01296zt
13464 05-22-2014 Sign Regulations Amendment 12-00941zt1
13499 02-26-2015 Modification of voting requirements 14-00515zt
13507 03-12-2015 Modification of successional zoning chart to
include T6-24b
14-01198zt
13566 09-24-2015 Amend Time Extensions for Nonconforming Uses 14-01304zt1
13577 11-19-2015 Modification of Adaptive Use Parking Requirements 14-01075zt
13594 01-28-2016 Updates PZAB to Hear Appeals of CU Revocation 15-01249zt
13690 06-22-2017 Joining of persons with entities when submitting
applications for rezoning.
2192
13728 12-14-2017 Parking standards and placement for frontages
and underground parking.
3003
VII.4
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
VII.5
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
PERMITTING PROCESS DIAGRAM
Applicant
Zoning Office
Referral
By Right
Building
Permit
Waiver
Preapplication
Submit to
Zoning Office*
PD
Zoning Office Decision
Building
Permit
Appeal
PZAB
Warrant
(Uses Only)
Preapplication
Submit to
Planning Department*
CRC
Planning Department
Decision
Building
Permit
Appeal
PZAB
Exception
Preapplication
Submit to
Planning Department*
CRC
Planning Department
Certification
Building
Permit
Appeal
City Comm.
Appeal
City Comm.
File with Hearing
Boards*
PZAB
Variance
Preapplication
Submit to
Planning Department*
Planning Department
Certification
Building
Permit
Appeal
City Comm.
File with Hearing
Boards*
PZAB
Zoning Change
Preapplication
Submit to
Planning Department*
Planning Department
Certification
Building
Permit
File with Hearing
Boards*
PZAB
DIAGRAM 14 PERMITTING PROCESS
PD Planning Department
CRC Coordinated Review Committee
PZAB Planning Zoning and Appeals Board
City Commission
VII.6
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
7.1 PROCEDURES
7.1.1 Authorities
The administration of the Miami 21 Code shall include the following authorities: Zoning Administrator;
Planning Director; Coordinated Review Committee; Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board; and
City Commission.
7.1.1.1 Zoning Administrator
a. Functions, powers and duties. A Zoning Administrator, appointed by and responsible to the City
Manager, shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of the Miami 21 Code as provided
herein, with such assistance as the City Manager may direct. For purposes of this Code,
the functions, powers and duties of the Zoning Administrator more specifically include:
1. To determine whether applications for building permits as required by the Building Code are
in accord with the requirements of this zoning ordinance. No building permit shall be issued
without approval of zoning compliance by the Zoning Administrator that plans and applications
conform to applicable zoning regulations.
2. To determine whether the Use of any Structure or premises hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, in Use or in Structure, is in accordance
with this Miami 21 Code and to issue a Certificate of Use if the plans and applications
conform to applicable zoning regulations. Certificates of Use for home occupations
in residential districts shall be issued annually to cover the period from January 1 through
December 31 of each year.
3. To approve, deny or approve with conditions applications for administrative Waiver, with the
recommendation as may be required of the Planning Director and pursuant to the standards
of the Miami 21 Code.
4. To assist the Code Enforcement Department to enforce vigorously the provisions of the Miami
21 Code.
5. To maintain records of all official administrative actions.
6. To decide questions of zoning interpretation pursuant to Section 7.1.2.3 of this Code.
7. To participate in the review of Warrants and Exceptions.
8. To serve in an advisory capacity on zoning matters to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board, the City Commission, and other officers or agencies of the City, and to prepare such
reports as may be appropriate in that capacity.
VII.7
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
9. To review and issue sign permits.
10. To determine whether changes made to applications are substantial modifications pursuant
to Section 7.1.3 that require additional review and evaluation by city staff or a new notice
prior to a hearing.
b. It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, and especially of all officers and inspectors of the
Department of Planning, Department of Building, Office of Zoning, the Fire Rescue Department,
and the Police Department, to report to the Code Enforcement Department any suspected violations
of the Miami 21 Code.
7.1.1.2 Planning Director
a. Functions, powers and duties. A Planning Director, appointed by and responsible to the City
Manager, shall be responsible for administration of the Miami 21 Code, as provided herein, with
such assistance as the City Manager may direct. For purposes of this Code, the functions, powers
and duties of the Planning Director more specifically include:
1. To make determinations concerning Uses where there is substantial doubt as to whether a
particular Use or Uses, or classes of Uses, or characteristics of Use not specifically identified
in the Miami 21 Code are of the same general character as those listed as permitted,
Warrant or Exception Uses, either upon request from any administrative agency or officer of
the city or upon his own initiative.
2. To approve, deny or approve with conditions any applications for Warrant, upon review by
members of the Coordinated Review Committee as the Director may request, and pursuant
to the standards of the Miami 21 Code.
3. To review and provide findings and recommendations to the Zoning Administrator regarding
certain applications for administrative Waiver pursuant to the standards of the Miami 21 Code.
4. To prepare recommendations regarding an application for Exception, upon review by members
of the Coordinated Review Committee as the Director may request, and to certify the
application and accompanying recommendations to be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards
for consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board .
5. To prepare recommendations regarding an application for Variance and to certify the application
and accompanying recommendations to be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards for
consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
6. To prepare recommendations regarding an application for amendment to the Miami 21 Code,
including rezoning, and to certify the application and accompanying recommendations to be
filed with the Office of Hearing Boards for consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board and the City Commission.
7. To prepare recommendations regarding an application for a Special Area Plan, and to certify
the application and accompanying recommendations to be filed with the Office of Hearing
Boards for consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board and the City Commission.
VII.8
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
8. To coordinate and chair the work of the Coordinated Review Committee.
9. To serve in an advisory capacity on Miami 21 Code matters to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board, the City Commission, and other officers or agencies of the city, and to prepare
such reports as may be appropriate in that capacity.
10. To make referrals to the Urban Development Review Board (UDRB) as defined in Chapter 62
of the City Code for projects that exceed 200,000 square feet or as the Director may deem
necessary.
7.1.1.3 Coordinated Review Committee
a. Establishment
There is hereby established a committee to be known as the Coordinated Review Committee.
The Coordinated Review Committee shall consist of the following members: the Planning Director
who shall serve as the chair of the committee, the Zoning Administrator, the City Attorney, the NET
Director, and the Public Works Director, and other city, county, school board and governmental
and utility officials with the necessary expertise that the Planning Director may require for any
particular application review.
b. Functions, powers and duties
The Coordinated Review Committee shall provide review of applications for Warrants and for
Exceptions, and for Special Area Plans, pursuant to the review criteria of Section 7.1.2 and Article
3, Section 3.9, as the case may be. The Planning Director shall determine to which members of
the committee any particular application shall be referred for review and advice. The committee
shall meet together only as requested by the Planning Director. Upon the Planning Director’s
request, the review reports of each member shall be provided to the Planning Director, who
shall consider them in making a decision regarding an application for a Warrant and in making
a recommendation to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board regarding an application for an
Exception or for a Special Area Plan.
c. Notice
The applicant shall be given an opportunity, upon a minimum of seven days’ notice, to attend any
meeting, if any, of the Coordinated Review Committee that may be held to review and evaluate
its application. Failure of the applicant to appear shall result in the withdrawal of the item from
the committee meeting agenda. The applicant shall receive notice of the Planning Director’s
preliminary decision or recommendation on its application, as applicable, at least twenty-one
(21) calendar days prior to the Director’s final decision or recommendation. Within fourteen
(14) calendar days of receipt of notice, the applicant may request an opportunity to revise its
application or provide additional information to address any comments or concerns raised by
the Coordinated Review Committee. If such a request is made, the Director’s final decision or
recommendation shall not be issued until the applicant has had a reasonable opportunity, as
determined by the Planning Director, to make its revisions or to provide additional information.
VII.9
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
7.1.1.4 Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board
a. Establishment
There is hereby established a board to be known as the city Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall consist of eleven voting members, one alternate
member to be appointed in the manner hereinafter set out in this section, and one ex-officio,
non-voting member appointed by the school board. The school board appointee shall be invited
to attend such meetings at which comprehensive plan amendments, re-zonings and Special Area
Plans are considered which, if granted, increase residential Density. The school board appointee
shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum is present at any meeting.
b. Functions, Powers and Duties
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board with the assistance of the planning department and all
other city departments as necessary, shall have the functions, duties and powers as follows:
1. To act as the local planning agency pursuant to section 163.3174, Florida Statutes.
2. To serve as the local land development regulation commission pursuant to section 163.3194(2),
Florida Statutes.
3. To prepare and recommend to the City Commission ordinances, regulations and other proposals
promoting orderly development of the city.
4. To make or cause to be made any necessary special studies on the location, adequacy and
conditions of specific facilities of the city. These may include, but are not limited to, studies
on housing, commercial and industrial conditions and public facilities, recreation, public and
private utilities, conservation of natural resources, roads and traffic, transportation, parking
and the like.
5. To determine whether proposed developments of regional impact conform to the requirements
of the Miami 21 Code, and with section 380.06, Florida Statutes, and to make recommendations
to the City Commission in that regard. When acting in this capacity, its work shall be
deemed advisory and recommendatory, and only advisory and recommendatory, to the City
Commission.
6. To determine whether Special Area Plans and rezonings that are regulated by the Miami 21
Code conform to the requirements of the Miami 21 Code, and to make recommendations to
the City Commission in that regard. When acting in this capacity, its work shall be deemed
advisory and recommendatory, and only advisory and recommendatory, to the City Commission.
7. To determine whether specific proposed developments that are regulated by the Miami 21
Code and that require an approval of an Exception conform to the requirements of the Miami
21 Code. In performing its authority to grant, deny or grant with conditions an Exception, the
board shall serve as a quasi-judicial body and observe the requirements of quasi-judicial
procedures as set out in the Miami 21 Code and under applicable state law.
VII.10
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
8. Rescission: The board, after a quasi-judicial hearing, may rescind, modify or change any
resolution granting an Exception if, upon application filed by the Director at any time after
the grant of an Exception, the board finds that there has been a violation of any conditions,
restrictions or limitations in the subject resolution. Such a hearing shall not be held until
published notice (per section 62-129 of the City Code) has first been given. If the Director,
upon written request of any aggrieved party, refuses or fails to make an application for such
rescission, modification or change, the aggrieved party may request the City Commission,
through the City Manager, to instruct the Director to do so. The decision of the board shall
be appealable to the City Commission in the same manner as an appeal of a board decision
regarding an Exception.
9. To determine whether an application for a Variance conforms to the requirements of the Miami
21 Code. In performing its authority to grant, deny or grant with conditions a Variance,
the board shall serve as a quasi-judicial body and observe the requirements of quasi-judicial
procedures as set out in the Miami 21 Code and under applicable state law.
10. To hear, de novo, and make a ruling on an appeal of the following administrative decisions:
(a) A Planning Determination of Use by the Planning Director;
(b) The decision of the Zoning Administrator regarding a Waiver;
(c) The decision of the Planning Director regarding a Warrant;
(d) A zoning interpretation by the Zoning Administrator;
(e) The decision of the Zoning Administrator regarding a denial or revocation of a Certificate
of Use.
In performing its appeal authority, the board shall serve as a quasi-judicial body and observe
the requirements of quasi-judicial procedures as set out in this Code and under applicable
state law.
11. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall perform such other functions as may be given
it by the City Commission.
c. Appointments; qualifications
1. No appointment shall be made by the City Commission to membership or alternate membership
on the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board until the City Clerk has given at least
thirty (30) days notice of the vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of
the vacancies. The City Commission shall solicit and encourage the public, professional and
citizen organizations within the area having interest in and knowledge of the purpose and
functions of the board to submit names of persons and their qualifications for consideration
as prospective appointees to the board. At least five (5) days prior to the making of any appointment,
the City Clerk shall publicly notice that the list of names thus submitted and the
names of candidates submitted by the City Commission, together with a short statement of
the qualifications of each person, is prepared and available for public inspection and consideration.
No person shall be appointed to the board whose name and qualifications have
VII.11
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
not been made publicly available in the manner set out herein. In reaching a decision on
an appointment, the City Commission shall give due consideration to the qualifications thus
submitted.
2. Nomination. Each City Commissioner shall nominate candidates to serve the terms of two
members of the board, taking into consideration the required qualifications for membership
as provided herein.
3. Terms of office. The terms of office shall be the later of those terms provided under section
2-885 of the City Code.
4. Qualifications. It is intended that members and alternate members of the board be persons
of knowledge, experience, mature judgment, and background; having ability and desire to
act in the public interest; and representing, insofar as may be possible, the various special
professional training, experience, and interests required to make informed and equitable
decisions concerning preservation and appropriate development of the physical environment.
To that end, qualifications of members and the alternate member shall be as follows:
(a) Eleven (11) members and one alternate shall be from the electorate of the City of Miami
with demonstrated knowledge and interest in the appropriate growth and development
of the city.
5. The City Commission shall appoint the board members from the nominations made by each
City Commissioner, for ten members of the board. The mayor shall appoint one member and
the alternate member. Appointees shall be persons in a position to represent the public interest,
and no person shall be appointed having personal or private interests likely to conflict
with the public interest. No person shall be appointed who has any interest in the profits or
emoluments of any contract, job, work, or service for the City. No person shall be appointed
who holds any elective office or is employed in a full-time capacity by any governmental
authority in the county or the City. Before making any appointment, the City Commission
shall determine that the person so appointed satisfies the requirements of sections 2-611 et
seq. of the City Code, and no person shall be confirmed in appointment who has not filed
the statement required by section 2-615 of the City Code. In addition, the code of ethics of
Miami-Dade County shall apply to members and the alternate member of the Planning, Zoning
and Appeals Board.
6. Persons appointed shall be electors of the City and otherwise meet the requirements of
Chapter 2, Article XI of the City Code.
7. No member or alternate member of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall be confirmed
in his appointment until he signs a statement agreeing to participate in at least one seminar
on planning or zoning to be held in Florida or elsewhere, and approved by the City, during the
course of each calendar year he shall remain a member or alternate member of the board.
Failure to meet this requirement each and every year after assuming board membership or
alternate membership may be grounds for removal.
8. Vacancies
(a) Vacancies in the membership or alternate membership of the Planning, Zoning and
VII.12
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Appeals Board shall be filled by the City Commission and mayor by appointment in the
manner herein set out and for the unexpired term of the member or alternate member
affected, provided the City Commission may appoint an alternate member of the board
to a vacancy as a full member of the board without resort to the procedural requirements
of paragraph (1) above.
(b) The executive secretary of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall notify the City
Clerk within ten days after a vacancy occurs, and the City Clerk shall promptly transmit
such information to the City Commission for appropriate commission action as set out
herein.
9. Removal
(a) Members and alternate members of the board may be removed for cause by the City
Commission upon the votes of not less than three members of the commission, upon
written charges and public hearing, if the member and the alternate member affected
requests such public hearing.
(b) There is hereby established a point system. Each member and the alternate member of
the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board who arrives after the beginning of the first agenda
item or leaves before the termination of the last agenda item, at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the board, shall receive two points. Any member and the alternate member
of the board who accumulates more than fifteen (15) points in one calendar year shall
be brought to the attention of the City Commission for its consideration of removal of the
member.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) above, any member or alternate member of the Board
who is absent, for whatever reason, from more than five meetings in one calendar year
shall be brought to the attention of the City Commission for its consideration of removal
of the member.
10. Compensation. Members and alternate members of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board
shall receive a remuneration of $1.00 per year. The City Commission shall make provision
for the payment of actual and necessary expenses, in accordance with City policy, for the
attendance of each member and alternate member of the board at one City-authorized planning
or zoning seminar or conference each calendar year to be held in Florida.
d. Proceedings of the Board
1. Officers and voting. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall select a chairman and
vice-chairman from among its members and may create and fill such other offices as it may
determine. All members, or the alternate member sitting in the place of a member, shall be
required to vote on matters before the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, subject to the
provisions of subsections (e) and (f) of this section and applicable Florida Statutes. The
Planning Director shall attend all meetings of the board. The Office of Hearing Boards, or its
successor, shall be the executive secretary of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
2. Rules of procedure. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall establish rules of procedure
necessary to its governing and the conduct of its affairs, in keeping with the applicable
provisions of Florida law, and the City charter, ordinances and resolutions. Such rules of
procedure shall be available in written form to persons appearing before the board and to
VII.13
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
the public upon request. Quasi-judicial procedures as provided in this Miami 21 Code and as
required by state law shall apply to its decisions and recommendations, including rezoning;
Special Area Plans; Exceptions; Variances; and appeal decisions by the board.
3. Meetings. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall hold at least two regularly scheduled
meetings each month, except the month of August, on days to be determined by the board.
Other regularly scheduled meetings may be set by the board, and additional meetings may
be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Meetings
that are not regularly scheduled shall not be held without at least ten (10) days written
notice to each member and the alternate member, provided that upon concurrence of the
chairman of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board and the city manager, an emergency
meeting may be called at any time and with appropriate notice.
4. Quorum; public records. Quorum requirements are governed by the provisions of section
2-887 of the City Code. However, no action to recommend adoption of amendments to the
city Comprehensive Plan, or to recommend the amendment of the text of the Miami 21 Code,
rezoning, or Special Area Plan, or to approve an Exception shall be taken without the concurring
votes of a supermajority of board members present. Said supermajority consists of one
(1) more member than a simple majority. The Executive Secretary of the Planning, Zoning and
Appeals Board shall keep minutes of board proceedings, showing the vote of each member
or alternate member, if sitting for a member, or if absent or failing to vote under paragraphs
five (5) and six (6) below, indicating such fact. It shall be the responsibility of the executive
secretary of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board to handle all procedural activities for all
public hearings held by the board, including the preparation of detailed minutes and official
records of such hearings. The official records of such public hearings shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
5. Status of alternate member. In the temporary absence or disability of a member, or in an instance
where a member is otherwise disqualified to sit on a particular matter, the chairman of
the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, or the vice-chairman in his absence, shall designate
the alternate member to sit as a board member to obtain a full membership of eleven or, as
nearly as possible, a full membership. When so acting, the alternate member shall have full
rights of participation and voting as members; his vote shall be deemed that of a member in
reaching a decision on a matter. In instances where the alternate member is not sitting as
a member, he shall have the right to participate in board discussions and to ask questions,
but he shall have no right to vote or make motions. Where the alternate member has been
duly designated to sit as a member on a particular matter and consideration of that matter
has begun, the alternate shall continue to sit as a board member through disposition of the
matter; and he shall not be replaced, should the member in whose stead he is sitting later
be present.
6. Disqualification of members or alternate. If any member of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board or the alternate member called on to sit in a particular matter shall find that his private
or personal interests are involved in the matter coming before the board, he shall, prior to the
opening of the hearing on the matter, disqualify himself from all participation of whatsoever
nature in the cause. Alternatively, he may be disqualified by the votes of not less than six
(6) members of the board, not including the member or alternate member about whom the
question of disqualification has been raised. No member or alternate member of the Board
may appear before the City Commission, Planning Advisory Board, Zoning Board or PlanVII.
14
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ning, Zoning and Appeals Board as agent or attorney for any other person.
e. All city departments and employees shall, under the direction of city manager and upon request
and within a reasonable time, furnish to the Planning Department such available records or information
as may be required in the work of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board. The city
manager shall assign a member of the Public Works Department, Planning Department, Zoning
Office, Neighborhood Enhancement Team, the Code Enforcement Department and Fire-Rescue
Department, or their successors, to attend public hearings of the Board and to advise the board
when necessary, and to furnish information, reports and recommendations upon request of the
board. The city attorney shall attend public hearings of the board to advise the board when necessary
and to furnish information, reports and recommendations upon request of the board.
f. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board or representatives of the Planning Department may,
in the performance of official duties, enter upon lands and make examinations or surveys in the
same manner as other authorized city agents or employees and shall have other powers as are
required for the performance of official functions in carrying out the purposes and responsibilities
of the board.
7.1.1.5 City Commission
The City Commission, in addition to its duties and obligations under the City Charter, the City Code,
and other applicable law, shall have the following duties specifically in regard to the Miami 21 Code:
a. To approve, deny or approve with conditions applications for developments of regional impact
pursuant to Chapter 380, Florida Statutes.
b. To consider and act upon proposed amendments, including rezoning, to the Miami 21 Code,
after consideration of the recommendation by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
c. To consider and act upon proposed Special Area Plans, after consideration of the recommendation
by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
d. To consider and act upon proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan which relate to the
Miami 21 Code, after consideration of the recommendation by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board.
e. To hear appeals of the ruling of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board on the appeal of a zoning
interpretation, Certificate of Use denial or revocation, planning determination of Use, Warrant,
Variance or Exception.
f. To consider and adopt ordinances, regulations and other proposals as it deems appropriate for
promoting orderly development within the areas of the city that are regulated by the Miami 21
Code.
g. To establish a schedule of fees and charges for the applications made pursuant to the Miami 21
Code.
h. To appoint members to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, as set forward in this Miami 21
VII.15
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Code.
i. To hear appeals from the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board in connection with decisions on
a Variance or Exception, or any appeals of any administrative decision on a Waiver or Warrant
application, or any other administrative decision or determination made in connection with a
proposed Affordable Housing Development qualifying under Section 3.15. Such appeals shall
be specially set for the first available City Commission hearing that is at least fifteen (15) days
after the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board hearing.
7.1.2 Permits
The permits that may be necessary to develop property under the Miami 21 Code include the following:
Warrant; Waiver; Exception; Variance; and amendment to the Code (including text amendments,
rezoning and Special Area Plans). The permits are illustrated in Article 7, Diagram 14. In addition,
certain approvals may be necessary to confirm that uses are permitted uses under the Code, which
are zoning approval (by right), certificate of use, planning determination, or zoning interpretation.
Permits issued in error shall convey no rights to any party. The Zoning Administrator shall require
corrections to be made unless construction has commenced on that portion of the construction that
was permitted in error.
7.1.2.1 Permitted Uses
A building permit for those permitted Uses as set forth in Article 4, Table 3 of this Code shall be approved
By Right when the Use meets all of the applicable standards of the Miami 21 Code, and the
other specific requirements that may be enumerated elsewhere in the City Code.
a. Zoning approval
A building permit shall be issued only after a zoning approval from the Zoning Administrator has
been obtained indicating that the application meets the applicable provisions of the Miami 21 Code.
Upon an affirmative finding by the Zoning Administrator that plans and application submitted are
complete and in compliance with the applicable requirements of the Miami 21 Code, an approval
shall be entered on the application and on the applicable building permit and, if otherwise lawful,
the permit shall be issued to the applicant, together with one copy of the approved plan. If the
application and plan are not in full in compliance with the requirements of the Miami 21 Code,
the application shall not be approved and the applicant notified in writing of the reasons for such
decision, with citation to the legal authority for any denial of a permit.
b. Certificate of Use
1. For new or altered Structures and Uses.
No person shall Use or permit the Use of any Structure or premises hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, in Use or in Structure,
until a Certificate of Use reflecting Use, extent, location, and other matters related to Miami
21 Code shall have been issued to the owner or tenant. Application shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided therefore. The Zoning Administrator shall issue the
Certificate of Use (or to approve its issuance where final responsibility for issuance lies with
other officers or agencies) if he finds that all the requirements of this Miami 21 Code have
VII.16
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
been met, and to withhold such certificate (or to prohibit its issuance) unless he finds that all
of the requirements of this Miami 21 Code have been met. If the Certificate of Use is denied,
the denial shall provide a citation to the legal authority for any denial. No Certificate of Use
is necessary for fewer than three (3) Single-Family Structures, attached or detached, on a
Lot or for fewer than two (2) duplex Structures on a Lot.
2. Certificates of Use for other existing Uses.
Any owner or tenant engaged in existing Use of Structures or premises, other than a nonconforming
Use at the time of the adoption of this Miami 21 Code, may apply for a Certificate
of Use certifying that such Use is lawful under this Code. The Zoning Administrator if necessary
shall inspect to determine the facts in the case and to either issue the certificate if the
administrator finds the Use lawful, or to withhold the certificate and take such remedial action
as is appropriate if the administrator finds otherwise. A denial shall include a citation to the
legal authority for the denial.
3. No Certificate of Use shall be issued for Buildings for which code compliance proceedings
are pending.
c. Zoning Approval or Certificates of Use issued by the Zoning Administrator on the basis of plans
and applications authorize only the Use, arrangement, and construction set forth in the approved
plans and applications, subject to any conditions or safeguards attached thereto, and no other.
Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized, or failure to observe conditions
and safeguards, shall be deemed a violation of this Miami 21 Code.
7.1.2.2 City Request for Planning Determination of Use
Where there is substantial doubt as to whether a particular Use, or classes of Uses not specifically
identified in the Miami 21 Code are of the same general character as those listed as permitted, by
Warrant or by Exception, the Planning Director shall make a written determination in the matter. The
Planning Director shall give due consideration to the intent of this Miami 21 Code concerning the
Transect Zone involved and the character of the Use in question.
Requests for such determinations shall be made only by officers or agencies of the City and may
originate during the permit process. However, such requests shall not involve those circumstances
where the Zoning Administrator has made a negative finding on a zoning interpretation, in which case
appeal may be taken to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board and then to the City Commission,
as set forth in section 7.1.2.3.
a. Notifications concerning determinations.
Upon making the determination, the Planning Director shall notify any other officer or agency of
the city likely to be affected by such ruling and all NET offices. Additionally, notice of the determination
shall be published to the public on the official city website.
b. Effect of findings.
If, in making the determination, the Planning Director finds that the particular Use or class of Use
VII.17
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
or characteristics of Use are of unusual or transitory nature, or are unlikely to recur frequently,
and unless his determination is reversed on grounds of error on appeal to the Planning, Zoning
and Appeals Board or the City Commission, the determination shall thereafter be binding on
all officers and agencies of the city as an administrative ruling, and without further action on or
amendment to the Miami 21 Code.
Where the Planning Director finds, in making the determination, that the particular Use or class of
Use or characteristics of Use are likely to be common or recurrent, and that omission of specific
reference in the Miami 21 Code is likely to lead to public uncertainty and confusion, the Director
shall initiate a proposed amendment to the Miami 21 Code to rectify the omission. Until final
action has been taken on such proposed amendment, the determination of the Director shall be
binding on all officers and agencies of the city as an interim administrative ruling.
c. Appeal to Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board
An appeal of a planning determination, if sought, shall be de novo and taken to the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board, and must be initiated within fifteen (15) calendar days of the publication
of the determination on the City’s official website. The appeal shall be filed with the Hearing
Boards Office.
The Board shall determine whether the administrative determination is upheld or rescinded. The
ruling of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board may be further appealed to the City Commission,
de novo and must be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards within fifteen (15) calendar
days of the Board’s issuance of its ruling.
The filing of the appeal shall state the specific reasons for such appeal, together with payment of
any required fee. The appeal may be filed only by the applicant or any person who is aggrieved
by the action of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
7.1.2.3 Zoning Interpretation
Except where the Miami 21 Code specifically places responsibility in other officers or agencies,
questions of interpretation of this Code shall first be presented to the Zoning Administrator.
a. Notifications concerning interpretations.
Upon making his interpretation, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the party requesting the
interpretation, as well as any other officer or agency of the City likely to be affected by such ruling
and all NET offices which shall, within five (5) days, distribute the zoning interpretation to the
official representatives of all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations within the
NET office that is applicable to the applicant property, and the City shall post the interpretation
on the City’s official website.
b. Appeal to Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
An appeal of a zoning interpretation, if sought, shall be de novo and presented to the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board within fifteen (15) calendar days of the publication of the interpretation
on the City’s official website. The appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Boards Office.
VII.18
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall determine whether the administrative interpretation
is upheld or rescinded. The ruling of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board may be further
appealed to the City Commission, de novo and must be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards
within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Board’s issuance of its ruling.
The filing of the appeal shall state the specific reasons for such appeal, together with payment of
any required fee. The appeal may be filed only by the applicant or any person who is aggrieved
by the action of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
7.1.2.4 Warrant
The Warrant permits those Uses listed in Article 4, Table 3 of this Code as requiring a Warrant, upon
review by the Planning Director or with the additional review of the Coordinated Review Committee.
a. Prior to submitting an application for a Warrant, the prospective applicant shall meet in a preapplication
meeting with the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Director to obtain information
and guidance as to matters related to the proposed application.
b. Required notice and hearing.
At the time of submitting the application to the Department of Planning, the applicant shall notify
all Abutting property owners, including those across a street or alley, by certified mail. In the case
of Abutting condominiums, only one notice to the condominium association need be sent.
Additionally, at the time of submitting the application, the applicant shall obtain from the Department
of Planning the list of all registered Neighborhood and homeowner associations within the
NET office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office, and official
representatives of all such registered associations, by certified mail, of the application. Neighborhood
and homeowner associations who wish to receive such notice must register on an annual
basis at their local NET offices.
The applicant shall submit the certified receipts from all notices to the Department of Planning
at the time of application. The decision on a Warrant shall be posted on the City website within
five (5) days of the written decision.
c. Review and approval process.
1. The Planning Director shall review each submitted application for a Warrant for completeness.
If the Warrant application involves a project in excess of two hundred thousand (200,000)
square feet of floor area, it shall be referred to the Coordinated Review Committee, which
shall review the application and provide its comments and recommendations to the Planning
Director.
2. Applications for projects equal to or less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of
floor area shall be reviewed by the Planning Director and the Zoning Administrator without need
for review by the Coordinated Review Committee, unless the Planning Director determines
that review by the Coordinated Review Committee is necessary. Where there is no referral
to the Coordinated Review Committee, the Planning Director shall issue an intended deciVII.
19
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
sion within twenty-one (21) calendar days of a determination that the application is complete.
The applicant shall have seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the notice of the intended
decision to request a conference with the Planning Director to discuss revisions or additional
information regarding the application. Within ten (10) calendar days of the conference, or
if no conference is requested, the Planning Director shall issue written findings and determinations
regarding the applicable criteria set forth in this section and any other applicable
regulations. The applicant and the Planning Director may mutually consent to an extension
of the time for issuance of the final decision. The findings and determinations shall be used
to approve, approve with conditions or deny the Warrant application.
3. The Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the Warrant application,
but in no event shall a Warrant be issued prior to thirty (30) days from the time the notice of
the application is provided to the NET office. Approvals shall be granted when the application
complies with all applicable regulations; conditional approvals shall be issued when the
applications require conditions in order to be found in compliance with all applicable regulations;
denials of applications shall be issued if after conditions and safeguards have been
considered, the application still fails to comply with all applicable regulations. The decision
of the Director shall include an explanation of the code requirements for an appeal of the
decision and shall be provided to the NET office which shall, within five (5) days, distribute
the Warrant to the official representatives of all registered neighborhood and homeowner
associations within the NET office that is applicable to the applicant property, and the City
shall post on the City’s website. The Director shall include a citation to the legal authority for
any denial of a Warrant.
4. A Warrant shall be valid for a period of two (2) years during which a building permit or Certificate
of Use must be obtained. This excludes a demolition or landscape permit. A one time
extension, for a period not to exceed an additional year, may be obtained if approved by the
Planning Director.
d. Review criteria.
As appropriate to the nature of the Warrant involved and the particular circumstances of the
case, the following criteria shall apply to a Warrant application. The application shall be reviewed
for compliance with this Code. The review shall consider the intent of the Transect, the guiding
principles of the Miami 21 Code, and the manner in which the proposed Use will operate given
its specific location and proximity to less intense Uses. The review shall also apply Article 4,
Table 12, Design Review Criteria, as applicable
e. Appeal to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
Appeal of the determination of the Planning Director shall be de novo and taken to the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board. An appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Boards Office within fifteen
(15) calendar days of the posting of decision by the Planning Director on the City’s website. The
Board shall determine whether the Warrant is upheld or rescinded.
The ruling of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board may be further appealed to the City Commission,
de novo and must be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards within fifteen (15) calendar
days of the Board’s issuance of its ruling.
VII.20
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
The filing of the appeal shall state the specific reasons for such appeal, together with payment of
any required fee. The appeal may be filed only by the applicant or any person who is aggrieved
by the action of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
7.1.2.5 Waiver
The Waiver permits specified minor deviations from the Miami 21 Code, as provided in the various
articles of this Code and as consistent with the guiding principles of this Code. Waivers are intended
to relieve practical difficulties in complying with the strict requirements of this Code. Waivers are not
intended to relieve specific cases of financial hardship, nor to allow circumventing of the intent of
this Code. A Waiver may not be granted if it conflicts with the City Code or the Florida Building Code.
a. Specific Waivers are described in the various articles of this Code, and are referenced here only
for convenience. The specific parameters of each Waiver are further described in the articles in
which each Waiver appears in this Code.
1. Parking reductions for Elderly Housing or for Adaptive Reuses in Community Redevelopment
Areas (Article 3, Section 3.6.1. and 3.6.7).
2. Setbacks for irregular Lots (Article 3, Section 3.3.3.c)
3. Setbacks for the property to be developed to match the dominant Setback in the Block and
its Context. (Article 3, Section 3.3.5; Article 5, Sections 5.5.1.g, 5.6.1.g and 5.8.1.g)
4. Shared Access for adjoining Lots (Article 3, Section 3.6.3.k).
5. Barbed wire fences in D1, D2 and D3 (Article 3, Section 3.7.2).
6. Review of Development within Neighborhood Conservation Districts for compliance with NCD
regulations (Appendix A).
7. The relaxation of Setbacks or required Off-street Parking for preservation of natural features
of land (Article 3, Section 3.13.1.e).
8. Decrease of required parking by thirty percent (30%) within the half-mile radius of a TOD
(Article 4, Table 4).
9. Reduction of setbacks for one-story, non-habitable accessory structures in T3. (Article 5,
Section 5.3.1.h)
10. Substitution of loading berths (Article 4, Table 5).
11. Required parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site that it serves (Article 4, Table
4 )
12. Extensions above maximum Heights for church spires, steeples, belfries, monuments, water
towers, flagpoles, vents, ornamental Building features, decorative elements, or similar StrucVII.
21
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
tures. (Article 3, Section 3.5.3, Article 5, Sections 5.3.2.f; 5.4.2.g; 5.5.2.h; 5.6.2.h, 5.9.2.g and
5.10.2.g).
13. Encroachment of mechanical equipment, such as air conditioning units, pumps, exhaust fans
or other similar noise producing equipment for existing Buildings (Article 5, Sections 5.3.2.d
and 5.4.2.d).
14. Service and Parking access from Principal Frontage (Article 5, Sections 5.4.2.e, 5.5.2.e and
5.6.2.f).
15. Pedestrian and vehicular entry spacing. (Article 5, Section 5.5.1.f, 5.5.4.e, 5.6.1.f and 5.6.4.g).
16. Adjustments to Building spacing and to Setbacks above the eighth floor for Lots having one
dimension one hundred (100) feet or less (Article 5, Section 5.6.1.h).
17. Adjustments to Building Disposition in CI. (Article 5, Section 5.7.2.4.d).
18. Industrial Uses requiring additional Height in D2 and D3 (Article 5, Section 5.9.2.f and 5.10.2.f).
19. Primary and Secondary Frontage Parking placement (Article 5, Sections 5.5.4.d, 5.5.4.e,
5.6.4.d and 5.6.4.e).
20. Reduction of reservoir parking space (Article 6).
21. Gas Station Building Frontage requirement (Article 6).
22. Modifications in Setbacks up to fifty percent (50%) when Liner Uses are provided along parking
Structures in Major Sports Facility. (Article 6, Table 13).
23. Replacement or reconstruction of a nonconforming Structure (other than Single-Family, duplex
or multi-family) destroyed by natural disaster, explosion, fire, act of God, or the public
enemy. (Article 7, Section 7.2.2.b).
24. Alterations to nonconforming Single Family or duplex Structures to enlarge a nonconformity
affecting the exterior of the Building or premises. (Article 7, Section 7.2.3).
25. Development of Single Family or duplex Structures on certain nonconforming Lots in T-3
zones. (Article 7, Section 7.2.7).
26. Modification to nonconforming Off-street Parking facilities involving restoration or rehabilitation
of an existing Building or an adaptive Use. (Article 7, Section 7.2.8).
27. Modification of the landscaping of nonconforming signs. (Article 7, Section 7.2.9.5).
28. As appropriate to the nature of the Waiver involved and the particular circumstances of the
case, Waivers up to ten percent (10%) of any particular standard of this Code except Density,
Intensity and Height, may be granted when doing so promotes the intent of the particular
Transect Zone where the proposal is located; is consistent with the guiding principles of this
Code; and there is practical difficulty in otherwise meeting the standards of the Transect Zone,
or when doing so promotes energy conservation and Building sustainability. The inability to
VII.22
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
achieve maximum Density, Height, or floor plate for the Transect shall not be considered
grounds for the granting of a Waiver. This Waiver cannot be combined with any other specified
Waiver of the same standard.
b. Prior to submitting an application for an administrative Waiver, the prospective applicant shall
meet in a preapplication meeting with the Zoning Administrator to obtain information and guidance
as to matters related to the proposed application.
c. Required notice and hearing.
At the time of submitting the application to the Office of Zoning, the applicant shall notify all
Abutting property owners, including those across a street or alley, by certified mail. In the case
of Abutting condominiums, only one notice, by certified mail, to the condominium association
shall be sent.
Additionally, at the time of initial application, the applicant shall obtain from the Department of
Planning the list of all registered Neighborhood and homeowner associations within the NET
office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office and official representatives
of such registered associations, by certified mail, of the application. Neighborhood
and homeowner associations who wish to receive such notice must register on an annual basis
at their local NET offices.
The applicant shall submit the certified receipt(s) from all notices to the Office of Zoning at the
time of submitting the application. The decision on a Waiver shall be posted on the City website
within five (5) days of the written decision.
d. Review criteria and approval process.
The Zoning Administrator shall review the Waiver application, as required under this Code, in
regard to compliance with the standards applicable to the specific Waiver and guiding principles
in Article 2 of the Miami 21 Code. Recommendations and findings from the Planning Director
shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator when applicable or when requested by the Zoning
Administrator. The review by the Planning Director shall apply Article 4, Table 12 Design Review
Criteria, as applicable. Based on these findings, and the applicable findings and determinations
of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator will issue a final decision on the Waiver
request within ten (10) calendar days of receiving the Planning Director’s recommendation and
findings. The application shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied. A citation to the
legal authority shall be included for any denial of a Waiver. In no event shall a Waiver be issued
prior to thirty (30) days from the time the notice of the application is provided to the NET office.
The decision of the Zoning Administrator shall include an explanation of the code requirements
for an appeal of the decision and shall be provided to the NET office which shall, within five
(5) days, distribute the Waiver to the official representatives of all registered neighborhood and
homeowner associations within the NET office that is applicable to the applicant property, and
the City shall post on the City’s website.
Approvals shall be granted when the application complies with all applicable regulations; conditional
approvals shall be issued when such applications require conditions in order to be found
in compliance with all applicable regulations; denials of applications shall be issued if, after
conditions and safeguards have been considered, the application still fails to comply with all
VII.23
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
applicable regulations.
e. Appeal to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
Appeal of the determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be de novo and taken to the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board. An appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Boards Office within
fifteen (15) calendar days of the posting of decision on the City’s website.
f. A Waiver shall be valid for a period of two (2) years during which a building permit or Certificate
of Use must be obtained. This excludes a demolition or landscape permit. A one time extension,
for a period not to exceed an additional year, may be obtained upon approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
7.1.2.6 Exception
As identified in Article 4, Table 3 of this Code, a Use may be permitted by Exception in specific
Transect Zones if it conforms to criteria of this Miami 21 Code. Exceptions may also be permitted
as provided in this Code, such as for adjustments to nonconformities as provided in section 7.2.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall determine
whether an Exception may be granted.
a. Prior to submitting an application for an Exception under this Code, the prospective applicant
shall meet in a preapplication meeting with the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Director
to obtain information and guidance as to matters related to the proposed application. The Planning
Director may request the attendance of other city departments to assist the applicant in
submitting a complete preliminary application.
b. Review by Planning Director and Coordinated Review Committee.
1. The Planning Director shall determine if a submitted preliminary application is complete for
purposes of further review.
2. If the Exception preliminary application meets or exceeds two hundred thousand (200,000)
square feet of floor area it shall be referred to the Coordinated Review Committee, which
shall review the preliminary application and provide its comments and recommendations to
the Planning Director.
3. Projects equal to or less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area shall
be reviewed by the Planning Director and the Zoning Administrator without need for review by
the Coordinated Review Committee, unless the Planning Director and Zoning Administrator
determine that review by the Coordinated Review Committee is necessary.
4. As appropriate to the nature of the Exception involved and the particular circumstances of
the case, the following criteria shall apply to an application for an Exception. The application
shall be reviewed for compliance with the regulations of this Code and a traffic study shall
be provided as required by the Planning Director. The review shall consider the manner in
which the proposed Use will operate given its specific location and proximity to less intense
Uses and shall apply Article 4, Table 12 Design Review Criteria, as applicable.
VII.24
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
5. The Director shall prepare recommendations and certify the preliminary application and accompanying
recommendations to be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards for consideration
by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board. Upon filing with the Office of Hearing Boards
the application shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
c. Decision by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
1. Notice and hearing.
A quasi-judicial hearing shall be held on the application for Exception.
The City shall notify all owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the Property
Line of the land for which the hearing is required, by certified mail, of the time and place of
the hearing by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board at least ten days in advance of the
hearing. In the case of condominiums within the notification area, only one notice, by certified
mail, to the condominium association shall be sent. For the purpose of this requirement, the
names and addresses of property owners shall be deemed those appearing on the latest
tax rolls of the City. The applicant shall provide the list of owners to the City at the time of the
initial application.
Additionally, the City shall notify all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations
within the NET office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office and
official representatives of such registered associations, by certified mail, of the application.
Neighborhood and homeowner associations who wish to receive such notice must register
on an annual basis at their local NET offices.
The City shall certify at the time of the hearing that notice as herein required was given to the
persons as named and with the addresses shown on the certification. The applicant shall
pay for the costs of the mailings.
Posting of the property which is the subject of the hearing and newspaper notice shall be
required as provided in Chapter 62 of the City Code.
2. Review and findings.
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall give full consideration to the Planning Director’s
recommendations, and shall determine whether to grant an application for Exception,
to grant with conditions and safeguards or to deny the application. The Planning, Zoning and
Appeals Board shall issue written findings that the applicable requirements of the Miami 21
Code have or have not been met. In no event shall an Exception be issued prior to thirty (30)
days from the time the notice of the application is provided to the NET office. The decision
of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall include an explanation of the code requirements
for an appeal of the decision and shall be provided to the NET office which shall,
within five (5) days, distribute the Exception to the official representatives of all registered
neighborhood and homeowner associations within the NET office that is applicable to the
applicant property, and the City shall post on the City’s website. The Planning, Zoning and
Appeals Board shall include a citation to the legal authority for any denial of an Exception.
VII.25
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Approvals shall be granted when the application complies with all applicable regulations;
conditional approvals shall be issued when such applications require conditions in order to
be found in compliance with all applicable regulations; denials of applications shall be issued
if, after conditions and safeguards have been considered, the application still fails to comply
with all applicable regulations.
d. Appeal to the City Commission.
Appeal of the decision of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall be de novo applying the
Exception criteria in this Code and taken to the City Commission, pursuant to section 7.1.5 of
this Miami 21 Code. The appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Boards Office. Notification of the
appeal shall be provided by the City in the same manner as provided for the original application
in section 7.1.2.6.c. of this Code.
The filing of the appeal shall state the specific reasons for such appeal, together with payment of
any required fee. The appeal may be filed only by the applicant or any person who is aggrieved
by the action of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
e. An Exception shall be valid for a period of two (2) years during which a building permit or Certificate
of Use must be obtained. This excludes a demolition or landscape permit. A one (1) time
extension, for a period not to exceed an additional year, may be obtained upon approval by the
Planning Director.
7.1.2.7 Variance
a. Variance defined; limitations.
A Variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Miami 21 Code, and is permitted only in those exceptional
circumstances when such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of the Miami 21 Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship on
the property. A Variance shall be authorized only for Lot size, Lot Coverage, dimensions of side
or rear Setbacks, parking and loading requirements, and Open Space requirements. Variances
shall be prohibited for anything not included in the listing above, except as specifically provided
by this Code. A Variance from the terms of the Miami 21 Code shall not be granted unless and
until every mitigating measure to offset the impact of the relaxed requirement can be shown to
have been taken.
Regulations of this Miami 21 Code that are not eligible for adjustment by Variance may be eligible
for administrative Waiver. See section 7.1.2.5.
Unachievable maximum Density, Height, or floor-plate, nonconforming Use of neighboring lands,
Structures or Buildings in the same Transect, and permitted Use of lands, Structures or Buildings
in any other Transect, shall not be considered grounds for the granting of a Variance.
b. Criteria for approval.
An application for a Variance shall be approved only if it demonstrates all of the following:
VII.26
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
1. Special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, Structure or Building
involved and that are not applicable to other lands, Structures, or Buildings in the same
Transect;
2. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
3. Literal interpretation of the provisions of the Miami 21 Code deprives the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same Transect Zone and results in unnecessary
and undue hardship on the applicant;
4. Granting the Variance requested conveys the same treatment to the individual owner as to
the owner of other lands, Buildings or Structures in the same Transect Zone;
5. The Variance, if granted, is the minimum Variance that makes possible the reasonable Use
of the land, Building, or Structure; and
6. The grant of the Variance is in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the Miami 21
Code, and is not injurious to the Neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public.
7. The Variance if granted, is consistent with the applicable criteria as set forth in Article 4, Table
12 as such relates to the particular location for which the Variance is being sought.
c. Prior to submitting an application for a Variance under this Code, the prospective applicant shall
meet with the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Director in a preapplication meeting to
obtain information and guidance as to matters related to the proposed application.
d. Review by Planning Director.
The Planning Director shall determine if a submitted preliminary application for a Variance is
complete. Upon making a completeness determination, the Planning Director shall prepare recommendations,
and shall certify the preliminary application and accompanying recommendations
to be filed with the Hearing Boards Office for consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board.
e. Review by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
1. Notice.
A quasi-judicial hearing shall be conducted by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board on
the Variance application. Formal public notice of hearing by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board of the application shall be issued.
The City shall notify all owners of property within 500 feet of the Property Line of the land
for which the hearing is required, by certified mail, of the time and place of the hearing by
the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board at least ten days in advance of the hearing. In the
case of condominiums within the notification area, only one notice, by certified mail, to the
condominium association shall be sent. For the purpose of this requirement, the names and
addresses of property owners shall be deemed those appearing on the latest tax rolls of the
City. The applicant shall provide the list of owners to the City at the time of the initial application.
Additionally, the City shall notify all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations
within the NET office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office and
official representatives of such registered associations, by certified mail, of the application.
Neighborhood and homeowner associations who wish to receive such notice must register
VII.27
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
on an annual basis at their local NET offices.
The City shall certify at the time of the hearing that notice as herein required was given to the
persons as named and with the addresses shown on the certification. The applicant shall
pay for the costs of the mailings.
Posting of the property which is the subject of the hearing and newspaper notice shall be
required as provided in Chapter 62 of the City Code.
2. Decision by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning
Director, conduct a quasi-judicial hearing, and shall issue written findings that the application
meets or does not meet the applicable criteria allowing for a Variance from the regulations
of the Miami 21 Code. In no event shall a Variance be issued prior to thirty (30) days from
the time the notice of the application is provided to the NET office. The decision of the Planning,
Zoning and Appeals Board shall include an explanation of the code requirements for
an appeal of the decision and shall be provided to the NET office which shall, within five (5)
days, distribute the Variance to the official representatives of all registered neighborhood and
homeowner associations within the NET office that is applicable to the applicant property,
and the City shall post on the City’s website. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall
include a citation to the legal authority for any denial of a Variance.
3. Conditions and safeguards.
In any Variance, the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board may prescribe appropriate mitigating
conditions and safeguards in conformity with the Miami 21 Code. Violation of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the Variance is granted, shall
be deemed a violation of the Miami 21 Code and grounds for revocation of the Variance.
f. Appeal to the City Commission.
Appeal of the decision of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall be made to the City
Commission, as a de novo hearing, and as set forth in section 7.1.5 of this Miami 21 Code. The
appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Boards Office. Notification of the appeal shall be provided
by the City in the same manner as provided for the original application in section 7.1.2.7.e. of
this Code.
The filing of the appeal shall state the specific reasons for such appeal, together with payment of
any required fee. The appeal may be filed only by the applicant or any person who is aggrieved
by the action of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
g. A project for which the Variance has been obtained shall be valid for a period of two (2) years
during which a Building Permit or Certificate of Use must be obtained. This excludes a demolition
or landscape permit. A one time extension, for a period not to exceed an additional year,
may be obtained upon approval by the Planning Director.
VII.28
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
7.1.2.8 Amendment to Miami 21 Code
a. Successional Zoning. The City’s growth and evolution over time will inevitably require changes
to the boundaries of certain Transect Zones. These changes shall occur successionally, in which
the zoning change may be made only to a lesser Transect Zone; within the same Transect Zone
to a greater or lesser intensity; or to the next higher Transect Zone, or through a Special Area
Plan. All changes shall maintain the goals of this Code to preserve Neighborhoods and to provide
transitions in Intensity, Density, Building Height and Scale.
1. When a CI zoned property ceases to be used for Civic functions, the successional rezoning
is determined by identifying the lowest Intensity Abutting Transect Zone, and rezoning to that
Zone’s next higher Intensity Zone.
2. For a property of nine (9) acres or more, a successional change shall require a Special Area
Plan as described in Article 3.
3. For all successional zoning changes of less than nine (9) acres, refer to the table below.
* The Planning Department shall make a recommendation as to which Transect Zone will yield the
most coherent pattern given the established zoning pattern and context in the immediate vicinity.
TRANSECT ZONE FLR SUCCESSIONAL
ZONE
FLR
T1 -- T1 --
T2 -- N/A --
T3 -- T4, CI --
T4 -- T5, CI --
T5 -- T6-8, CI 6
T6-8 5 T6-12. CI 8
T6-12 8 T6-24a, CI 7
T6-24a 7 T6-24b, CI 16
T6-24b 16 T6-36a, CI 12
T6-36a 12 T6-60a, CI 11
T6-48a 11 T6-60a, CI 11
T6-60a 11 T6-60b, CI 18
T6-48b 18 T6-60b, CI 18
T6-36b 22 T6-60b, CI 18
T6-60b 18 N/A, CI --
T6-80 24 N/A, CI --
CI -- Abutting Zones
CI-HD 8 T6-24 7
D1 -- T6-8*, T5, CI, D2 5 (T6-8)* or --
all others
D2 -- D1, CI --
D3 -- T6-8L, T6-8 O, CI --
VII.29
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
b. The Miami 21 Code may be amended by amending the Miami 21 Atlas or by amending the text
of this Code.
1. Miami 21 Atlas amendments (also referred to as a “rezoning”, including Special Area Plans)
may only be applied for at two times of the year, which times shall be set yearly by the City
Commission. A rezoning to a CS Transect Zone, and any rezoning initiated by the City shall
be exempt from the twice yearly schedule. The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall
make recommendations to the City Commission for such amendments to the Miami 21 Code.
2. Every two years, the City may conduct a comprehensive review of the Miami 21 Atlas to
evaluate the development direction of the City’s neighborhoods and determine if additional
amendments are appropriate.
3. Amendments to the text of the Miami 21 Code (including tables and diagrams) may be made
only upon application of a city official and may be considered at any time during the year.
c. Applications for rezoning (Miami 21 Atlas amendment).
1. Except where the proposal for the rezoning of property involves an extension of an existing
Transect boundary, no rezoning of land shall be considered which involves less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of land area or two hundred (200) feet of street Frontage on
one (1) street. Applications for rezoning may be made by:
(a) The City Commission;
(b) The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board;
(c) Any other department, board or agency of the City;
(d) Any person or entity other than those listed in (a) through (c), above, provided that only
the owner(s) or their agent(s) may apply for the rezoning of property.
2. Applications for rezoning made pursuant to (d) above shall be made on an application form
as provided by the City which shall require, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) Location of the property, including address and legal description
(b) Survey of the property prepared by a State of Florida registered land surveyor within six
(6) months from the date of the application, including acreage.
(c) Affidavit and disclosure of ownership of all owners and contract purchasers of the property,
including recorded warranty deed and tax forms of the most current year. For corporations
and partnerships, include articles of incorporation, certificate of good standing, and
authority of the person signing the application. Non-profit organizations shall list members
of the Board of Directors for the past year.
(d) Certified list of owners of real estate within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property.
(e) Present zoning of the property and Future Land Use designation of the property.
(f) At least two photographs that show the entire property.
(g) An analysis of the properties within a one-half mile radius of the subject property regarding
the existing condition of the radius properties and the current zoning and Future Land Use
designations of the radius properties. The analysis shall include photos of Building elevations
of both sides of the street extending three hundred (300) feet beyond all boundaries
of the site. An aerial photo of the site and the radius properties shall be included. The
VII.30
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
analysis shall explain why the zoning change is appropriate and why the existing zoning
is inappropriate, in light of the intent of the Miami 21 Code and particularly in relation to
effects on adjoining properties.
d. Review of application for code amendments by Planning Director.
1. The Planning Director shall review each application for a code amendment and provide a
recommendation and a statement in regard to how each of the criteria of this Code is met
or not met. In the case of rezonings, the Director shall additionally review the application in
regard to whether the land Use densities and intensities are compatible with and further the
objectives, policies and land Uses in the Comprehensive Plan, and whether the criteria in
7.1.2.8.f are met.
2. A non-City applicant for rezoning shall obtain a Zoning Referral by the Zoning Administrator,
and meet with the Planning Director and Zoning Administrator in a preapplication meeting
prior to the applicant’s submission of a preliminary application for rezoning. The Director shall
review each preliminary application for rezoning for completeness. The Planning Director
shall certify the preliminary application and his accompanying recommendations to be filed
with the Office of Hearing Boards for consideration by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board. The applicant shall be responsible for filing the application with the Office of Hearing
Boards. Upon filing with the Office of Hearing Boards, the application shall be placed on the
agenda of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
e. Review by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
1. Notice
Formal public notice of hearing by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board of an application
for a code amendment shall be issued in the following manner:
The City shall notify all owners of property within 500 feet of the Property Line of the land for
which the hearing is required, by certified mail, of the time and place of the rezoning hearing
by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board at least ten days in advance of the hearing. In
the case of condominiums within the notification area, only one notice, by certified mail, to
the condominium association shall be sent. For the purpose of this requirement, the names
and addresses of property owners shall be deemed those appearing on the latest tax rolls
of the City. The applicant shall provide the list of owners to the City at the time of the initial
application.
Additionally, the City shall notify all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations
within the NET office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office
and the official representatives of such registered associations, by certified mail, of the rezoning
application. Neighborhood and homeowner associations who wish to receive such
notice must register on an annual basis at their local NET offices.
Notice of text amendments shall be as provided by Chapter 62 of the City Code and state
law.
The City shall certify at the time of the hearing that notice as herein required was given to the
VII.31
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
persons as named and with the addresses shown on the certification. The applicant shall
pay for the costs of the mailings.
Posting of the property which is the subject of the hearing and newspaper notice shall be required
as provided in Chapter 62 of the City Code.
2. Review, findings and recommendation.
(a) The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall give full consideration to the Director’s
recommendations, and shall evaluate whether an application for a code amendment
should be granted, granted with modifications or denied.
(b) The Board shall conduct a hearing on text amendments and make its recommendations
based on whether the criteria in this section are met.
(c) The Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall conduct a quasi-judicial public hearing on
rezoning applications, and make its recommendations based on whether the criteria in
this section are met.
f. Criteria.
The recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall show that the board has
considered and studied the application in regard to the following criteria:
1. For all amendments:
(a) The relationship of the proposed amendment to the goals, objectives and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan, with appropriate consideration as to whether the proposed change
will further the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; the Miami 21
Code; and other city regulations.
(b) The need and justification for the proposed change, including changed or changing conditions
that make the passage of the proposed change necessary.
2. For rezonings:
A change may be made only to the next intensity Transect Zone or by a Special Area Plan,
and in a manner which maintains the goals of this Miami 21 Code to preserve Neighborhoods
and to provide transitions in intensity and Building Height.
3. For Special Area Plan rezonings:
Special Area Plans shall be adopted by rezoning pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.9.
g. City Commission action on Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board recommendations.
1. Notice and hearings.
Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations regarding code amendments by the
VII.32
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, the City Commission shall hold at least two advertised
public hearings on the proposed code amendments. Notice shall be given as follows:
The City shall notify all owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the Property
Line of the land for which the hearing is required, by certified mail, of the time and place of
the rezoning hearing by the City Commission at least ten days in advance of the hearing. In
the case of condominiums within the notification area, only one notice, by certified mail, to
the condominium association shall be sent. For the purpose of this requirement, the names
and addresses of property owners shall be deemed those appearing on the latest tax rolls
of the City. The applicant shall provide the list of owners to the City at the time of the initial
application.
Additionally, the City shall notify all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations
within the NET office that is applicable to applicant property and shall notify the NET office
and the official representatives of such registered associations, by certified mail, of the rezoning
application. Neighborhood and homeowner associations who wish to receive such
notice must register on an annual basis at their local NET offices.
Notice of text amendments shall be as provided by Chapter 62 of the City Code and state
law.
The City shall certify at the time of the hearing that notice as herein required was given to the
persons as named and with the addresses shown on the certification. The applicant shall
pay for the costs of the mailings.
Posting of the property which is the subject of the hearing and newspaper notice shall be
required as provided in Chapter 62 of the City Code and by state statute.
2. Adoption.
In the case of all proposed Miami 21 text or Miami 21 Atlas amendments, if the recommendation
of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board is adverse to the proposal, such rezoning
shall not be adopted except by the vote of at least three members of the City Commission.
The City Commission may, by a vote of not less than three (3) members, approve the rezoning
of property to a Transect Zone of less Intensity than that applied for in situations where,
in the opinion of the commission and upon the recommendation of the Planning Director,
the specific rezoning applied for would work to the detriment of the health, safety or welfare
of the surrounding Neighborhood, whereas a rezoning to a Transect Zone of less Intensity
would not.
In no event shall a rezoning be issued prior to thirty (30) days from the time the notice of the
application is provided to the NET office. The decision of the City Commission shall include
an explanation of the code requirements for an appeal of the decision and shall be provided
to the NET office and posted on the City’s website. The City Commission shall include a
citation to the legal authority for any denial of a rezoning.
VII.33
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
3. Failure of City Commission to act.
If a recommendation of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board is not legislatively decided
within twelve (12) months from first reading by the City Commission, the application upon
which the report and recommendation are based shall be deemed to have been denied.
However, for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan and its corresponding Miami 21 Atlas
amendment, the time period will be extended an additional twelve (12) months. In both instances,
the provisions of sections 62-54 and 62-55 of the City Code will not apply unless
otherwise required by the City Commission. No day of the month of August shall be counted
in the administration of this section.
4. Limitation on further consideration after denial.
Whenever the City Commission has denied an application for the rezoning of property, the
Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board shall not thereafter:
(a) Consider any further application for the same rezoning of any part or all of the same
property for a period of eighteen months from the date of such action;
(b) Consider an application for any other kind of rezoning on any part or all of the same
property for a period of twelve months from the date of such action; or
(c) Consider an application for rezoning that involves the same owner’s property within two
hundred (200) feet of property granted a change within a period of twelve (12) months.
5. Limitation on further consideration after rezoning.
Whenever the City Commission has rezoned property, the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board shall not thereafter consider any petition for rezoning of all or any part of the same
property for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of such action.
6. Limitation on further consideration after voluntary withdrawal of application.
Whenever an applicant has voluntarily withdrawn an application for rezoning of property
during either first or second reading before the City Commission, the Planning, Zoning and
Appeals Board shall not thereafter consider an application for the same property for eighteen
(18) months from the date of such action, nor consider an application for any kind of rezoning
of any part or all of the same property for twelve (12) months from the date of such action.
7. Waiver of time limits.
The time limits set forth in this subsection g. may be waived by a vote of at least three (3)
members of the City Commission when such action is deemed necessary to prevent injustice
or to facilitate development of the city in the context of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, or
any portion thereof.
7.1.2.9 Sign Permits
a. Application. Except for classes of signs exempted from permit requirements as specified in Article
10, all signs shall require permits. Applications for such permits shall be made, on forms provided
VII.34
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
by the city, and in addition shall provide at a minimum the following information:
1. A drawing to scale showing the design of the Sign, including the dimensions, Sign size,
method of attachment, source of illumination, and showing the relationship to any Building
or Structure to which it is, or is proposed to be, installed or placed, or to which it relates;
2. A fully dimensional Lot plan, drawn to scale, indicating the location of the Sign relative to Property
Line, right-of-way, streets, sidewalks, and other Buildings or Structures on the premises;
3. Number, size and location of all existing signs upon the same Building, Lot or premises, if
applicable; and
4. Any other information required, if any, by the Florida Building Code.
b. Permit identification required to be on Sign. Any Sign requiring a permit or permits shall be clearly
marked with the permit number or numbers and the name of the person or firm responsible for
placement of the Sign on the premises.
c. Approval of sign permit. A sign permit may be approved by the Zoning Administrator if the requirements
and criteria set forth in this Code have been met; all other necessary approvals, if
any, have been obtained; and all required fees have been paid.
d. Transferability of sign permit. Permits, permit numbers or permit applications and attachments
shall not be transferable to other sites. They are valid only for a specific Sign Structure at the
specifically designated location subject to change of copy limitations in Article 10. If at any time
a Sign Structure is altered, removed or relocated in a manner different from the terms of the sign
permit, the sign permit will become void, unless otherwise provided in this code.
7.1.3 Application and Review Process
Generally, the application and review process for By Right permits, Warrants and Waivers, Exceptions,
Variances and rezonings are as illustrated in Article 7, Diagram 14.
7.1.3.1 Informal Consultation
Prior to submitting any application for a permit under this Code, the prospective applicant may
informally consult with the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Director to obtain information
and guidance concerning the proposed application, the general application requirements and the
plan review process. The prospective applicant for plan review under section 7.1.3.2 may request
informal consultation regarding the proposed plan prior to the required pre-application process. No
statement made or information exchanged during the informal consultation shall be binding on the
city or the applicant.
7.1.3.2 Generally
a. The Zoning Office shall direct an applicant for a permit under this Code to the appropriate office
for the review of the permit application by issuing a Zoning Referral. Preapplication package
forms for specific permits shall be provided by the city administration to assist the applicant in
the review and approval process. For all applications, the following information shall be required
1. Names and addresses of the record owners, the applicant, and the person preparing the
application, and the signatures of each. Statement of ownership or control of the property,
VII.35
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
executed and sworn to by the owner or owners of one hundred percent (100%) of the property
described in the application, or by tenant or tenants, with owner’s written sworn-to-consent,
or by duly authorized agents, evidenced by a written power of attorney if the agent is not a
member of the Florida Bar.
2. Evidence of authority by the record owners for submission of the application, and identification
of the applicant’s relationship to the owner if the applicant is not the record owner.
3. Legal description and a certified land survey of the proposed site boundaries. The survey
shall be performed in accordance with Florida Administrative Code, and dated within one
year proceeding the filing date of the application, providing such survey reflects all current
conditions of the subject property. The land survey shall be reviewed by the Department of
Public Works and baseline information shall be provided by the Department to the applicant
prior to review of the preapplication package at the preapplication meeting.
4. Any information required for notice of a hearing or administrative decision pursuant to this
Miami 21 Code.
5. Proof of any pending code enforcement action or municipal liens on the property.
6. Payment of required fees and charges.
7. Phased project. A phased project is one which, due to its magnitude, has to be developed
in stages. Such project shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres of land. Any such project
shall establish the maximum development capacity for the subject property. At the time of
qualification by the Planning Director and Zoning Administrator, the project shall be owned by
a single entity or subsidiaries of one (1) entity and may occupy contiguous lands, separated
only by streets or alleys, and will be considered as one (1) project for the purpose of calculating
all zoning requirements. A phased project must be qualified by the Planning Director
and Zoning Administrator, at the written request of the property owner.
b. The Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Director, as appropriate, shall make a determination
as to the completeness of the preapplication package prior to its further review.
c. When any combination of a Warrant, Waiver or Exception is requested for a particular project,
one application for the highest ranking permit shall be sufficient for review, and lower ranking
approvals need not be applied for separately. Although only one application is required to be filed,
the project must meet the criteria for all the approvals requested. Applications shall be ranked as
follows: Waivers, Warrants, and Exceptions. Special Area Plans, Variances, and amendments
to the Miami 21 Code shall always require separate applications and approvals. The approval
of any administrative permit shall be contingent on the approval of all permits requiring public
hearing, and the appeal period for any required administrative approval shall be stayed pending
the approval of the last permit requiring public hearing.
7.1.3.3 For By Right permits, the applicant shall also provide a complete set of plans, signed and
sealed as required by the Florida Building Code, which should include:
a. Location plan at minimum scale of 1:200, of project within Neighborhood structure as shown in
VII.36
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Zoning Atlas, including plat plan of Neighborhood and Building footprints of Neighborhood or
superimposition of project on aerial photograph.
b. Dimensioned site plan(s) including:
1. Lot Lines and Setbacks.
2. Location, shape, size and Height of existing and proposed Building construction and landscaping.
3. Location of Off-street Parking, loading facilities, waste collection areas, and all above ground
utilities.
4. Location and design of any signage.
5. Indication of any site or Building design methods used to conserve energy.
6. Abutting area extending three hundred (300) feet beyond Property Lines including street
design from project Building Façade to Building Façade across the street, including sidewalk,
swale if any, street trees, and on-street parking pavement.
c. Landscape plans including specification of plant material, location and size.
d. Floor plans and elevations of all Structures, including total gross square foot area of each floor
and all dimensions relating to the requirements of this Code.
e. Figures indicating the following:
1. Lot area.
2. Amount of green space or Open Space, trees, and pervious and impervious pavement in
square feet and percentage required and provided.
3. Amount of building coverage at ground level in square feet and percentage required and
provided.
4. Total square footage of all built areas, categorized by Use.
5. Parking required and provided.
6. Total number of dwelling units.
7. Other design data as may be needed to evaluate the project.
7.1.3.4 Plan Approval Required for Warrants, Waivers, Exceptions and Variances
a. Requirements.
Plan approval is required for any Structure or premises to be constructed, changed, converted,
enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, by Warrant, Waiver, Exception or Variance. The plan shall
VII.37
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
be reviewed as part of the preapplication package for the Warrant, Waiver, Exception, or Variance.
If plan approval is required, the plan shall show that the Structure or Use, or both, or the
affected part thereof, are in conformity with the provisions of this Miami 21 Code.
b. Preapplication Meeting.
After receiving a Zoning Referral and a preapplication package from the Zoning Office for a Warrant,
Waiver, Exception, or Variance under this Code, the prospective applicant shall meet in a
preapplication meeting to obtain information and guidance as to matters related to the proposed
application. No statement made or information exchanged during the pre-application meeting
shall be binding on the City or the applicant. The Planning Director (or the Zoning Administrator
in the case of a Waiver) shall ensure that representatives of potentially affected City departments
or agencies are present at the meeting and shall, if deemed necessary, extend invitations to
attend and participate in the meeting to potentially affected agencies or officers of Miami-Dade
County, the state or the federal government. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
the preapplication meeting in the case of a Waiver. The preapplication meeting may be continued
for the review of further information that may be necessary to enable the applicant to submit a
complete preliminary application.
Insofar as possible, the applicant shall be given guidelines at the pre-application meeting in
regard to:
1. Any referral to other governmental officers or agencies that may be necessary either before
or after filing application for permit requested.
2. Any required Comprehensive Plan amendments or zoning changes.
3. Any Waivers which may be required for the proposed project.
4. Information regarding the plan process and information that the Zoning Administrator or
Director deem pertinent to the application.
5. Any other matters that are deemed pertinent to the application.
6. Estimate of fees.
c. Upon completion of the pre-application meeting, the applicant if required shall submit an application
for preliminary plan approval with the Planning Department or Zoning Office, as applicable, on
forms provided by the City. The Planning Department or Zoning Office as applicable shall initiate
review of the preliminary plan application and determine that the preliminary plan application is
complete.
d. Materials to be submitted with the application shall include maps, plans, surveys, studies and
reports that may reasonably be required to make the necessary determinations called for in the
particular case, in sufficient copies for referrals and records, including those materials listed in
section 7.1.3.3, and may include other materials such as traffic studies and other documents
relative to the application, as deemed necessary by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator,
as applicable.
VII.38
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
e. A preliminary plan application shall be deemed complete at the time:
1. It is on a form approved by the city, and all applicable information is provided by the applicant
on the form, or attachment(s), as necessary, at the time of its filing and;
2. It has been reviewed and signed by the appropriate official and;
3. All required fees are paid.
f. The Planning Department or Zoning Office shall review the submitted application pursuant to
the standards of this Code. If further review is necessary by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board or the City Commission, the Planning Director shall prepare recommendations and certify
the application and recommendations to be filed with the Office of Hearing Boards. The applicant
is responsible for filing the application for a hearing, along with the Planning Director’s certification,
with the Office of Hearing Boards.
7.1.3.5 Modifications to Applications Requiring Public Hearing
a. Modifications to applications after processing begins.
An applicant may modify an application filed with the Office of Hearing Boards after processing
begins and prior to the public hearing if the modifications are not substantial. Otherwise, a new
application must be made and fee paid. Whether a proposed modification is substantial shall
be determined by the Zoning Administrator, according to whether the requested modification
requires a Variance or Exception.
b. Modifications subsequent to notice of hearing.
1. After notice has been given of a public hearing before the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board, or City Commission, as the case may be, no change shall be made in the original application
which would have the effect of creating substantial differences between the matter
advertised and the matter upon which the hearing is actually held.
2. Upon completion of the public hearing by the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, or City
Commission, as the case may be, no proposed amendment shall be recommended or adopted
which is substantially different from the proposal for which the public hearing was held.
c. Modifications to a plan approved under this Miami 21 Code.
Minor modifications may be made to a plan approved by Warrant, Variance or Exception under
the Miami 21 Code upon the applicant’s submission of a letter explaining the need for corrections,
payment of the fee established by the adopted fee schedule, and written approval of the
Planning Director. Minor modifications include:
1. Those changes that meet Transect regulations and do not change the manner of operation
of the approved site; or
2. Those changes that can be approved by Waiver; or
VII.39
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
3. Changes in the project phasing. At the time of its approval, the entire project shall be owned
by a single entity or its subsidiaries, and shall occupy contiguous lands, separated only by
streets or alleys; or
4. An increase in height not exceeding five (5) feet or 5% of the approved height; or
5. Movement of the footprint of the building not more than ten (10) feet in any horizontal direction.
All applications for minor modifications to an approved plan shall be reviewed in light of their
cumulative effect on the original approved plan, taking into account building disposition, configuration,
function, and other Code standards. The minor modification shall meet the criteria
of Table 12. Except for minor modifications, the plan may be amended only pursuant to the
procedures and standards established for its original approval.
d. Modifications to special permits and Variances approved under a previous code.
1. An applicant may modify a special permit approved under a previous zoning code, as a minor
modification through the Warrant process. The components being modified after modification
shall be in compliance with this Code, even though the remainder of the approved development
plan is not in full compliance with this Code, and shall not increase previously approved
overall Development Capacity.
2. The special permit may be amended with modifications that the Planning Director determines
not to be minor, and variances may be modified according to the following procedures:
(a) Class I Special Permits shall be amended pursuant to Chapter 62 of the City Code.
(b) Class II Special Permits shall be amended as a Warrant.
(c) Special Exceptions and Major Use Special Permits shall be amended as an Exception
(d) Variances may be modified as a Variance.
3. In all Special Permit cases, the City shall recognize any rights to develop that may be vested
under legal principles of equitable estoppel, and may allow changes to a previously approved
phased Special Permit that has begun construction (other than under a demolition or landscape
permit), applying the standards of the previous code for all phases. Where those changes to
an approved phased Special Permit to the greatest extent possible conform to the standards
of this Code, the review shall be conducted by Warrant; otherwise the review of the changes
shall be conducted as an Exception. The owner of property which has a previously approved
phased Special Permit nonetheless may choose to submit a new application for approval
pursuant to the Miami 21 code.
4. The expiration date for any Class II Special Permit, Major Use Special Permit or Variance
approved under the Zoning Ordinance 11000 in effect immediately prior to the date of adoption
of this Miami 21 Code may, upon application to the Director by the owner, be extended
from its existing expiration date as follows:
(a) Class II Special Permits, Special Exceptions and Variances shall be permitted no more
than one (1) time extension for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
VII.40
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
(b) Major Use Special Permits shall be permitted no more than three (3) time extensions for
each time extension period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months.
5. Nothing in this Code shall divest a previously approved Development of Regional Impact
from any development rights obtained as a result of its approval under a Chapter 380, Florida
Statutes.
e. Phased project: At the time of its approval, the entire project shall be owned by a single entity or
its subsidiaries, and shall occupy contiguous lands, separated only by streets or alleys. Changes
in the phasing of such a project may be approved as a minor modification if approved by the
Zoning Administrator, building official and Planning Director.
f. Complete applications pending at the effective date of this Code shall be reviewed under the
provisions of Ordinance 11000 as existing at the date of adoption of this Code.
7.1.3.6 Approvals granted in error do not authorize violation of this Code; corrections required.
a. An approval issued in error shall not confer any rights to construction or occupancy.
b. No approval shall be construed to authorize violation of any provisions of this Code, and such
approval shall be valid only to the extent that the work authorized is lawful.
c. Issuance of a building permit based upon a site plan shall not prevent the Zoning Administrator
from thereafter requiring correction of errors in the plan.
7.1.3.7 No Approval Available if Code Enforcement Violations.
No approval may be issued if the business, enterprise, occupation, trade, profession, property or
activity is the subject of an ongoing city enforcement procedure, or is the subject of a notice of violation
of a state law or county ordinance where the business enterprise is located or is to be located,
unless the subject of the application would cure the outstanding violation. Failure to comply with
conditions and safeguards, when attached to a grant of a development order or permit, shall be
deemed a violation of this Miami 21 Code.
7.1.3.8 Resubmission and Withdrawal of Applications Requiring Public Hearing.
a. Whenever an application has been denied, the city shall not thereafter consider the same application
for any part or all of the same property for a period of eighteen (18) months from the
date of the denial.
b. Whenever an applicant has voluntarily withdrawn an application after the application has been
scheduled for a public hearing, the city shall not thereafter consider the same application for the
same property for eighteen (18) months from the date of the withdrawal.
c. The time limits set by paragraphs a. and b. above may be waived by a vote of not less than three
VII.41
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
(3) members of the decision making body when such action is deemed necessary to prevent
injustice or to facilitate development of the city in the context of the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, or portion thereof.
d. If an application is on file for more than six (6) months without activity by the applicant, it shall
be deemed withdrawn.
7.1.4 Quasi-Judicial Procedures
7.1.4.1 Intent
The intent of this section is to establish procedures to ensure procedural due process and maintain
citizen access to the local government decision-making process for the review of certain applications
that require quasi-judicial hearings. These procedures shall be applied and interpreted in a manner
recognizing both the legislative and judicial aspects of the local government decision-making process
in quasi-judicial hearings.
7.1.4.2 Applicability
These procedures shall apply to all applications in which the City Commission or Planning, Zoning
and Appeals Board acts in a quasi-judicial capacity for recommendations or final decisions as to
Exceptions, Variances, Special Area Plans and rezoning; and to appeals to the City Commission or
Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board on Warrants, Waivers, zoning approvals and Certificates of Use.
These procedures do not apply to administrative decisions made by City staff on Warrants or Waivers,
zoning approvals, sign permits or Certificates of Use, except upon the appeal of the administrative
decision to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
7.1.4.3 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
a. Applicant shall mean the owner of record, the owner’s agent, or any person with a legal or equitable
interest in the property for which an application or appeal thereof has been made and
which is subject to quasi-judicial proceedings, and shall mean the staff when the application is
initiated by the city.
b. Competent substantial evidence shall mean testimony or other evidence based on personal observation,
or fact or opinion evidence offered by an expert on a matter that requires specialized
knowledge and that is relevant to the issue to be decided. Competent substantial evidence is
evidence a reasonable mind could accept as adequate to support a conclusion.
c. Decision-making body shall mean the City Commission or the Planning, Zoning and Appeals
Board, as the case may be, that makes a recommendation or decision on an application or deVII.
42
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
cides the appeal.
d. Intervenor shall mean a person whose interests in the proceeding are adversely affected in a
manner greater than those of the general public.
e. Material evidence shall mean evidence that bears a logical relationship to one or more issues
raised by the application or the laws and regulations pertaining to the matter requested by the
application.
f. Participants shall mean members of the general public, other than the Applicant, including experts
and representatives of local governments and governmental agencies, who offer testimony at a
quasi-judicial hearing for the purpose of being heard on an application.
g. Party shall mean the Applicant, the city staff, and any person recognized by the Decision-making
body as a qualified Intervenor.
h. Relevant evidence shall mean evidence which tends to prove or disprove a fact that is material
to the determination of the application.
7.1.4.4 General procedures
a. Each Party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to crossexamine
opposing witnesses on any relevant matter (subject to the rules contained herein), and
to rebut evidence.
b. Staff shall have the responsibility of presenting the case on behalf of the City. The staff report on
the application shall be made available to the Applicant and the Decision-making body no later
than five (5) days prior to the quasi-judicial hearing on the application.
c. Official file. All written communication received by Decision-making body or staff concerning an
application, the staff report on the application, any petitions or other submissions from the public,
and all other documents pertaining to the application upon receipt shall be filed in the official file
for the application, which shall be maintained by staff. The Comprehensive Plan, this Code and
the City Code shall be deemed to be part of the official file. The official file shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours.
d. The printed agenda for the meeting at which the quasi-judicial hearing is scheduled to take place
shall identify the hearing as quasi-judicial and indicate where copies of the procedures that apply
may be obtained.
7.1.4.5 Hearing procedures
a. The hearing shall, to the extent possible, be conducted as follows:
1. The Chair or City Attorney shall read a statement at the beginning of the quasi-judicial hearing
portion of the agenda, which shall outline the procedure to be followed. A copy of the
procedures shall be made available at the hearing.
VII.43
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
2. The members of the Decision-making body shall disclose any ex parte communications regarding
the application. Such disclosure by the commissioner shall remove the presumption
of prejudice from ex parte communications pursuant to Fla. Stat. 286.0115.
3. The Applicant, staff, and all Participants requesting to speak shall be collectively sworn by
oath or affirmation.
4. The Applicant may waive its right to an evidentiary hearing if it agrees with the staff recommendation
and no one from the audience wishes to speak for or against the application. The
Decision-making body may then vote on the item, based upon the staff report and any other
materials entered by staff from the official file into the record of the hearing.
5. If there is an evidentiary hearing, the order of the presentation shall be as follows, unless the
chair agrees to a different order, taking proper consideration of fairness and due process:
(a) Staff shall present a brief synopsis of the application; introduce any appropriate additional
exhibits from the official file that have not already been transmitted to the decision-making
body with the agenda materials, as staff desires; summarize issues; and make a recommendation
on the application. Staff shall also introduce any witnesses that it wishes to
provide testimony at the hearing.
(b) The Applicant shall make its presentation, including offering any documentary evidence,
and introduce any witnesses as it desires.
(c) Participants shall make their presentations in any order as determined by the chair.
(d) Staff may cross-examine any witnesses and respond to any testimony presented.
(e) The Applicant may cross-examine any witnesses and respond to any testimony presented.
(f) The chair may choose to allow Participants to respond to any testimony if the chair deems
the response to be necessary to ensure fairness and due process.
(g) Members of the Decision-making body, through the Chair, may ask any questions of the
staff, Applicant and Participants.
(h) Final argument may be made by the staff, related solely to the evidence in the record.
(i) Final argument may be made by the applicant, related solely to evidence in the record.
b. A qualified Intervenor may make a presentation, conduct cross-examination and make final arguments
in the order as decided by the chair.
c. The chair shall keep order, and without requiring an objection, may direct a Party conducting the
cross-examination to stop a particular line of questioning that merely harasses, intimidates or
embarrasses the individual being cross-examined; is unduly repetitious or is not relevant; or is
beyond the scope of the testimony by the individual being cross-examined. If the Party conducting
the cross-examination continuously violates directions from the chair to end a line of questioning
VII.44
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
deemed irrelevant and merely designed to harass, intimidate or embarrass the individual, the
chair may terminate the cross-examination.
d. After the presentations, and at the conclusion of any continuances, the Decision-making body
shall deliberate on the application or appeal, as the case may be. Once the Decision-making
body begins its deliberations, no further presentations or testimony shall be permitted except in
the sole discretion of the Decision-making body. The Decision-making body’s decisions must be
based upon Competent substantial evidence in the record.
e. The Decision-making body may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, continue the
hearing to a fixed date, time, and place. The Applicant shall have the right to one continuance;
however, all subsequent continuances shall be granted at the sole discretion of the decisionmaking
body.
7.1.4.6 Rules of evidence
a. The Decision-making body shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, or limited only to
consideration of evidence which would be admissible in a court of law.
b. The chair may exclude evidence or testimony which is not Relevant, Material, or competent, or
testimony which is unduly repetitious or defamatory.
c. The chair, with the advice of the City Attorney, will determine the relevancy of evidence.
d. Matters relating to an application’s consistency with the Comprehensive Plan or Miami 21 Code
will be presumed to be Relevant and Material.
e. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence,
but it shall not be sufficient by itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection
in a court.
f. Documentary evidence may be presented in the form of a copy of the original, if available. A copy
shall be made available to the Decision-making body and to the staff no later than two business
days prior to the hearing on the application. Upon request, the Applicant and staff shall be given
an opportunity to compare the copy with the original. Oversized exhibits shall be copied and
reduced for convenient record storage.
g. Only the Applicant, qualified Intervenor, staff and the Decision-making body shall be entitled to
conduct cross-examination when testimony is given or documents are made a part of the record.
h. The City Attorney shall represent the Decision-making body and advise it as to the procedures to
be followed and the propriety, relevancy and admissibility of evidence presented at the hearing.
i. The Decision-making body shall take judicial notice of all state and local laws, ordinances and
regulations and may take judicial notice of such other matters as are generally recognized by
the courts of the State of Florida.
j. Supplementing the record after the quasi-judicial hearing is prohibited, unless specifically authoVII.
45
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
rized by an affirmative vote of the Decision-making body under the following conditions:
1. The supplementation occurs after a quasi-judicial hearing is continued but prior to final action
being taken on the application or the appeal.
2. If a question is raised by the Decision-making body at the hearing which cannot be answered
at the hearing, the Party to whom the question is directed may submit the requested information
in writing to the Decision-making body after the quasi-judicial hearing, with copies
to the other Parties, provided the hearing has been continued or another hearing has been
scheduled for a future date and no final action has been taken by the Decision-making body.
The information requested will be presented to the Decision-making body at the time of the
continued hearing.
3. All Parties and Participants shall have the same right with respect to the additional information
as they had for evidence presented at the hearing.
7.1.4.7 Final decision by the Decision-making body
The Decision-making body shall reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay, which
it shall adopt in writing. The written decision shall note the date issued and shall indicate the date
filed in the City Clerk’s office. The Office of Hearing Boards shall provide the Applicant notification
of the decision by certified mail.
7.1.4.8 The record
All evidence admitted into the record at the hearing, and the adopted development order of the
Decision-making body shall be maintained by the City Clerk in a hearing file for a period of at least
forty-five days (45) from issuance of the decision.
7.1.5 Appeals
Appeals to the appropriate appellate body from the following decisions shall be made as follows:
a. Fifteen (15) days from the posting on the city website of the decision of the Zoning Administrator
on an application for zoning interpretation or Waiver, and fifteen (15) days from the denial or
revocation of a Certificate of Use: to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
b. Fifteen (15) days from the posting on the city website of the decision of the Planning Director on
a Warrant or planning determination: to the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
c. Fifteen (15) days from the decision of the Planning, Zoning, and Appeals Board on an Exception
or a Variance: to the City Commission.
d. Fifteen (15) days from the decision of the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board on a zoning interpretation
appeal, denial or revocation of a Certificate of Use appeal, planning determination
appeal or Warrant appeal: to the City Commission.
VII.46
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
e. Thirty (30) days from the appellate decision of the City Commission on a zoning interpretation
appeal, denial or revocation of a Certificate of Use appeal, planning determination appeal, Warrant
appeal, Variance appeal or Exception appeal: to the circuit court of the eleventh judicial
circuit in the manner set forth in the rules of the court.
f. Thirty (30) days from the decision of the City Commission on a code amendment: to the circuit
court of the eleventh judicial circuit in the manner set forth in the rules of the court.
7.1.6 Notice of Hearings
Notice of hearings shall be as set forth in Chapter 62 of the City Code or as set forth in the Miami
21 Code.
7.1.7 Unity of Title
7.1.7.1 When required
The owner of a property shall submit a Unity of Title in recordable form to the Office of Zoning providing
that all of the property encompassing the Lot upon which the Building and appurtenances are to
be located shall be held together as one (1) tract of land and providing that no part or parcel shall
be conveyed or mortgaged separate and apart from the Lot, as set forth under the Building Permit
in the following cases:
a. Whenever a Development site consists of more than one (1) Lot, whether the combination of
Lots is required to meet minimum zoning requirements or the Development site is not platted as
a single Development site.
b. Whenever a Unity of Title is required by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Commission.
c. Whenever the City of Miami requires a Unity of Title be executed as a condition to the issuance
of any Variance or permit or prior to acceptance of any terms of an agreement.
7.1.7.2 Specific requirements
a. The owner shall provide a certificate of ownership by an opinion of title from an attorney licensed
to practice law in the State of Florida. Said opinion of title, which shall be from the point of beginning,
shall be based upon an abstract brought up within ten (10) days of the requirement that
such Unity of Title be recorded.
b. The opinion of title shall include the names and addresses of all mortgagees and lien holders,
the description of the mortgages or liens, if applicable, and the status of all real estate taxes due
and payable.
c. The Unity of Title shall be executed with the same formality and manner as a warranty deed under
the laws of the State of Florida.
VII.47
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
d. Prior to submission of a Unity of Title, the owner shall conduct a lien search with the Office of
Hearing Boards and the Department of Finance and comply with any code enforcement violations
and satisfy any outstanding liens, if applicable, due to the City.
7.1.7.3 Approval
No Building Permit shall be issued until the required Unity of Title has been approved by the Zoning
Administrator, as to Zoning requirements, in a legal form acceptable to the City Attorney and upon
proper recording in the Miami-Dade County Public Records at the Owner’s sole expense.
7.1.7.4 Release
Any Unity of Title required by this section shall not be released, except as specified in the legal
instrument used to record said Unity of Title. Any Unity of Title agreement which does not contain
a release clause or procedures for release, may be released by the Zoning Administrator, in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney, upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator that the Unity of
Title is no longer necessary (i.e. a release may be proper due to a replat of the properties united or
the removal of any encroachments which necessitated the unity). In the absence of such a determination,
the Unity of Title shall be released only by resolution of the City Commission. Releases
approved pursuant to this section shall be recorded in the public records of Miami-Dade County,
Florida, at the property owner’s sole expense.
7.1.7.5 Recording
The owner shall be solely responsible for the costs of recording the Unity of Title in the Public Records
of Miami-Dade County. The Owner shall also be responsible for an administrative fee of $3.50 which
shall be payable to the City upon submission of the Unity of Title to the Office of Zoning.
7.1.7.6 Covenant in lieu of Unity of Title
Whenever a Unity of Title is required, pursuant to this section, a covenant in lieu thereof shall be
acceptable provided that said covenant conforms to all of the following requirements:
a. Where multiple Buildings on a single site exist, or for properties which contain multiple owners
on a single site, the City may accept a covenant in lieu of Unity of Title. The acceptance of said
covenant shall require the approval of the Zoning Administrator and any other City officials that
may be required by the Zoning Administrator. The acceptance of a covenant in lieu of Unity of
Title will not constitute a subdivision of land for purposes of this article. The Zoning Administrator
shall evaluate the request for submittal of a covenant in lieu of Unity of Title and the information
supplied with regard to its impact on the community. In evaluating the request, the Zoning
Administrator may confer with representatives of other departments or agencies, as may be
necessary.
b. If a negative impact on the community exists, the request for submittal of the covenant in lieu of
Unity of Title shall be denied.
c. If no negative impact on the community exists, the Zoning Administrator may approve the covenant
in lieu of Unity of Title.
VII.48
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
d. In determining whether a negative impact on the community exists, the Zoning Administrator
shall review:
1. The off-street parking and loading facilities related to adjacent streets, including ingress and
egress to the subject property, with particular importance on pedestrian safety, convenience,
internal traffic flow and control, arrangement in relation to access in case of fire or other
emergency, and screening and landscaping.
2. The utilities on the subject property.
3. The maintenance of the subject property.
e. A covenant in lieu of Unity of Title shall not be accepted for residential properties in T3 Transects
(Single Family and Two-Family Residential).
f. The covenant in lieu of Unity of Title, approved for legal form and sufficiency by the City Attorney,
or designee, shall run with the land and be binding upon the heirs, successors, personal
representatives and assigns, and upon all mortgagees and lessees and others presently or in
the future having any interest in the property. The covenant in lieu of Unity of Title shall contain
the following elements:
1. That in the event of multiple ownership subsequent to the approval of the covenant in lieu
of Unity of Title, each of the subsequent owners shall be bound by the terms, provisions
and conditions of the covenant. The owner shall further agree not to convey portions of the
subject property to such other parties unless and until the owners and such parties shall
have executed and mutually delivered, in recordable form an instrument to be known as an
“easement and operating agreement” which shall include, but is not limited to:
(a) Easements in the common area of each parcel for ingress to and egress from the other
parcels;
(b) Easements in the common area of each parcel for the passage and parking of vehicles;
(c) Easements in the common area of each parcel for the passage and accommodation of
pedestrians;
(d) Easements for access roads across the common area of each parcel to public and private
roadways;
(e) Easements for the installation, use, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, relocation
or removal of utility facilities in appropriate areas in each such parcel;
(f) Easements on each parcel for construction of buildings and improvements in favor of
each other parcel;
(g) Easements upon each parcel in favor of each adjoining parcel for the installation, use,
maintenance, repair, replacement and removal of common construction improvements
such as footing, supports and foundations;
(h) Easements on each parcel for attachment of Buildings;
(i) Easements on each parcel for Building overhangs and other overhangs and projections
encroaching upon such parcel from adjoining parcel such as, by way of example, marquees,
canopies, lights, lighting devices, awnings, wing walls and the like;
(j) Appropriate reservation of rights to grant easements to utility companies;
(k) Appropriate reservation of rights to road rights-of-way and curb cuts;
(l) Easements in favor of each such parcel for pedestrian and vehicular traffic over dedicated
private ring roads and access roads; and
VII.49
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
(m) Appropriate agreements between the owners of the several parcels as to the obligation to
maintain and repair all private roadways, parking facilities, common areas and common
facilities and the like.
These instruments or portions may be waived if approved by each of the directors of the
Public Works Department, the Planning Department, the Building Department, and the Office
of Zoning, or their designees, if the provisions are inapplicable to the subject property.
In addition, the instruments shall contain such other provisions with respect to the operation,
maintenance and development of the property as the parties may agree. Such provision may
be modified or amended by such parties (or the applicable association governing such parties)
without approval or joinder by the directors, or their designees, if it will be constructed,
conveyed and operated in accordance with an approved site plan. The multiple owners may,
by mutual agreement, allocate among themselves and the parcels owned by them, setbacks,
parking, open space, floor area and similar governmental requirements, and these allocations
shall be honored in connection with requests for future site plan changes.
2. The covenant in lieu of Unity of Title shall be in effect for a period of thirty (30) years from
the date the documents are recorded in the public records of Miami-Dade County, Florida,
after which time it shall be extended automatically for successive periods of ten (10) years,
unless released in writing by the Owners with approval by the Zoning Administrator. With
respect to any portion of the subject property over which a condominium, homeowners or
other similar association then exists, the instrument of amendment, modification or release
shall be executed by such association (in accordance with its governing documents) in lieu
of the fee owners of such portion of the subject property. For modifications, amendments,
or releases, joinder is required by each of the directors of the Public Works Department, the
Planning Department, the Building Department, and the Office of Zoning, or their designees
to execute the instrument of amendment, modification or release upon the demonstration
and affirmative finding that the Covenant is no longer necessary to preserve and protect the
property for the purposes herein intended.
g. The remaining requirements as discussed in this Article concerning a Unity of Title shall also apply
to a covenant in lieu of a Unity of Title.
7.1.7.7 Recorded agreements between parties superseded by covenants in lieu of Unity of Title
Whenever a covenant in lieu of Unity of Title is drafted which makes specific reference to and provides
new conditions, requirements and limitations for any characteristic or aspect of use pertaining
to the subject property, such new covenant shall supersede any other existing agreements regulating
such matters, or shall be accepted as a substitute for any agreements required from the applicant
pertaining to joint or shared facilities.
VII.50
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
7.2 NONCONFORMITIES: STRUCTURES; USES; LOTS; SITE IMPROVEMENTS; AND SIGNS
7.2.1 Generally
a. Definition
A nonconformity as used in this Code is an existing Use, Structure, Lot or site improvement that
is in compliance with the zoning regulations that were applicable to it when it was established,
and for which all required permits were issued, but which does not conform in whole or in part to
the regulations of this Code. Such nonconformity is legal and may continue except as regulated
by this section.
1. A nonconformity may also be created where the lawful use of eminent domain or an order of
a court of competent jurisdiction has affected the lawfully existing Use, Structure, Lot or site
improvement in a way so that the property does not comply with this Code. In this instance,
the nonconformity is legal and may continue except as regulated by this section.
2. A change in tenancy, ownership, or management of a nonconforming Use, Structure, Lot or
site improvement shall not be construed to create a nonconformity, provided the change is
otherwise lawful and in compliance with this Code.
b. Intent concerning nonconformities generally.
It is the intent of this Code that nonconformities may continue but are not encouraged to expand
or enlarge, and once they cease they may not be re-established, except under the terms of Section
7.2.
c. The existence of nonconformity shall not be used as a reason to add new Uses, Structures, or site
improvements that are not allowed by the regulations of the Transect Zone in which it is located.
d. The temporary or illegal Use of property shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a
nonconformity or to create rights in the continuation of a nonconformity until it shall come into
compliance with the regulations of this Code.
e. If at any time a nonconforming Structure, or any Structure containing a nonconforming Use,
becomes unsafe or unlawful by declaration of the City of Miami, Miami-Dade County Unsafe
Structures Board, or other government agency having jurisdiction, the Structure shall not thereafter
be restored or repaired and the Use shall not be reestablished except in conformity with
the regulations of the Transect Zone in which it is located.
7.2.2 Structures and Uses in the Event of Disaster
a. Single-Family Residences, Duplexes and Multi-Family Structures
In the event of a natural disaster, explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, the Zoning
Administrator may permit the reconstruction of any nonconforming Single-Family Residence,
VII.51
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
duplex or multi-family structures to the same or decreased nonconformity as existed immediately
prior to the disaster, upon proof satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator of the configuration of the
prior Single-Family Residence, duplex or multi-family structures, and only in compliance with the
Florida Building Code. An application for reconstruction of the Single-Family Residence, duplex
or multi-family structures shall be filed within twelve (12) months of the event of its destruction,
unless the City Commission authorizes the Zoning Administrator to extend the twelve (12) month
time period city-wide.
b. All Other Structures
1. Where a nonconforming Structure is destroyed by natural disaster, explosion, fire, act of
God, or the public enemy, the Zoning Administrator may, by Waiver, allow the replacement
or reconstruction of the nonconforming Structure in whole or in part upon finding that the
Waiver criteria of this Code and the criteria of paragraph 2 below are met.
2. Criteria for approval. Replacement or reconstruction may be permitted if the following findings
are made.
(a) The cause of destruction was not the deliberate action of the owner of the Structure or
his agents.
(b) The replacement or reconstruction is reasonably necessary to allow the conforming Use
of the Structure.
(c) The replacement or reconstruction meets the Florida Building Code.
3. An Application for the reconstruction or repair shall be filed within a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of the destruction unless the City Commission authorizes the Zoning
Administrator to extend the twelve (12) month time period city-wide.
c. Nonconforming Uses
1. The restoration of a nonconforming Use within a Structure that is destroyed by natural disaster,
explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, may be approved by Warrant. The
Use must be restored in a conforming Structure or Structure approved by Waiver, and of
equal or lesser size and on the same Lot. The approval shall further find that the criteria of
paragraph 2 below are met.
2. Criteria for approval. The restoration of the nonconforming Use may be permitted if all of the
following are found to be met:
(a) The cause of destruction was not the deliberate action of the owner of the Structure or
his agents; and
(b) Nothing contained in the provisions of this Code or the City Code requires termination of
such nonconforming Use; and
(c) There is substantial public advantage in continuance of the nonconforming Use; and
VII.52
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
(d) Replacement or reconstruction in the manner proposed, with related actions imposed
in conditions and safeguards, will reduce any previous adverse effects of the Use on
neighboring properties; and
(e) The Use will not be enlarged or intensified.
3. The application for restoration shall be filed within twelve (12) months of destruction and be
diligently carried to completion. Unless restoration is so initiated and completed, the nonconforming
Use shall terminate and not be resumed.
7.2.3 Alterations and Expansion of Nonconforming Structures
a. Single-Family Residences and Duplexes
1. Interior alterations to a nonconforming Single-Family Residence or duplex for interior work
such as repairs or interior remodeling shall be allowed.
2. Alterations, additions, repairs and maintenance to a nonconforming Single-Family Residence
or duplex shall be permitted as long as there is no enlargement of any nonconformity that
affects the exterior of the Building or premises.
3. Where alteration, addition, repair or maintenance enlarges a nonconformity affecting the
exterior of the Building or premises, the enlargement may be permitted by Waiver from the
Zoning Administrator.
b. All other Structures
1. Less than fifty percent (50%) of square footage of Structure.
Alterations which enlarge the nonconformity of a nonconforming Structure to an extent of
less than fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of the nonconforming Structure may
be permitted by Exception from the Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board.
2. Fifty percent (50%) or more of square footage of the Structure.
A nonconforming Structure may be altered to enlarge the nonconformity of the Structure by
fifty percent (50%) or more of the total square footage of the nonconforming Structure only
if the Structure thereafter conforms to the Transect Zone in which it is located.
c. Computation of alterations
The extent of alteration will be calculated to include the sum of all alterations over a period of
three consecutive years.
d. Expansion, repairs, remodeling and maintenance that do not enlarge the nonconformity of a
nonconforming Structure
All expansions, repairs, remodeling and maintenance that do not enlarge the nonconformity of
the Structure are permitted consistent with the Florida Building Code.
VII.53
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
7.2.4 Moving a Nonconforming Structure on the Same Lot
A nonconforming Structure may be moved on the same Lot only pursuant to an Exception. In addition
to satisfying the Exception criteria, the following criteria apply:
a. The proposed movement must reduce the degree of nonconformity to the maximum extent reasonably
feasible, or eliminate the nonconformity;
b. The Structure shall in no case be moved in such a manner as to increase the degree of nonconformity;
and
c. Where a nonconforming Structure is moved to a location not on the same Lot, the Structure and
all new construction shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the Transect Zone to which it
is moved.
7.2.5 Locally Designated Historic Resources—Nonconformities
a. Definition
A locally designated historic resource is a Building or Structure listed in the Miami Register of
Historic Places that has been deemed individually significant for its contribution to Miami’s history
and sense of place; or is a part of a locally designated historic district where the individual
Building or Structure is deemed to add to the historic architectural qualities or historical associations,
and the Building or Structure has been so designated through the formal public process
provided in Chapter 23 of the City Code.
b. Generally
Nonconforming locally designated historic resources shall be subject to the regulations of this
section, except as they may be granted certain waivers or an exception for preservation purposes
by the Historic and Environmental Preservation Board pursuant to Chapter 23 of the City Code.
7.2.6 Nonconforming Uses
a. Time Limitation
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code, a lawful Use exists which
would not be permitted under this Code, the Use may be continued for twenty (20) years from the
date the Use first became legal noncomforming and consistent with the regulations of this section.
The Use shall not be allowed to continue automatically upon expiration of the twenty (20) years.
Upon application, the City Commission may grant by Exception an extension for continuance of
the Use for an additional term of up to twenty (20) years. However, accessory parking abutting
T3-R areas that were approved as transitional Uses under prior zoning codes and were legally
nonconforming prior to the adoption of this Code will not have a continued automatic twenty-year
(20) extension as provided in this section, but shall instead seek an Exception before the City
VII.54
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Commission within sixty (60) days of renewal of a Certificate of Use.
b. Legally established alcoholic beverage establishments, having a valid Certificate of Use or certificate
of occupancy and all other required permits, may continue in existence despite subsequent
establishment of a church or school within the distance limitations of Chapter 4 entitled “Alcoholic
Beverages” of the City Code.
c. Replacement and Expansion of Structures that Contain Nonconforming Use
1. No enlargement, extension, replacement, or reconstruction of an existing Structure which
contains a nonconforming Use shall be permitted except to change the Use to a conforming
Use, except as provided below:
(a) Interior Arrangement
A nonconforming Use may be extended throughout any parts of a Structure which was
clearly designed or arranged for the nonconforming Use at the time that the Use became
nonconforming. If a portion of a Structure was unoccupied or not manifestly designed for
the nonconforming Use, the Use may not be expanded within the Structure.
(b) Alterations to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of a Structure
containing a nonconforming Use
Where an alteration of a Structure containing a nonconforming Use is less than fifty percent
(50%) of the square footage of the Structure at the time of alteration, the nonconforming
Use may be permitted to continue pursuant to an Exception.
(c) Exterior
No nonconforming Use which exists outside a Structure shall be extended to occupy more
area than was occupied at the time the Use became nonconforming, except as approved
by Exception and to comply with the non Use regulations of the Transect in which it is
located. In this case, the occupancy of the new location shall be construed as remaining
a nonconforming Use.
2. Extending / Transferring the Nonconforming Use
No nonconforming Use shall be extended to occupy any other Structure on the same Lot
or parcel if the other Structure was not used for the nonconforming Use at the time the Use
became nonconforming.
3. Subdivision or structural additions
Structures used for nonconforming Uses shall not be subdivided, nor shall any Structures
be added on the premises, except for conforming Uses and Structures.
d. Discontinuance or Abandonment of a nonconforming Use
If, for a period of more than six (6) months, a nonconforming Use is documented as being disVII.
55
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
continued or a Certificate of Use for a nonconforming Use lapses, any subsequent Use shall
conform to the regulations of this Code. Provided, however, the time period shall not include any
time during which the discontinuance is caused by governmental action which impedes access
to the premises.
7.2.7 Nonconforming Lots
a. Nonconforming Lot
A nonconforming Lot may continue and may be used as provided by this section. A nonconforming
Lot is one shown on the latest recorded plat or described by deed, both as recorded in
the public records of Miami-Dade County, which met the width, length and area requirements in
effect when the Lot became of record, and which Lot would not conform to the requirements of
this Code.
b. Street or alley closure
When a Lot has become nonconforming due to a street or alley vacation or closure, the Lot may
be modified pursuant to an approval by the Director of the Public Works Department as long as
the degree of nonconformity created by the vacation or closure is not increased.
c. Rules concerning combinations of contiguous nonconforming Lots in the same ownership and
with common Frontage for T3 Transects only.
1. Combinations required
(a) If two or more Lots, or combinations of Lots and portions of Lots, with continuous Frontage
in the same ownership exist at the time of passage or amendment of this Code, and
if all or part of the Lots do not meet the requirements for Lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered an “undivided parcel” for the purposes of this Code. Except
as provided below in paragraph c.2., no portion of an undivided parcel shall be used or
sold in a manner diminishing compliance with general Transect requirements for Lot
width and area.
(b) The undivided parcel shall be considered one Lot for which only one Single-Family Residence
or duplex may be constructed, regardless of how many nonconforming Lots make
up the parcel.
(c) A unity of title, or covenant in lieu of unity of title, which complies with all applicable
requirements of the City Code shall be required on all undivided parcels prior to the issuance
of any building permits, including demolition permits.
2. Exceptions to the combination requirement
Notwithstanding paragraph c.1, where nonconforming Lots with continuous Frontage in the
same ownership exist at the time of passage or amendment of this Code, such Lots may be
developed individually, in accordance with the applicable code requirements and pursuant
to a Waiver, if such Lots individually comply with any of the following exceptions.
VII.56
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
(a) Duplex Lots restricted to Single-Family Residences
The owner of two or more adjoining nonconforming duplex Lots must by covenant (in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney) restrict the Use of the Lots to the development of
no more than one Single-Family Residence per Lot and must comply with all Miami 21
Code requirements except for minimum Lot width.
(b) The ninety percent (90%) rule
The Lots must individually comply with ninety percent (90%) of the requirements for Lot
width, area, and Principal Front Setback under the Miami 21 Code regulations.
(c) The one thousand (1,000) feet radius rule
The width or size of such nonconforming Lots must be equal to or larger than the majority
of the existing Building sites within the same Transect Zones and either within a minimum
one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the nonconforming Lot perimeter, or extending no further
than the immediate vicinity, whichever is less. “Building site” shall mean a Lot, group
of Lots or parcel upon which a Single-Family Residence or duplex is located. “Immediate
vicinity” shall mean either an area in which a parcel of land is located that is physically,
functionally or geographically identifiable as a distinct realm, place or neighborhood, or
an area within a radius of one-half mile from the nonconforming Lot, whichever is smaller.
7.2.8 Nonconforming Site Improvements
Where nonconforming site improvements exist, such as Off-street Parking and loading, access,
fences, walls, lighting, landscaping, or similar site improvements, such nonconformities may continue
and the site may be altered only as provided below.
a. No change shall be made in any nonconforming site improvement which increases the nonconformity.
Changes may be approved by Waiver, if the changes result in the same or a reduced
degree of nonconformity
b. Except in a T3 or T4-R Transect Zone or within an area of the City for which a parking trust fund
has been established and is in effect pursuant to Chapter 35 of the City Code, where existing
Off-street Parking is nonconforming to the requirements of this Code or any other City standards
to any Use permitted in the Transect Zone, Adaptive Use, shall not require the provision of additional
parking or on-site storm water retention or detention. If the prior Use of such structure
was single-family, duplex, or lodging and the site abuts a T3 Transect Zone, the provision of
additional parking shall be required as per the requirement of this Code. No modifications may
be permitted which increase the degree of the existing nonconformity. Modifications to Off-street
Parking may be approved by Waiver, and the Waiver may be conditioned on safeguards that
reduce the degree of nonconformity to the extent reasonably feasible in the circumstances of
the case.
VII.57
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
7.2.9 Nonconforming signs
The following provisions shall apply to nonconforming signs:
7.2.9.1 Removal, Repair or Replacement
All legally built Monument Signs, Freestanding Signs or Signs above a height of fifty (50) feet that
do not meet the provisions of Section 10.2, Table 15 or Section 10.3.6, shall be removed within five
(5) years or as applicable. All other legal, nonconforming Signs shall be removed within one (1) year
from original adoption of Article 10. Any modifications, repair, replacement, alteration, or Change of
Copy that does not increase the Nonconformity is permitted consistent with the Florida Building Code.
7.2.9.3 Rescission
The Zoning Administrator may rescind any permit granted under this section for failure to maintain
such Sign in appropriate condition and repair. A rescission by the Zoning Administrator may be
rendered after a sixty (60) day written notice from the City and a finding that no corrections to the
violations have been made, and the decision by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in accordance
with the procedures for appealing a Waiver.
7.2.9.4 Historic Signs
Historic Signs as designated by the Historic Preservation Board pursuant to Chapter 23 of the City
Code shall be permitted to remain and to be repaired, restored, structurally altered, or reconstructed
as provided in Chapter 23.
VII.58
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES AND NONCONFORMITIES
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
VIII.1
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
8.1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION VIII.5
8.2 ILLUSTRATION: THE THOROUGHFARE ACROSS THE TRANSECT VIII.6
8.3 PUBLIC FRONTAGES VIII.7
8.4 ILLUSTRATION: SIDEWALKS VIII.9
VIII.2
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
VIII.3
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
Amendments to Article 8
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
VIII.4
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
VIII.5
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
8.1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
This article describes the guidelines for development of Thoroughfares throughout the City. It supplements
the design standards adopted in the City of Miami Manual of Engineering Standards for Design and
Construction, maintained in its most current form at the City of Miami Department of Public Works.
Where these guidelines conflict with the Manual, the standards of the Manual shall apply.
The urban landscape is characterized by a set of interdependent elements that create a sense of place.
These include Thoroughfare type, Building type, Frontage type, and the form and disposition of landscape
and lighting. Thoroughfares provide the City with both the major part of public Open Space as well as
moving lanes for vehicles, bicycles and transit. A Thoroughfare is associated with a particular type of
movement, and is endowed with two attributes: movement type and character. The movement type of
the Thoroughfare refers to the number of vehicles that can move safely through a segment within a
given time period; it is physically manifested by the number of lanes and their width, by the centerline
radius, the curb radius, and the super-elevation of the pavement. The character of the Thoroughfare
refers to its suitability as a setting for pedestrian activities and is physically manifested by the associated
Frontage types as determined by location within the Transect.
Thoroughfares can be assigned appropriately to Transect Zones, with calibrated Right-of-Way widths,
movement types, design speed, number of travel lanes, pavement width, curb radius and Verge type.
In Zones T3 and T4, D1, D2 and D3, generally sidewalks occur at the edge of the Right-of-Way. In Zones
T5 and T6, sidewalks occur at the edge of the Right-of-Way and are given the additional dimensions of
the 10 foot setback in the First Layer.
The following additional assumptions govern the Thoroughfares shown here:
• To clear sight lines for drivers, Visibility Triangles shall be required as described in Article 3,
Section 3.8.4.1
• Pavement widths are measured inside of curb to inside of curb.
• Curb and gutter may range from 1’-6” for City Thoroughfares to 2’-0” for some County
Thoroughfares.
• Parking spaces range from 7’-0” to 9’-0” including pan; they should be wider on higher speed
Thoroughfares but may be restricted by existing Right-of-Way dimensions.
• Right turns may be taken from the parking lane.
• Tree spacing is 22’ on center to match parallel parking or 25’ on center to match Lot Line spacing.
• Tree planters have a minimum dimension of 4’ x 4’, increased where possible to a 4’ x 8’
dimension.
• Bulb-outs may be added where Thoroughfare widths are wide and design speed high, or where
sidewalks are narrow, in order to facilitate pedestrian safety.
Thoroughfares must evolve with the needs of the City. As Miami continues to grow, a Thoroughfare
may change in character reflecting new density, or conversely, a return to an historic dimension. For
instance, a continuous lawn planter may be replaced with individual tree wells for additional sidewalk
space, or a wide neighborhood street may be narrowed to control traffic intrusion.
The accommodation of bicycles and transit requires detailed response to the existing Thoroughfare
condition and thus is not illustrated specifically here.
VIII.6
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
8.2 Illustration: The Thoroughfare across the Transect
MORE RURAL
MORE URBAN
VIII.7
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
TABLE A PUBLIC FRONTAGES
R U R A L l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l T R A N S E C T l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l U R B A N
TRANSECT ZONE
Public Frontage Type
T1 T3
HW & RD
T1 T3
RD & ST
T3 T4
ST & DR
T3
RS-ST-AV-DR
T4 T5
ST-AV-BV
ST-AV-BV
a. Assembly: The principal
variables are the
type and dimension of
curbs, walkways, planters
and landscape.
b. Curb: The detailing of
the edge of the vehicular
pavement, incorporating
drainage.
-T-y-p-e-
Radius
Open Swale - 10-30 feet
Open Swale - 10-30 feet
Raised Curb - 5-20 feet
Raised Curb - 5-20 feet
Raised Curb - 5-20 feet
Raised Curb -5---2-0-f-e-e-tc.
Walkway: The pavement
dedicated exclusively to
pedestrian activity.
-T-y-p-e- Path Optional -
Path -
Sidewalk -
Sidewalk -
Sidewalk -
Sidewalk -
d. Planter: The layer
which accommodates
street trees and other
landscape.
-A-r-r-a-n-g-e-m-e-n-t- -S-p-e-c-i-e-s- -P-l-a-n-t-e-r-T-y-p-e-
-C-l-u-s-t-e-r-e-d- Mu ltiple -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-S-w-a-l-e-
-C-l-u-s-t-e-r-e-d- Mu ltiple -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-S-w-a-l-e-
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- Alte rnating -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- S ingle -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- S ingle -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
-O-p-p-o-r-t-u-n-i-s-t-i-c-,-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- -S-i-n-g-l-e- -I-n-d-i-v-i-d-u-a-l-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
T4 T5 T6 T4 T5 T6 D
Note: Appropriate types for Civic Zones shall be determined based on context and abutting Transect Zones.
8.3 Public Frontages
VIII.8
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
PLAN
LOT R.O.W.
PRIVATE FRONTAGE ? ? PUBLIC FRONTAGE
a. (HW) For Highways: This Frontage has open swales drained by percolation, bicycle trails and no parking.
The landscaping consists of the natural condition or multiple species arrayed in naturalistic clusters.
Buildings are buffered by distance or berms.
b. (RD) For Roads: This Frontage has open swales drained by percolation and a walking path or bicycle
trail along one or both sides and yield parking. The landscaping consists of multiple species arrayed in
naturalistic clusters.
c. (ST) For Street: This Frontage has raised curbs drained by inlets and sidewalks separated from the
vehicular lanes by individual or continuous planters, with parking on one or both sides. The landscaping
consists of street trees of a single or alternating species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
d. (DR) For Drive: This Frontage has raised curbs drained by inlets and a wide sidewalk or paved path
along one side, related to a greenway or waterfront. It is separated from the vehicular lanes by individual
or continuous planters. The landscaping consists of street trees of a single or alternating species aligned
in a regularly spaced allee.
e. (AV) For Avenues: This Frontage has raised curbs drained by inlets and wide sidewalks separated
from the vehicular lanes by a narrow continuous planter with parking on both sides. The landscaping
consists of a single tree species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
f. (ST) (AV) For Mixed Use Streets or Avenues: This Frontage has raised curbs drained by inlets and
very wide sidewalks along both sides separated from the vehicular lanes by separate tree wells with
grates and parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of a single tree species aligned with regular
spacing where possible.
g. (BV) For Boulevards: This Frontage has slip roads on both sides. It consists of raised curbs drained by
inlets and sidewalks along both sides, separated from the vehicular lanes by planters. The landscaping
consists of rows of a single tree species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
TABLE B PUBLIC FRONTAGES GENERAL
T5
T4
T3
T6
D
T5
T4
T3
T6
D
T5
T4
T3
T6
D
T5
T4
T3
T6
T5
T4
T3
T6
T3
T1
T3
T1
Note: Appropriate types for Civic Zones shall be determined based on context and abutting Transect Zones.
8.3 Public Frontages (continued)
VIII.9
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
8.4 Illustration: Sidewalks
IDEAL CONDITION
Sidewalk may be scored concrete. Verge may be
permeable pavement. All vertical elements shall
be located within verge and neatly aligned.
LESS THAN IDEAL EXISTING CONDITION
Sidewalk dimensions shall comply with
A.D.A. standards. Narrow sidewalks should
provide a 5’-0” X 5’-0” minimum passing
space at reasonable intervals not to exceed
200 feet. See Chapter 11- 4.3 Florida
Building Code. All vertical elements to be
located within verge and neatly aligned.
MIN 4’ MIN (+/-) (+/-) 2’ MIN (+/-) (+/-)
VIII.10
MIAMI 21
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 8. THOROUGHFARES
8.4 Illustration: Sidewalks (continued)
MIAMI 21
IX.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
9.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE IX.5
9.2 SHORT TITLE AND APPLICABILITY IX.6
9.3. PLANS REQUIRED IX.6
9.4 TREE REMOVAL AND PRESERVATION IX.8
9.5 MINIMUM STANDARDS IX.9
9.6 PLANT QUALITY IX.15
9.7 BUFFERS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR LAND USES IX.15
9.8 LANDSCAPED AREAS IN PARKING LOTS IX.15
9.9 STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION AREAS IX.16
9.10 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA IX.17
9.11 PREPARER’S CERTIFICATION OF LANDSCAPE COMPLIANCE AT TIME OF FINAL INSPECTION IX.17
9.12 LANDSCAPE ADJUSTMENT IX.17
9.13 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE IX.18
9.14 PROHIBITIONS IX.18
9.15 ENFORCEMENT IX.19
MIAMI 21
IX.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
IX.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Amendments to Article 9
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13177 05-23-2010 “Green” ordinances carried into Miami 21 10-00519
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications throughout
the Code
10-00956zt
MIAMI 21
IX.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
IX.5
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
9.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE
It is the intent of this article to establish minimum landscape standards for the City of Miami that enhance,
improve and maintain the quality of the landscape, and to:
a. Promote Florida Friendly landscaping principles through the use of drought tolerant plant species,
grouping of plant material by water requirements, the use of irrigation systems that conserve
the use of potable and non potable water supplies and restrictions on the amount of lawn areas.
Florida Friendly landscape principles also promote planting the right plant in the right place and
appropriate fertilization and mulching.
b. Use landscape material, specifically street trees, to visually define the hierarchy of roadways,
and to provide shade and a visual edge along roadways.
c. Prevent the destruction of the City’s existing tree canopy and promote its expansion.
d. Provide for the preservation of existing Natural Forest Communities and specimen sized trees
in conformance with existing City and County codes, as may be amended from time to time; reestablish
native habitat where appropriate, and encourage the appropriate use of native plant
materials in the landscape.
e. Promote the use of trees and shrubs for energy conservation by encouraging cooling through
the provision of shade and the channeling of breezes, thereby helping to offset global warming
and local heat island effects through the added absorption of carbon dioxide and reduction of
heat islands.
f. Contribute to the processes of air movement, air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water
recharge, and stormwater runoff retention, while aiding in the abatement of noise, glare, heat,
air pollution and dust generated by major roadways and intense use areas.
g. Improve the aesthetic appearance of commercial, industrial and residential development through
the use of appropriate plant materials, thereby protecting and increasing property values within
the City, and protecting designated historic landscapes.
h. Reduce the negative impacts of exotic pest plant species and prohibit the use of noxious exotic
plants which invade native plant communities.
i. Promote the use of trees to protect and buffer the effects of high winds on structures.
j. Promote proper landscaping methods and selection of plant materials to avoid problems such
as clogged sewers, cracked sidewalks and power services interruptions.
MIAMI 21
IX.6
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
9.2 SHORT TITLE AND APPLICABILITY
9.2.1 Title
a. This article shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Miami Landscape Ordinance”.
9.2.2 Applicability
a. This article shall be a minimum standard and shall apply to the City of Miami, and shall be enforced
by the City.
b. The provisions of this article shall be considered minimum standards and shall apply to all public
and private development when a permit is required, except for existing attached and detached
single family and duplex dwellings, including any future additions or expansions shall be exempt
from the provisions of this article.
c. Existing development shall only be required to comply with the street tree requirements and
parking lot buffers. Parking lot buffers will not be required if inadequate area exists which will
cause the elimination of any required parking pursuant to the City code or Zoning Ordinance. The
provisions of this subsection shall only apply where a building permit is required for expansion
of parking areas.
9.3. PLANS REQUIRED
9.3.1 General
Landscape plan(s) shall be approved by the Office of Zoning, and where required pursuant to this
code, an irrigation plan shall be approved by the Building Department prior to the issuance of any
building permit or paving for new parking areas or expansion of existing parking areas.
9.3.2 Landscape plans
a. Owner - builder single family or duplex dwelling:
Landscape plan(s) submitted for new one (1) family or duplex dwellings may be in the form of
a plot plan or drawing prepared by the owner or the owner’s representative, provided however,
developments requiring review before the Urban Development Review Board shall provide Landscape
Plans prepared by, and that bear the seal of, a landscape architect licensed to practice
in the State of Florida, or by persons authorized by Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, to prepare
landscape plans or drawings.
b. All other development:
The landscape plan for development other than provided for in 9.3.2 (a) above, shall be prepared
by, and bear the seal of, a landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Florida, or by
persons authorized by Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, to prepare landscape plans or drawings.
Preliminary landscape plans shall be provided as part of the submission for approval and shall:
1. Be drawn to scale and include property boundaries, north arrow, graphic scale, and date.
2. Include a vegetation survey, including an aerial photograph which outlines the subject site,
provided at the same scale as the landscape plan.
MIAMI 21
IX.7
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
3. Delineate existing and proposed structures, parking spaces, driveways and other vehicular
use areas, sidewalks, utilities, easements, height and voltage of power lines on the property
or adjacent property.
4. Indicate the common and scientific name and quantity of plants to be installed using the
“Landscape Legend” code format as prescribed by the Director of the Planning Department.
5. Identify all landscape features and non-living landscape materials.
6. Show all areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law, including but not limited to
trees, specimen trees, native plant species, Natural Forest Communities, native habitats and
wetlands.
7. Illustrate geologic, historic and archeological features to be preserved.
8. Depict stormwater retention/detention areas and areas excluded from maximum permitted
lawn area.
9. Document Transect Zone, Net Lot area, maximum Lot coverage, required Open Space, and
maximum permitted lawn area.
10. Complete Preparer’s Statement of Landscape Compliance form.
c. Final landscape plans submitted for permit shall include all of the above, as well as the following:
1. A fully completed, permanently affixed “Landscape Legend” as prescribed by the Director of
the Planning Department.
2. Critical layout dimensions for trees, plant beds and landscape features.
3. Method(s) to protect and relocate trees and native plant communities during construction.
4. Planting details and specifications.
5. Irrigation plans, as required by this code.
6. Irrigation details and specifications, as required.
7. Notarized Preparer’s Statement of Landscape Compliance form.
9.3.3 Vegetation Survey
A vegetation survey shall be provided for all sites at the same scale as the landscape plan. The
vegetation survey shall be accompanied by an aerial photograph which outlines the subject site
without obscuring its features. The vegetation survey shall provide the following information:
a. The accurate location and graphic representation, in relation to existing development, of all existing
trees of a minimum two (2) inch DBH or ten (10) foot height or, for native trees, of a minimum
one and one-half (1 1/2) inch DBH or eight (8) foot height, including those which are proposed
MIAMI 21
IX.8
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
to be removed, relocated or preserved on site in accordance with the requirements of this Code
and Chapter 17 of the City Code.
b. The boundaries of any Scenic Transportation Corridor, Environmental Preservation District, native
habitat, native plant community, native plant species, and/or Natural Forest Community and
associated understory that exists on site, as determined by the City of Miami Commission or the
Miami-Dade County Department of Environmental Resources Management.
c. A table showing the following information:
1. The scientific and common name of each tree, each of which shall be numbered.
2. The diameter at breast height (DBH) of each tree, or if a multiple trunk tree, the sum DBH
for all trunks.
3. An estimate of the height, canopy cover, and physical condition of each tree, and whether
specimen tree(s) exist on site.
9.3.4 Irrigation Plans
An irrigation plan shall be submitted if an irrigation system is required by this code or where an irrigation
system is to be provided regardless of code requirements. Where a landscape plan is required,
an irrigation plan shall be submitted concurrently.
a. For a new one-family or duplex dwelling the irrigation plan may be indicated on a plot plan or a
separate drawing prepared by the owner or the owner’s agent indicating area(s) to be irrigated,
location and specifications of lines and heads and pump specifications.
b. All other development other than those provided in a subsection 9.3.4 (a) above shall:
1. Be drawn on a base plan at the same scale as landscape plan(s).
2. Delineate landscape areas, major landscape features, and hydrozones.
3. Delineate existing and proposed structures, parking areas or other vehicular use areas, access
aisles, sidewalks, driveways, the location of utilities and easements, and similar features,
4. Include water source, design operating pressure and flow rate per zone, total volume required
for typical depths of application, and application rate.
5. Include locations of pipes, controllers, valves, sprinklers, back flow prevention devices, rain
switches or soil moisture sensors, and electrical supply.
6. Include irrigation details.
9.4 TREE REMOVAL AND PRESERVATION
No person and no agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, move
or effectively destroy through damaging any tree situated on any real property as described in Chapter
MIAMI 21
IX.9
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
17 of the City Code, without first obtaining approval and a tree removal permit. No permit for development
activity shall be issued until it has been determined that no tree removal permit is required or that
a valid tree removal permit has been issued in compliance with this article. The City of Miami Code
Enforcement Department is responsible for administering and enforcing these provisions in accordance
with Chapter 17 of the City Code.
9.5 MINIMUM STANDARDS
The following standards shall be considered minimum requirements unless otherwise indicated:
9.5.1 Lawn Area (turf)
a. Grass areas shall be planted in species well adapted to localized growing conditions in Miami-
Dade County. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydromulched, or seeded except
that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than
solid sod or grass seed is used, overseeding shall be sown for immediate effect and protection
until coverage is otherwise achieved.
b. Exclusions from maximum permitted lawn areas:
1. Stabilized grassed area used for parking;
2. Grassed areas designated on landscape plans and actively used for sports, playgrounds or
picnic areas;
3. Grassed areas in the right-of-way;
4. Stormwater retention/detention areas planted in grasses which are very drought tolerant, as
referenced in the Landscape Manual, as well as tolerant to wet soils.
c. Maximum permitted lawn area for all zoning districts is referenced in Table A. Very drought tolerant
grasses and low growing native plants, including grasses and forbs, as referenced in the
Landscape Manual, may be used as groundcover beyond the maximum permitted grass area
specified in Table A.
9.5.2 Irrigation
a. All newly-planted and relocated plant material shall be watered by temporary or permanent irrigation
systems until such time as they are established and subsequently on an as needed basis
to prevent stress and die off in compliance with existing water restrictions.
b. Irrigation shall be prohibited within native plant communities and Natural Forest communities,
except for temporary systems needed to establish newly planted material. Temporary irrigation
systems shall be disconnected immediately after establishment of plant communities.
c. Irrigation systems shall be designed, operated, and maintained to:
1. Meet the needs of the plants in the landscape
MIAMI 21
IX.10
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
2. Conserve water by allowing differential operation schedules based on hydrozone.
3. Consider soil, slope and other site characteristics in order to minimize water waste, including
overspray or overflow on to impervious surfaces and other non-vegetated areas, and off-site
runoff.
4. Minimize free flow conditions in case of damage or other mechanical failure
5. Use low trajectory spray heads, and/or low volume water distributing or application devices.
6. Maximize uniformity, considering factors such as:
i. Emitter types,
ii. Head spacing,
iii. Sprinkler pattern, and
iv. Water pressure at the emitter.
7. Use the lowest quality water feasible (graywater shall be used where approved systems are
available.)
8. Rain switches or other devices, such as soil moisture sensors, shall be used with automatic
controls.
9. Operate only during hours and on days permitted under South Florida Water Management
District rules.
10. Where feasible, drip irrigation or micro-sprinklers shall be used.
11. During dry periods, irrigation application rates of between one (1) and one and one-half (1
½) inches per week are recommended for turf areas.
12. If an irrigation system is not provided, a hose bib shall be provided within seventy-five (75)
feet of any landscape area.
9.5.3 Trees
a. Tree Size
All trees, except street trees, shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet high and have a minimum
caliper of two (2) inches at time of planting, except that thirty (30) percent of the tree requirement
may be met by native species with a minimum height of ten (10) feet and a minimum caliper of
one and one-half (1 1/2) inches at time of planting.
b. Street tree size and spacing
Street trees shall be of a species typically grown in Miami-Dade County which normally mature
to a height of at least twenty (20) feet. Street trees shall have a clear trunk of four (4) feet, an
overall height of fifteen (15) feet and a minimum caliper of three (3) inches at time of planting, and
MIAMI 21
IX.11
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
shall be provided along all roadways at a maximum average spacing of thirty (30) feet on center,
except as otherwise provided in this Article. The thirty (30) foot average spacing requirement for
multiple single family units and townhouse shall be based on the total lineal footage of roadway
for the entire project and not based on individual Lot widths. Street trees shall be placed within
the swale area or shall be placed on private property where demonstrated to be necessary due
to right-of-way obstructions as determined by the Public Works Department. Street trees planted
along private roadways shall be placed within seven (7) feet of the edge of roadway pavement
and/or where present within seven (7) feet of the sidewalk.
c. Power lines
Where the height and location of overhead power-lines requires the planting of low growing
trees, street trees shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet, a minimum caliper of one and
one-half (1 1/2) inches at time of planting, and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Single trunk trees clear of lateral branches to four (4) feet and/or multi trunk trees or tree/
shrubs, as referenced in the Landscape Manual, cleared of foliage to a height of four (4) feet.
2. A maximum average spacing of twenty-five (25) feet on center.
3. Maturing to a height and spread not encroaching within five (5) feet of overhead power distribution
lines.
4. Under high voltage (50kV and above) transmission lines installed independent of underbuilt
distribution lines, tree height and spread shall not exceed the minimum approach distances
specified in the current ANSI (American National Standards Institute) Z133.1 Standards, as
referenced in the Landscape Manual.
9.5.4 Palms
Palms which meet all of the following requirements shall count as a required street tree on the basis
of one (1) palm per tree.
a. Minimum canopy of fifteen (15) feet at maturity.
b. Provided at an average maximum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet on center.
c. A single trunk palm species with a minimum ten (10) inches DBH and a minimum of eight (8)
feet of clear wood or gray wood.
d. Queen palms (Syagrus romanzoffiana) shall not be allowed as street trees.
9.5.5 Minimum Number of Trees
The minimum number of required trees, in addition to street trees, is referenced in Table A.
MIAMI 21
IX.12
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
*Requirements determined by most restrictive abutting Transect Zone
TABLE A
Zoning District
Number of Trees Required Maximum Lawn Area
Per Acre of Net
Lot Area
Per Lot Percent of Req.
Open Space
Sub-Urban
T3-R 3 50%
T3-L 3 50%
T3-O 3 50%
Urban General
T4-R 28 40%
T4-L 28 40%
T4-O 28 40%
Urban Center
T5-R 22 20%
T5-L 22 20%
T5-O 22 20%
Urban Core
T6-R 22 20%
T6-L 22 20%
T6-O 22 20%
District
D1 22 20%
D2 15 20%
D3 15 20%
Civic
CI * *%
CS N/A N/A
MIAMI 21
IX.13
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Where a conflict exists, the requirement imposing the higher standard shall apply.
a. Urban Center and Urban Core Transect Zones. In Urban Center or Urban Core Transect Zones,
if the minimum number of trees required cannot be reasonably planted on the ground level of
the subject property, the applicant may plant twenty-five percent (25%) of the required trees on
upper levels such as open recreation areas or exposed decks.
b. Off-site tree planting. If the minimum number of trees required cannot be reasonably planted on
the subject property, the applicant may enter into an agreement with the city, as approved by
the department, to plant the excess number of required trees on public property within the City
Commission district of the subject property.
c. Tree trust fund. If the minimum number of trees required cannot be reasonably planted on the
subject property, but as an alternative to the off-site tree planting option provided in subsection
9.5.5.b, the applicant shall contribute into the city’s tree trust fund the sum of one thousand dollars
($1000.00) for each two (2) inch caliper tree required in accordance with Table A of section
9.5.5. A city resident with current proof of residency and homestead status shall contribute five
hundred ($500.00) for each two (2) inch caliper tree required in accordance with Table A of section
9.5.5.
d. Grassed areas that are to be used for organized sports such as football and soccer or other
similar sports or playgrounds, that are clearly identified on a landscape plan shall not be counted
toward calculating tree and maximum lawn area requirements.
e. Trees shall be planted to provide shade to residential structures of a height of thirty-five (35) feet
or less. At least two (2) required lot trees shall be positioned in the energy conservation zone as
defined herein. All exterior air conditioning units, except for air conditioning units placed on the
roof, shall be shaded by trees and/or shrubs as referenced in the Landscape Manual.
f. Palms of a fourteen (14) foot minimum overall height and minimum caliper of three (3) inches
at time of planting shall count as a required tree on the basis of two (2) palms-per tree, except
as provided herein for palms used as of street trees. No more than thirty (30) percent of the
minimum tree requirements shall be palms.
g. Existing trees required by law to be preserved on site and that meet the requirements of Section
9.5.3, may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum tree requirements.
h. Prohibited and controlled tree species shall not be counted toward fulfilling minimum tree requirements.
Prohibited trees shall be removed from the site after obtaining approval of a tree removal
permit.
i. No less than thirty (30) percent of the required trees and/or palms shall be native species.
j. No less than fifty (50) percent of the required trees shall be low maintenance and drought tolerant
species.
k. Eighty (80) percent of the trees shall be listed in the Miami-Dade Landscape Manual, the Miami-
Dade Street Tree Master Plan and/or the University of Florida’s Low-Maintenance Landscape
Plants for South Florida list.
MIAMI 21
IX.14
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
l. In order to prevent adverse environmental impacts to existing native plant communities, cabbage
palms (Sabal palmetto) that are harvested from the wild shall not be used to satisfy minimum
landscaping requirements. Only existing cabbage palms (Sabal palmetto) which are rescued
from government approved donor sites, transplanted within the site, or commercially grown from
seed shall be counted towards the minimum tree and native plant requirements.
m. When trees are planted within the right-of-way, the owners of land adjacent to the areas where
street trees are planted must maintain those areas including the trees, plants and sod, using
pruning methods specified in this Code. A covenant executed by those owners is required, or
a special taxing district must be created to maintain these areas. Where the State, County or
municipality determines that the planting of trees and other landscape material is not appropriate
in the public right-of-way, they may require that said trees and landscape material be placed on
private property.
n. Consideration shall be given to the selection of trees, plants and planting site to avoid serious
problems such as clogged sewers, cracked sidewalks, and power service interruptions.
9.5.6 Shrubs
a. All shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height when measured immediately
after planting. Shrubs shall be provided at ratio of ten (10) per required tree. No less than Thirty
(30) percent of the shrubs shall be native species and no less than fifty (50) percent shall be
low maintenance and drought tolerant. Eighty (80) percent of the shrubs shall be listed in the
Miami-Dade Landscape Manual, the Miami-Dade Street Tree Master Plan and/or the University
of Florida’s Low-Maintenance Landscape Plants for South Florida list.
b. When used as a visual screen, buffer, or hedge, shrubs shall be planted at a maximum average
spacing of thirty (30) inches on center or if planted at a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches,
shall have a maximum average spacing of forty-eight (48) inches on center and shall be maintained
so as to form a continuous, unbroken and solid visual screen within one (1) year after time
of planting. Shrubs used as a buffer, visual screen, or hedge need not be of the same species.
9.5.7 Vines
Vines shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches in length immediately after planting and may be
used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified.
Planting of perimeter walls with vines is recommended as a deterrent to painting of graffiti.
9.5.8 Ground Cover
Ground cover plants used in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as
to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one (1) year after planting.
9.5.9 Mulch
a. Mulches shall be applied and maintained in accordance with the most recent edition of the Florida
Yards & Neighborhoods Handbook titled “A Guide to Florida Friendly Landscaping” by the University
of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences (UF/IFAS) and available online at
MIAMI 21
IX.15
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
http://www.floridayards.org/landscape/FYN-Handbook.pdf.
b. Cypress mulch shall not be used because its harvest degrades cypress wetlands.
9.6 PLANT QUALITY
9.6.1 Plants installed pursuant to this Code shall conform to, or exceed, the minimum standards for “Florida
Number One” as provided in the most current edition of “Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants,
Part I and II, “ prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
9.6.2 Trees installed pursuant to this Code shall have one (1) primary vertical trunk and secondary branches
free of included bark up to a height of six (6) feet above natural grade.
9.7 BUFFERS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR LAND USES
Where dissimilar land uses exist on adjacent properties, and where such areas will not be entirely visually
screened by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, that portion shall be provided
with a buffer consisting of a six (6) foot wall or fence with a life expectancy of at least ten (10) years,
or shrubs which normally grow to a minimum height of six (6) feet. Where chain link fencing is used,
shrubs shall also be required. Said buffer shall form a continuous screen between the dissimilar land
uses within one (1) year after planting. Buffers screening dissimilar uses shall include trees planted at a
maximum average spacing of thirty (30) feet on center within a minimum five (5) foot landscaped strip.
9.8 LANDSCAPED AREAS IN PARKING LOTS
All required and/or provided surface off-street parking facilities and parking lots shall be landscaped in
accordance with the following standards:
a. The total area of all interior landscaped areas shall not be less than ten (10) square feet for each
parking space provided on the site.
b. In order to maximize the distribution of shade, trees shall be planted throughout the interior of
the parking lot at a minimum density of one (1) tree per eighty (80) square feet of landscaped
area, exclusive of parking lot buffers.
c. A landscaped area with a tree shall be required at the end of all parking rows, particularly when
abutting an aisle or building. Planting areas for each tree shall have a minimum area of fifty (50)
square feet and a minimum width of five (5) feet, exclusive of the curb dimension, and shall be
planted or covered with other landscape materials.
d. For each row of parking there shall be landscaped areas with trees within the first ninety (90)
linear feet, and one (1) landscaped area provided with a tree for each additional ninety (90)
linear feet. When a minimum six (6) foot clear landscape area is provided between two rows of
parking, the landscape areas with trees every ninety (90) linear feet is not required. This six (6)
foot wide landscape area shall be planted with trees no greater than thirty (30) feet on-center.
e. For each row of parallel parking there shall be a minimum of two (2) landscape areas with trees
MIAMI 21
IX.16
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
within the first seventy-five (75) linear feet, and one (1) landscape area with a tree for each
additional seventy-five (75) linear feet. The landscape areas shall be equally spaced wherever
possible.
f. All required trees shall be of an approved shade tree variety which shall attain a minimum mature
crown spread greater than fifteen (15) feet.
g. All parking stalls, access aisles and driveways in a residential area shall be separated from any
building by a minimum of thirty (30) inches and landscaped with shrubbery, ground-cover, or
other suitable material.
h. All parking lots adjacent to a right-of-way or private street shall be screened by a continuous
planting and/or three (3) foot high wall with a seven (7) foot landscaped strip incorporating said
planting and/or wall on private property.
i. A landscape area that is a minimum of five (5) feet in width shall be provided when parking stalls,
access aisles, or driveways are located along any side or rear lot line. The landscape areas shall
be planted with a continuous hedge, and with trees no greater than thirty (30) feet on center, when
the landscaped area does not abut a parking row. In certain instances, a solid and continuous
masonry wall, a minimum of five (5) feet in height, whose surfaces are stuccoed, painted, tiled,
or textured in such a way as to provide a decorative effect if approved, may be used in lieu of
the landscape area.
j. These requirements are in addition to any applicable required open space as provided in this
Code.
9.9 STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION AREAS
a. Stormwater retention/detention areas shall be designed to maximize the perimeter dimension,
where feasible.
b. Stormwater retention/detention areas shall be planted throughout with native herbaceous facultative
plants, with the following exceptions:
1. In areas that are designated and actively used for play and/or picnic areas, overflow parking,
or sports shall be planted with grasses which are very drought tolerant, as referenced in the
Landscape Manual, as well as tolerant to wet soils.
2. In areas where the minimum required stormwater retention capacity would be adversely affected.
c. The minimum required number of native herbaceous facultative plants shall be one (1) plant per
square foot of retention/ detention area, including the slope. Minimum required herbaceous plant
container size shall be one and one-half (1 1/2) inches, commonly, referred to as a liner. Sprigging,
seeding, plugging, hydro-mulching or sodding with native herbaceous facultative plants
grown from local seed sources may be used in lieu of liners. Herbaceous plants shall be planted
in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within
one (1) year after planting.
MIAMI 21
IX.17
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
d. Native facultative trees or shrubs may be used in lieu of native herbaceous facultative plants,
provided that the minimum required stormwater retention capacity is not adversely affected.
9.10 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA
All landscape plans shall be reviewed by the Office of Zoning. Where existing trees lie within Natural
Forest Communities, Environmental Preservation Districts, and/or Scenic Transportation Corridors,
landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Historic Preservation Division of the Planning
Department as prescribed in Chapter 17 of the City Code. Landscape plans shall be reviewed in accordance
with Section 9.1 and the guidelines and illustrations provided in the Landscape Manual as well as
the Guide to Florida Friendly Landscaping provided by the Florida Yards and Neighborhoods Program.
9.11 PREPARER’S CERTIFICATION OF LANDSCAPE COMPLIANCE AT TIME OF FINAL INSPECTION
a. A notarized Preparer’s Certification of Landscape Compliance form bearing the original letterhead
of the designing firm and licensing number shall be submitted to and approved by the Office of
Zoning prior to issuance of any Certificate of Use or Certificate of Occupancy. The notarized
Preparer’s Certification of Landscape Compliance form shall contain a statement, signed and
sealed by the landscape architect or by person(s) authorized to prepare plans by Chapter 481,
Florida Statutes, who prepared the approved plans, that the landscape and irrigation plans
have been implemented and that all requirements of this article have been met. Any changes or
substitutions to the approved plan shall be approved by the original designing firm prior to the
implementation of said changes and substitutions. All changes or substitutions to the approved
plan shall be noted on all copies. Changes and substitutions of plant material shall be of similar
quality, quantity and size, as originally approved and shall be in compliance with the intent and
requirements of this code.
b. For a new single family or duplex residence on its own lot or applicable existing development, the
owner or owner’s agent may certify in writing that landscape and irrigation have been installed
according to approved plan(s).
c. The Planning Department and the Office of Zoning shall have the right to inspect all projects for
compliance prior to issuance of a Certificate of Use or Certificate of Occupancy.
9.12 LANDSCAPE ADJUSTMENT
Unless otherwise required by this Code, as amended, the Code of the City of Miami, as amended, or
the Florida Building Code, as amended; Landscape Ordinance requirements may be modified through
the Waiver process, with mandatory referral to the Planning Director.
a. Criteria to be considered in granting Waivers of Landscape Ordinance Requirements
In addition to the considerations listed in Article 4, Table 12 and elsewhere in this Code, the following
shall also apply to the review of Waiver permits pursuant to this Section:
1. Waivers of Landscape Ordinance requirements may be granted when, to do so promotes the
intent of the particular Transect Zone where the proposal is located; and help mitigate any
potential adverse effect of a specific proposal whose implementation is found to be in comMIAMI
21
IX.18
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
pliance with the intent and findings of a commission approved Planning study or conceptual
plan for the subject area.
2. Waivers of Landscape Ordinance requirements may be granted when, the observance of
applicable guides and standards for which the Waiver is being requested would put the proposed
project into a variance situation which is against the public interest.
b. Specific findings required
Specific findings shall be made by the Planning Department which establish how the above criteria
are met. Additionally, any conditions, restrictions and limitations deemed appropriate by the
Planning Director shall be implemented in order to ensure compliance with the considerations
set forth above, as well as in Article 4, Table 12 of this Code.
9.13 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE
a. An owner is responsible to ensure that landscaping required to be planted pursuant to this
chapter is installed in compliance with the Landscape requirements; maintained as to present
a healthy, vigorous, and neat appearance free from refuse and debris; and sufficiently fertilized
and watered to maintain the plant material in a healthy condition.
b. If any tree or plant dies which is being used to satisfy current landscape code requirements, such
tree or plant shall be replaced with the same landscape material or an approved substitute.
c. Trees shall be pruned in the following manner:
1. All cuts shall be clean, flush and at junctions, laterals or crotches. All cuts shall be made as
close as possible to the trunk or parent limb, without cutting into the branch collar or leaving
a protruding stub.
2. Removal of dead wood, crossing branches, weak or insignificant branches, and sucker shall
be accomplished simultaneously without any reduction in crown.
3. Cutting of lateral branches that results in the removal of more than one-third (1/3) of all
branches on one (1) side of a tree shall only be allowed if required for hazard reduction or
clearance pruning.
4. Lifting of branches or tree thinning shall be designed to distribute over half of the tree mass
in the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the tree.
5. No more than one-third (1/3) of a tree’s living canopy shall be removed within a one (1) year
period.
6. Trees shall be pruned according to the current ANSI A300 Standards and the Landscape
Manual.
9.14 PROHIBITIONS
a. Prohibited plant species. Prohibited species shall not be planted and shall be removed from any
MIAMI 21
IX.19
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
site which is subject to the requirements of this article.
b. Controlled plant species. Controlled species shall not be planted within five hundred (500) feet
of a Natural Forest Community or native habitats as defined herein.
c. West Indian Mahogany. West Indian Mahogany, Swietenia mahagoni, shall not be planted within
five hundred (500) feet of a rockland hammock or pine rockland.
d. Tree abuse. Tree abuse is prohibited. Abused trees shall not be counted toward fulfilling the
minimum tree requirements.
9.15 ENFORCEMENT
a. The Code Enforcement Department shall withhold approval of a final building inspection prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Use or Certificate of Occupancy until a notarized Preparer’s
Certification of Landscape Compliance form has been submitted and approved.
b. The Code Enforcement Department shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this
Code and is authorized to issue cease and desist orders and citations to the current owner and
the Contractor, if applicable, for violations.
c. Failure to install or maintain landscaping according to the terms of this article shall constitute
a violation of this Code. Also, failure to plant, preserve, or maintain each individual tree shall
be considered to be a separate violation of this Code. Each day in which either landscaping or
individual trees are not installed or maintained according to the terms of this article shall constitute
a continuing and separate violation of this Code. Further, failure by the current owner or the
Contractor to provide the required landscaping and watering of such landscaping within ninety
(90) days after the South Florida Water Management District ends the emergency Phase II and
Phase III water restrictions shall constitute a violation of this Code.
MIAMI 21
IX.20
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
ARTICLE 9. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
X.1
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
10.1 GENERAL X.5
10.2 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS X11
TABLE 15 SPECIFIC SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS X.13
10.3 SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS X.23
MIAMI 21
X.2
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
X.3
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
Amendments to Article 10
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE ID
13464 05-22-2014 Updated Sign regulations 12-00941zt1
MIAMI 21
X.4
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
MIAMI 21
X.5
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
10.1 . GENERAL
10.1.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to provide a comprehensive system of regulations for Signs visible from
the public right-of-way and to provide a set of standards designed to optimize communication and design
quality of Signs. Through these regulations, the City of Miami will uphold the United States Constitution
and State of Florida Constitution, conserve and protect scenic beauty, regulate signage for the purpose
of visual clutter, and preserve the aesthetic character of the City. In addition, special permits which may
have been approved under previous Ordinance 11000 or under previous sections of this ordinance may
also contain conditions that regulate Signs on certain properties. No Signs or advertising devices of any
kind or nature shall be erected or maintained on any premises or affixed to the inside or outside of any
Structure to be visible from the public right-of-way except as specifically provided for by these regulations.
10.1.1.1 INTENT:
a. Promote the effectiveness of Signs by preventing their improper placement, deterioration and
excessive size and number.
b. Regulate and control Signs and Sign Structures in order to prevent property damage and personal
injury resulting from improper construction or poor maintenance.
c. Promote the free and safe flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and
property damage attributable to cluttered, distracting, or illegal signage.
d. Control and reduce visual clutter and visual blight.
e. Prevent any deleterious effects arising from the unrestricted use of Signs by providing a reasonable,
flexible, efficient, comprehensive and enforceable set of regulations that will foster a high
quality, aesthetic, visual environment for the City, enhancing it as a place to live, visit and do
business.
f. Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and
beautification of streets and other public Structures and Open Spaces shall be protected by
exercising reasonable control over the character and design of Sign Structures.
g. Address the business community’s need for adequate business identification and advertising
communication by improving the readability, and therefore, the effectiveness of Signs by preventing
their improper placement, over-concentration, excessive Height, area, and bulk.
h. Coordinate the placement and physical dimensions of Signs within the different Transects.
i. Protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing
the appearance of the Streetscapes that affect the image of the City.
j. Acknowledge the differing design concerns and needs for Signs in certain specialized areas
such as tourist areas.
MIAMI 21
X.6
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
k. Require that Signs be properly maintained for safety and visual appearance.
l. Protect non-Commercial speech such that any Sign allowed herein may contain any lawful
non-Commercial message, so long as said Sign complies with the size, Height, Area
location and other requirements of these regulations.
m. Provide no more restrictions on speech than necessary to implement the purpose and
intent of this section.
These regulations are specifically intended to be severable such that if any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of these regulations is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions of these regulations.
10.1.2 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING SIGN PERMIT
10.1.2.1 Permits required for Signs except those exempted.
Except for classes of Signs exempted from permit requirements as specified in Section 10.1.3, all Signs
shall require permits. Applications for such permits shall be made separately or in combination with
applications for other permits as appropriate to the circumstances of the case and shall provide at a
minimum the information as specified in Section 7.1.2.9.
10.1.3 SIGNS EXEMPTED FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
The following types of Signs, and Changeable Copy Signs, are exempted from permit requirements
because such Signs are needed in order to convey messages to protect lives, give direction, identify
public access ways, and protect civil rights.
Such Signs shall comply with size and location requirements as set forth in these regulations for the
specific Transect Zone in which they are to be located.
a. Address, Notice, Directional or Warning Signs. No Sign permit shall be required for Address,
Notice, Directional or Warning Signs except as otherwise required in this section. Any Sign that
exceeds the area below is subject to Building Identification criteria within Section 10.2, Table 15.
1. Address Signs, not to exceed one (1) for each Dwelling Unit or other Use for each Lot Line
adjacent to a street. Each address sign shall be limited to two (2) square feet in Area.
2. Notice, Directional or Warning Signs, not to exceed one (1) for each Dwelling Unit or other
Use for each Lot Line adjacent to a street. Each Notice, Directional and Warning Sign shall
be limited to two (2) square feet in Area.
b. Cornerstones, memorials, or tablets. Due to their historic or civic significance to the community,
no Sign permit is required for cornerstones, memorials, or tablets when part of any masonry
surface or constructed of bronze or other incombustible and durable material. Signs shall be
MIAMI 21
X.7
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
limited to identification and date of construction of Buildings, persons present at dedication or
involved in Development or construction, or significant historical events relating to the premises
or development.
c. U. S. Mail delivery receptacles. No Sign permit shall be required for delivery receptacles for U.S.
mail which have been approved for use by postal authorities.
d. Flags. Limited to one (1) per property and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. National
flags, state flags and flags of political subdivisions within the State of Florida shall not be subject
to these regulations; however, in no case shall more than three (3) flags be flown per property.
The flags permitted by this subsection shall not be used in mass to circumvent this subsection
by using said flags primarily as an advertising device.
e. Celebratory Flags and Banners. A Sign permit shall not be required for celebratory flags and
Banners located within Regional Activity Complexes related to community wide celebrations or
commemorations. Such Signs shall not include any form of commercial advertising, shall not
be located within any public right-of-way, and shall be removed within thirty (30) days of such
event.
f. Vehicle Signs. No Sign permit shall be required for display of Signs on automobiles, trucks,
buses, trailers, or other vehicles when used for purposes of transportation.
g. Changeable Copy Sign. No Sign permit shall be required for routine Change of Copy on a
Changeable Copy Sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and periodic changes,
provided such change of copy does not result in increase of total Sign Area beyond permissible
limits and meets all other requirements of this Code and the City Code. Signs with the capability
of content change by means of manual or remote input include the following types:
1. Manually Activated - Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
manually on a Display Surface.
2. Electronically Activated - Changeable sign whose message, copy or content can be remotely
programmed electronically.
10.1.4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The following general requirements and limitations shall apply with regard to Signs, in addition to provisions
appearing elsewhere in this Code. No Variance or Waiver from these provisions are permitted
unless otherwise stated within Article 10:
a. Any Sign allowed herein may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial
message, so long as said Sign complies with the size, Height, Area, location and
other requirements of this Code and the City Code.
b. False and misleading Signs shall be unlawful to post.
c. Illuminated Sign Requirements:
MIAMI 21
X.8
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
1. Illuminated Signs containing functions of Animated Signs are prohibited. Illuminated Signs
within a T1, T3, T4, T5-R, T6-R or CS Transect Zone shall be reviewed by process of
Warrant as per Table 15. Illuminated Signs in all other Transect Zones shall be allowed by
Right subject to the regulations specified within Table 15.
2. Signs may be Internally Illuminated or Indirectly Illuminated from any external source. Illuminated
Sign fixtures or luminaries shall not shine directly on adjacent properties, motorists
or pedestrians. Illumination will provide visibility to the Sign and eliminate glare and
intensity which might pose safety hazards to drivers and pedestrians.
3. Signs that are Internally Illuminated may not exceed a maximum brightness level of 0.3
foot candles above ambient light as measured at a preset distance depending on Sign
size. Measuring distance shall be calculated by taking the square root of the product of the
Sign Area multiplied by one-hundred (Example using a 12 square foot Illuminated Sign:
v[12x100] = 34.6 feet measuring distance). All applicants shall provide a written certification
from the Sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to
exceed the levels specified.
4. No Illuminated Sign shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any portion of a
T1, T3, T4-R, T5-R or T6-R property, as measured along the street Frontage on the same
side of the street, or as measured in a straight line to a property across the street, unless
Signs are specifically authorized by Warrant as per Table 15.
d. Structural members of all Signs, including supports, electrical conduit and receptacle boxes, or
any other operational devices shall be covered, painted, or designed in such a manner as to be
visually unnoticeable.
e. Devices used to attract attention such as blinking or flashing lights, streamer lights, pennants,
banners, balloons, streamers, and all fluttering and spinning devices shall be prohibited.
f. Portable Signs shall be prohibited, including those that are tied down with metal straps, chaining,
or otherwise temporarily anchored to an existing Structure or other similar method of anchoring.
g. Roof Signs shall be prohibited in all Transects. No Sign shall extend above the roof line or
parapet wall.
h. Any Sign issued a Certificate of Appropriateness that meets the criteria of Section 23-6.4 of the
City Code may be exempted from these Sign limitations through a Warrant process..
i. All Class A and Class C Signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 62 of the City Code.
j. All Signs shall comply with the vision clearance standards within this Code.
k. Master Sign packages or vertical shopping center Signs approved under zoning
ordinance 11000 or Special Area Plan Sign packages adopted under the provisions
of Article 3, Section 3.9.1 of this Code shall be governed by approved condiMIAMI
21
X.9
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
tions and may be modified through the provisions of Section 10.3.7 of this Article.
10.1.5 REMOVAL, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF SIGNS
a. All nonconforming Signs shall be subject to the provisions within Article 7, Section 7.2
b. Repair or Maintenance of Signs; Decrepit or dilapidated Signs.
1. All Signs shall be properly maintained in a safe and legible condition at all times. Signs that are
not properly maintained (whether or not determined to be unsafe as provided by the Florida
Building Code) shall be removed, repaired, or replaced. No Zoning permit shall be required
for such maintenance, however a permit may be required by other departments or agencies.
2. No Zoning Sign permit shall be required for routine maintenance on a Sign, providing such
maintenance does not result in alteration of the Sign as originally permitted. Any Sign allowed
herein may contain, in-lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful non-Commercial message,
so long as said Sign complies with the size, height, location and other requirements of
this Code.
c. Removal, repair or replacement of any Sign with regard to any official order as indicated below.
1. Signs otherwise lawfully permitted, except for the condition or circumstance leading to an order
issued by any official City or County Board with applicable jurisdiction in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the City Code, the Florida Building Code or this Code, shall require
repair or replacement within a stated time, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of the
order, or removal prior to the expiration of such period. No Zoning permit shall be required
for such repair or replacment, however a permit may be required by other departments or
agencies.
2. In the event that an official order is issued for a having a Sign for a discontinued use for a
period of thirty (30) days or longer, all signs identifying the use are to be removed from the
site or in the case of a painted Sign, painted out. Sign removal shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the property.
3. The building official or Code compliance officer may issue a written notice to the responsible
party of any Sign found to be unsafe. The written notice shall specify either the repair or removal
of the Sign within the time specified in the notice by the responsible party. The building official
or code compliance officer shall serve this notice on the responsible party in accordance with
the Florida Building Code and City Code and the responsible party may seek review of such
decisions as provided in the Florida Building Code and City Code.
d. Change or Replacement of a Sign not due to any official order for removal.
1. Replacement of any Sign that is not a Changeable Copy Sign shall conform to Section 10.2
Table 15 of this Code.
MIAMI 21
X.10
ARTICLE 10. SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
2. Class B Signs previously associated with the premises on which erected, but no longer there
or otherwise bearing other obsolete matter, shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the
time such activity ceases.
3. A twenty percent (20%) increase in Sign Area may be allowed, by Waiver, for all Freestanding
Signs replaced with a Monument Sign. Such Monument Sign shall conform with Table 15 and
shall not be cumulative with any other increase in Sign Area.
MIAMI 21
X.11
ARTICLE 10. SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
10.2 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
Table 15 Function:
The following tables illustrate Sign design standards for specific Sign types allowed within
Restricted(R), Limited(L) and Open(O) categories of specified Transect Zones. Calculated
Aggregate Area maximum shall not be exceeded for any establishment or Sign type. Sign Area
calculation shall be determined by the establishment length fronting a street multiplied by the
Aggregate Area Ratio specific to each Transect. In review and approval of Signs, the City shall
ensure compliance with all applicable sections of the Florida Building Code and ensure that the
Signs comply with this Code including:
1. Size and area
2. Location standards
3. Sign placement
4. Illumination Sign regulations.
BUILDING SIGN TYPES
Disclaimer: The following image serves to illustrate the types of building signs and not the
placement, design or size of signs for any particular site.
7
8
2
4
1
5
3
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
WALL SIGN
SIGN TYPE
WINDOW SIGN
PROJECTING SIGN
HANGING SIGN
AWNING SIGN
MONUMENT SIGN
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
(May include Wall,
Hanging or Monument
Signs)
MIAMI 21
X.12
ARTICLE 10. SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
10.2.1 SIGN MEASUREMENT CALCULATIONS
Sign Placement
a. All Signs, excluding Monument Signs placed
between Average Sidewalk Elevation and fifty
(50) feet height above sidewalk shall be subject
to Table 15 Sign Design Standards.
b. Signs above fifty (50) feet shall comply with
section 10.3.6 of this Code.
c. All Monument Signs shall be placed along the
Principal Frontage within the Base Building Line
of the establishment site. No establishment shall
bear more than two (2) Monument Signs on a
single Frontage. Signs that are located in the
First Layer shall not disrupt pedestrian activity
and shall respect a clearance of ten (10) feet
from back-of-curb. Additional Vision Clearance
regulations shall be applied as per Section 3.8.4.
d. Signs shall not exceed a tenant’s occupied establishment.
e. Monument Signs shall not be located within the
public right-of-way unless permitted by Public
Works.
Sign Area
a. Aggregate Area Calculation
Walls fronting a street between Average Sidewalk
Elevation and fifty (50) feet height above sidewalk:
Aggregate Area = (total linear frontage) x
(aggregate area ratio).See Table 15 for specific
signage calculation details.
b. Sign Area: See Article 1, Section 1.3 Definitions
of Signs
c. Monument Sign Area
Monument Signs which may include up to two
(2) Display Surfaces. The area of the Sign shall
be the area of the largest Display Surface that
is visible from any single direction. Total Sign
Area shall not exceed forty (40) square feet for
T3 and T4 Transect Zones and one hundred
(100) square feet for T5, T6, D and C Transect
Zones excluding embellishments.
d. Monument Base
The base of the Sign Structure shall not be
calculated into the Display Surface calculation.
Sign base width shall not vary by more than 20%
of the total Sign Display Surface width.
SIGN HEIGHT PLACEMENT
SIGN SETBACK PLACEMENT
SIGN AREA
MONUMENT SIGN AREA
X.13
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLES 15 SPECIFIC SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS WALL WINDOW PROJECTING HANGING AWNING
T3
R L O R L O R L O R L O R L O
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION
Aggregate Area Ratio 0.25 sq.ft. per linear Frontage See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area
Aggregate Area 24 sq.ft. max per Frontage 20% of total glass area 18 sq.ft. max 3 sq.ft. max per frontage Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning
Width 50% of linear Frontage 12 in. max. 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average
Sidewalk Elevation)
See Section 10.2.1 of Article 10 See Section 10.2.1 of Article 10 8 ft. min (bottom of sign) 8 ft. min (bottom of sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance 6 in. max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Included in total Aggregate
Area; shall not exceed 50% of
Aggregate Area
Included in total Aggregate Area;
shall not exceed Aggregate Area
Included in total Aggregate Area;
shall not exceed 50% of Aggregate
Area
Included in total Aggregate Area;
shall not exceed 50% of Aggregate
Area
Included in total Aggregate Area;
shall not exceed 50% of Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window or door opening
located on the Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage N/A
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Aggregate Area
Width
Height
Depth/Projection
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity
Secondary Frontage Quantity
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant N/A By Warrant By Warrant By Warrant
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Refer to Section 10.2 Table
15 Function for calculated
Aggregated Area description.
• Limited to the identification of
subdivisions, developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary, Middle
or High Schools.
• All Sign proposals shall only
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to the identification of
subdivisions, developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary, Middle
or High Schools.
• Signage to be displayed on
street level windows only
• All Sign proposals may only be
permitted by Warrant
• Limited to the identification
of subdivisions,
developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary,
Middle or High Schools.
• Projection angle shall be
parallel or perpendicular
to wall.
• All Sign proposals may only
be permitted by Warrant
• Limited to the identification of
subdivisions, developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary, Middle
or High Schools.
• All Sign proposals may only
be permitted by Warrant
• Limited to the identification of
subdivisions, developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary, Middle
or High Schools
• All Sign proposals may only
be permitted by Warrant
T3 - SUB-URBAN
1 2 3 4 5
X.14
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS MONUMENT DIRECTIONAL
T3
R L O R L O R L O
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION
Aggregate Area Ratio
Aggregate Area 15 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 5 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width 6 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average
Sidewalk Elevation)
6 ft. max 8 ft. max
Depth/Projection 18 in. max 12 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of Frontage (no
more than 2 Display Surfaces)
1 sign per entrance, exit or
parking area
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per entrance, exit or
parking area
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A N/A
Aggregate Area
Width
Height
Depth/Projection
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity
Secondary Frontage Quantity
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Warrant
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to the identification of
subdivisions, developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary, Middle
or High Schools.
• All Sign proposals may only
be permitted by Warrant.
• An increase up to forty (40)
square feet for such a Sign
shall be permitted if the Sign
is located on a right-of-way
greater than fifty (50) feet and
the facility has a setback in
excess of thirty (30) feet.
• Limited to the identification
of subdivisions,
developments,
neighborhoods, Religious
Facilities, Elementary,
Middle or High Schools.
• All Sign proposals may only
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to Wall, Hanging, or
Monument Signs.
T3 - SUB-URBAN
7 8
X.15
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS WALL WINDOW PROJECTING HANGING AWNING
T4
R L O R L O R L O R L O R L O
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio 0.25 sq.ft.
per linear
Frontage
0.5 sq.ft. per linear
Frontage
Aggregate Area (total linear building Frontage) x (aggregate area ratio); 150 sq.ft. max per Frontage (24 sq.ft. max for T4-R)
Width 50% of linear Frontage 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of Sign) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance 6 in. max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed 50% of
Aggregate Area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
1 sq.ft.
max
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
15 sq.ft. max; Included in total
Aggregate Area
3 sq.ft. max per Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning; Included in total Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 per unit 1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per window or door opening
located on the Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
.25 sq.ft. per linear ft.
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) max 10 sq.ft per
Frontage.
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) (linear feet of
Frontage) x
(aggregate area
ratio).
See Wall Sign
Width 50% of linear
Frontage (per
establishment)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
Letters, emblems,
logos or symbols on
valance max 6 in
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed
50% of Aggregate
Area; Included in
total Aggregate
Area
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
15 sq.ft. max;
Included in total
Aggregate Area
3 sq.ft. max per
Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or
bottom edge of
Awning; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 Business
Identification
Sign per 20 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant N/A By Warrant By Warrant By Warrant
ADDRESS SIGN max 2 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign max 2 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign N/A N/A max 2 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
• Any painted Wall Signs shall
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Signage to be displayed on
street level windows only
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Projection angle shall be
parallel or perpendicular
to wall.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
T4 - GENERAL URBAN
1 2 3 4 5
X.16
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS MONUMENT MENU BOARD DIRECTIONAL
T4
R L O R L O R L O R L O
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
Aggregate Area 15 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 5 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width 6 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
6 ft. max 5 ft. max
Depth/Projection 18 in. max 12 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of Frontage (no
more than 2 Display Surfaces)
1 sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
N/A
N/A
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) 15 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
24 sq.ft Display
Surface
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) 5 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
Width 6 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
6 ft. max 7 ft max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 24 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of
frontage (no more
than 2 Display
Surfaces)
1 sign per drivethrough
(no more
than 1 Display
Surfaces)
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Warrant
ADDRESS SIGN max 2 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign max 2 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation.
• An increase up to forty (40)
square feet for such a Sign
shall be permitted if the Sign is
located on a right-of-way greater
than fifty (50) feet and the facility
has a setback in excess of thirty
(30) feet.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment
name, logo, menu selection/
pricing for food service,
hours of operation.
• Shall be located within
the Third Layer between
the building and the drivethrough
lane and shall not
be noticeably visible from the
public right-of-way.
• Limited to Wall, Hanging, or
Monument Signs.
• All T4-R Sign proposals may
only be permitted by Warrant.
T4 - GENERAL URBAN
7 8
X.17
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS WALL WINDOW PROJECTING HANGING AWNING
T5 - T6
R L O R L O R L O R L O R L O
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio 0.5 sq.ft.
per linear
Frontage
1.5 sq.ft. per linear
Frontage
Aggregate Area (total linear building Frontage) x (aggregate area ratio); 300 sq.ft. max per Frontage (40 sq.ft. max for T5-R and T6-R)
Width 70% of linear Frontage 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of Sign) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance 8 in. max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 4 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed 60% of
Aggregate Area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
1 sq.ft.
max
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max; Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning; Included in total Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage (no
more than 3 signs total)
1 per unit 1 sign per window 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window or door opening
located on the Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
(shall not exceed 50 sq.ft. in area)
1 sign per window 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
1.0 sq.ft. per linear ft.
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) max 50 sq.ft per
Frontage.
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) (linear feet of
Frontage) x
(aggregate area
ratio).
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
Width 70% of linear
Frontage (per
establishment)
60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
Letters, emblems,
logos or symbols on
valance max 8 in
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed
60% of Aggregate
Area; Included in
total Aggregate
Area
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max;
Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per
Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or
bottom edge of
Awning; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 Business
Identification
Sign per 20 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Right N/A By Warrant By Right By Warrant By Right By Warrant By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign N/A N/A max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Any painted Wall Signs shall
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Signage to be displayed on
street level windows only
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Projection angle shall be
parallel or perpendicular
to wall.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
T5 - URBAN CENTER/T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
1 2 3 4 5
X.18
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS MONUMENT MENU BOARD DIRECTIONAL
T5 - T6
R L O R L O R L O R L O
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
Aggregate Area 40 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 10 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width 8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft. max (14 ft. max by Warrant) 8 ft. max
Depth/Projection 24 in. max 10 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of Frontage (no
more than 2 display surfaces)
1 sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
N/A
N/A
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) 40 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
24 sq.ft Display
Surface
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) 15 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
Width 8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft. max (14 ft. max
by Warrant)
7 ft max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 24 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of
frontage (no more
than 2 Display
Surfaces)
1 sign per drivethrough
(no more
than 1 Display
Surfaces)
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Right By Right By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign max 5 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation.
• Individual Business Identification
sign may be located within
Building Identification Monument
sign, but total Sign Area shall
exceed one hundred (100)
square feet.
• Height may exceed eight (8) feet
by Warrant process, but shall
not exceed fourteen (14) feet
in height.
• Limited to establishment
name, logo, menu selection/
pricing for food service,
hours of operation.
• Shall be located within
the Third Layer between
the building and the drivethrough
lane and shall not
be noticeably visible from the
public right-of-way.
• Limited to Wall, Hanging, or
Monument Signs.
T5 - URBAN CENTER/T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
7 8
X.19
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS WALL WINDOW PROJECTING HANGING AWNING
C
CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio 0.25 sq.ft.
per linear
Frontage
1.5 sq.ft. per linear
Frontage
Aggregate Area (total linear building Frontage) x (aggregate area ratio); 300 sq.ft. max per Frontage (25 sq.ft. max for CS)
Width 40% of
linear
Frontage
70% of linear Frontage 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of Sign) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance 8 in. max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 4 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed 60% of
Aggregate Area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
1 sq.ft.
max
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max; Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning; Included in total Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage (no
more than 3 signs total)
1 per unit 1 sign per window 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window or door opening
located on the Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
(shall not exceed 50 sq.ft. in area)
1 sign per window 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
1.0 sq.ft. per linear ft.
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
N/A
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) max 50 sq.ft per
Frontage.
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) (linear feet of
Frontage) x
(aggregate area
ratio).
See Wall Sign
Aggregate Area
Width 70% of linear
Frontage (per
establishment)
60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
8 ft min (bottom of
Sign)
Letters, emblems,
logos or symbols on
valance max 8 in
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed
60% of Aggregate
Area; Included in
total Aggregate
Area
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max;
Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per
frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or
bottom edge of
Awning; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 Business
Identification
Sign per 20 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
1 Business
Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
1 Sign per 100 ft.
of establishment
accessing the outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Right N/A By Warrant By Right By Warrant By Right By Warrant By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign N/A N/A max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Any painted Wall Signs shall
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Signage to be displayed on
street level windows only
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Projection angle shall be
parallel or perpendicular
to wall.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
C - CIVIC ZONE
1 2 3 4 5
X.20
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS MONUMENT MENU BOARD DIRECTIONAL
C
CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD CS CI CI-HD
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
Aggregate Area 40 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 10 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width 8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft. max (14 ft. max by Warrant) 8 ft. max
Depth/Projection 24 in. max 10 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of frontage (no
more than 2 Display Surfaces)
1 Sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
N/A
N/A
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) 40 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
24 sq.ft Display
Surface
Aggregate Area (Business Identification) 15 sq.ft. max per
Display Surface
Width 8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft. max (14 ft. max
by Warrant)
7 ft max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 24 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft.
of Frontage (no
more than 2 Display
Surfaces)
1 Sign per drivethrough
(no more
than 1 Display
Surfaces)
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 150 ft.
of establishment
accessing the
outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Warrant By Right By Right By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign max 5 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment
name, logo, decorative graphic
bands, hours of operation.
Regional parks shall be allowed
commercial sponsorship
messages not to exceed
twenty-five precent (25%) of total
Sign Area
• Monument Sign total Sign Area
shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet.
• Height may exceed eight (8) feet
by Warrant process, but shall
not exceed fourteen (14) feet
in height.
• Limited to establishment
name, logo, menu selection/
pricing for food service,
hours of operation.
• Shall be located within
the Third Layer between
the building and the drivethrough
lane and shall not
be noticeably visible from the
public right-of-way.
• Limited to Wall, Hanging, or
Monument Signs.
C - CIVIC ZONE
7 8
X.21
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS WALL WINDOW PROJECTING HANGING AWNING
D
D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio 1.5 sq.ft. per linear Frontage
Aggregate Area (total linear Building Frontage) x (aggregate area ratio); 300 sq.ft. max per Frontage
Width 70% of linear Frontage 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft min (bottom of Sign) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance 8 in. max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 4 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type Shall not exceed 60% of
Aggregate Area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
1 sq.ft.
max
20% of total glass
area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max; Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning; Included in total Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 150 ft linear Frontage (no
more than 3 Signs total)
1 per unit 1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per 150 ft linear Frontage 1 sign per window or door opening
located on the Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per 250 ft linear frontage
(shall not exceed 50 sq.ft. in area)
1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 250 ft linear Frontage 1 Sign per 250 ft linear Frontage
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio 1.0 sq.ft. per linear ft. See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area See Wall Sign Aggregate Area
Aggregate Area (Building Identification)
max 50 sq.ft per Frontage.
Aggregate Area (Business Identification)
(linear feet of Frontage) x
(aggregate area ratio). See Wall Sign Aggregate Area
Width 70% of linear Frontage (per
establishment) 60% of valance area
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) 8 ft min (bottom of Sign) Letters, emblems, logos or symbols
on valance max 8 in
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 3 ft. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Shall not exceed 60% of
Aggregate Area; Included in total
Aggregate Area
20% of total glass area; Included in
total Aggregate Area
25 sq.ft. max; Included in total
Aggregate Area
6 sq.ft. max per Frontage; Included in
total Aggregate Area
Limited to skirt or bottom edge of
Awning; Included in total Aggregate
Area
Principal Frontage Quantity
1 Business Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment accessing
the outdoors
1 Sign per window
1 Business Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment accessing
the outdoors
1 Business Identification Sign per 20
ft. of establishment accessing the
outdoors
1 Business Identification Sign per
20 ft. of establishment accessing
the outdoors
Secondary Frontage Quantity
1 Sign per 100 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors 1 Sign per window 1 Sign per 100 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
1 Sign per 100 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Right N/A By Right By Right By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign N/A N/A max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Any painted Wall Signs shall
be permitted by Warrant.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Signage to be displayed on
street level windows only
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Projection angle shall be
parallel or perpendicular
to wall.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
• Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation and Class
B Signs.
D - DISTRICTS
1 2 3 4 5
X.22
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 10. TABLE 15 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS CONT.
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS MONUMENT MENU BOARD DIRECTIONAL
D
D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3 D1 D2 D3
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN A BUILDING
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
Aggregate Area 40 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 10 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width 8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation)
8 ft. max (14 ft. max by Warrant) 8 ft. max
Depth/Projection 24 in. max 10 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity 1 sign per 100 ft. of Frontage (no
more than 2 Display Surfaces)
1 Sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
Secondary Frontage Quantity 1 Sign per entrance, exit or parking
area
BUILDING WITH MORE THAN ONE ESTABLISHMENT OPENING TO THE OUTDOORS
Aggregate Area Ratio
N/A
Aggregate Area (Building Identification) 40 sq.ft. max per Display Surface 24 sq.ft Display Surface
Aggregate Area (Business Identification)
15 sq.ft. max per Display Surface
Width
8 ft. max
Height (Measured from Average Sidewalk
Elevation) 8 ft. max (14 ft. max by Warrant) 7 ft max
Depth/Projection 12 in. max 24 in. max
Aggregate Area Per Sign Type
Principal Frontage Quantity
1 Sign per 100 ft. of frontage (no
more than 2 Display Surfaces)
1 Sign per drive-through (no
more than 1 Display Surfaces)
Secondary Frontage Quantity
1 Sign per 150 ft. of establishment
accessing the outdoors
ILLUMINATION PERMIT By Right By Right By Right
ADDRESS SIGN max 10 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign max 5 sq.ft. area/max 1 Sign
SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS • Limited to establishment name,
logo, decorative graphic bands,
hours of operation.
• Individual Business Identification
sign may be located within
Building Identification Monument
sign, but total Sign Area shall
exceed one hundred (100)
square feet.
• Height may exceed eight (8) feet
by Warrant process, but shall
not exceed fourteen (14) feet
in height.
• Limited to establishment
name, logo, menu selection/
pricing for food service,
hours of operation.
• Shall be located within
the Third Layer between
the building and the drivethrough
lane and shall not
be noticeably visible from the
public right-of-way.
• Limited to Wall, Hanging, or
Monument Signs.
D - DISTRICTS
7 8
MIAMI 21
X.23
ARTICLE 10. SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
10.3 SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
10.3.1 Class A Signs (Temporary)
For the purposes of this Article, Class A Signs shall be removed from the event or location to which they
are related in a timeframe described below, unless otherwise specified.
a. Class A (construction, development and special events signs). All construction, development and
special events signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 62 of the City Code.
b. Class A (real estate Signs). No Sign permit shall be required for real estate Signs displayed on
private property. Such real estate Signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale or
rental of the property. All such real estate Signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. In T5-L,O, T6-L,O, CI, CI-HD, D1, D2 and D3 Transect Zones, Signs shall not exceed fifteen
(15) square feet in Sign surface Area; or
2. In T3, T4-R, T5-R or T6-R Transect Zones, Signs shall not exceed one (1) for each Dwelling
Unit and not exceed four (4) square feet in Sign surface Area.
c. Class A (political election Signs). No Sign permit shall be required for political election Signs
displayed on private property. Such political election Signs shall be permitted no earlier than
three (3) months prior to the date of the election and removed within fifteen (15) days after the
election. All such political election Signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. In T5-L,O, T6-L,O, CI, CI-HD, D1, D2 and D3 Transect Zones, Signs shall not exceed fifteen
(15) square feet in aggregate of Sign surface Area; or
2. In T3, T4, T5-R and T6-R Transect Zones, Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in aggregate
of Sign surface Area.
10.3.2 Class B Signs (Entertainment Establishments)
For the purposes of this Article, Class B Signs for Entertainment Establishments may install no more
than two (2) outdoor display encasements for event posters per fifty (50) feet of linear Frontage subject
to the following guidelines:
a. Shall be located within thirty (30) feet of Entertainment Establishments main entrance.
b. Shall be permanently wall-mounted, maintained in good condition and contain current events.
c. Shall not exceed forty-six (46) inches in height by thirty-two (32) inches in width by for (4)
inches in depth.
d. Framing materials (other than fasteners) for event posters shall be made of wood, brass or
aluminum, and shall blend in and be consistent with the color of the building façade.
MIAMI 21
X.24
ARTICLE 10. SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
e. Illuminated Sign encasements shall be subject to requirements of Section 10.1.4 (c) of this
Article.
f. Information displayed on posters shall be limited to the specific Entertainment Establishments
events and event show times.
10.3.3 Class C Signs (Commercial Advertising Signs)
All Class C Signs shall comply with the requirements of the City Code, Article IX of Chapter 2 for Outdoor
Advertising on City Buildings and Article XIII of Chapter 62 for Murals and Billboards.
10.3.4 Home Office Signs
All Home Office Signs shall be limited to one (1) sign and not to exceed one (1) square foot in Area
located on the front facade.
10.3.6 Signs Above a Height of Fifty (50) Feet
Except as otherwise provided in a specific Transect Zone, all Signs higher than fifty (50) feet above
Average Sidewalk Elevation shall be permitted by Warrant and shall be reviewed based on the following
guidelines:
a. Signs shall be limited to the Building Identification or the name of one (1) major Commercial,
Office or Lodging tenant of the Building occupying more than five percent (5%) of the gross leasable
Building Floor Area. Not more than two (2) Signs per Building on two (2) separate Building
Facades shall be permitted.
b. Signs shall consist only of individual letters or a graphic logotype. No graphic embellishments
such as borders or backgrounds shall be permitted.
c. The maximum Sign Area shall be as indicated in the table below.
AREA
any portion of a Sign over fifty (50) feet or greater, but less than two hundred (200) feet
above grade
140 s. f.
any portion of a Sign at two hundred (200) feet or greater, but less than three hundred (300)
feet above grade
210 s. f.
any portion of a Sign at three hundred (300) feet or greater, but less than four hundred (400)
feet above grade
280 s. f.
any portion of a Sign over four hundred (400) feet above grade 350 s. f.
d. When text and a graphic logotype are combined in an integrated fashion to form a seal or emblem
representative of an institution or corporation, and when this emblem is to serve as the principal
means of Building identification, the following regulations shall apply:
MIAMI 21
X.25
ARTICLE 10. SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
AREA
any portion of a Sign over fifty (50) feet or greater, but less than two hundred (200) feet
above grade
200 s. f.
any portion of a Sign at two hundred (200) feet or greater, but less than three hundred (300)
feet above grade
300 s. f.
any portion of a Sign at three hundred (300) feet or greater, but less than four hundred
(400) feet above grade
400 s. f.
any portion of a Sign over four hundred (400) feet above grade 500 s. f.
e. The maximum length of the Sign shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the width of the Building
wall upon which it is placed, as measured at the height of the Sign. The Sign shall consist
of not more than one (1) horizontal line or one (1) vertical line of letters or symbols, unless it is
determined by the Planning Director that two (2) lines of lettering would be more compatible with
the Building design. The total length of the two (2) lines of lettering, end-to-end, if permitted, shall
not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the width of the Building wall.
f. No Waiver from maximum logotype, length of Sign or Number Of Signs shall be granted.
g. The following design guidelines shall be applied to all Signs higher than fifty (50) feet above
Average Sidewalk Elevation:
1. Signs should respect the Architectural Features of the Facade and be sized and placed subordinate
to those features. Overlapping of functional windows, extensions beyond parapet
edges obscuring architectural ornamentation or disruption of dominant Facade lines shall not
be allowed.
2. The Sign’s color and value (shades of light and dark) should be harmonious with Building
materials. Strong contrasts in color or value between the Sign and Building that draw undue
visual attention to the Sign at the expense of the overall architectural composition shall be
prohibited.
3. In the case of an Illuminated Sign, a reverse channel letter that silhouettes the Sign against
an Illuminated Building face is desirable. Illumination of a Sign should be accompanied by
accent lighting of the Building’s distinctive Architectural Features and especially the Facade
area surrounding the Sign. Illuminated Signs on unlit Buildings shall not be allowed.
4. Feature lighting of the Building, including exposed light elements that enhance Building lines,
light sculpture or kinetic displays that meet the criteria of the Miami Dade County art-in-public
places ordinance, shall not be construed as Signage subject to these regulations.
MIAMI 21
X.26
ARTICLE 10. SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
10.3.7 Special Sign Package
The purpose of a Special Sign Package is to allow buildings exceeding 200,000 square feet of commercial
or office gross leasable Building Floor Area, mixed use developments over four (4) stories (excluding
residential uses), entertainment establishments and Civil Support Uses exceeding 200,000 square feet
of Building Floor Area to allow greater flexibility in Sign regulations to result in a higher or specialized
quality design. It is important that Sign designs preserve the characteristics of the surrounding community
and create a Sign package that will contribute to the character of the area. Specific Sign standards may
be exceeded for various Sign types with the exception that the total Aggregate Area is not exceeded.
Comprehensive signage proposals for Special Sign Package may only be permitted by Warrant. Aggregate
Areas that exceed Table 15 Sign Design Standards may be permitted only by Exception.
10.3.8 Regional Activity Complex Sign Package
Comprehensive signage proposals for Regional Activity Complexes may only be permitted by Exception.
Proposed Aggregate Area shall not exceed three (3) square feet for each linear foot of wall fronting on
a street. In determining whether an Exception should be granted, the PZAB shall consider the following
guidelines as well as Article 4, Table 12:
a. Certain deviations from the Sign standards and areas otherwise applicable may be considered
within comprehensive signage proposals for Regional Activity Complexes. Specific Sign criteria
may be waived to achieve specific objectives commensurate with the facility’s regional purpose,
size, bulk and scale.
b. Signs should respect the Architectural Features of the Structure and be sized and placed subordinate
to those features. Overlapping of functional windows, extensions beyond parapet edges
obscuring architectural ornamentation or disruption of dominant Facade lines are examples of
Sign design problems considered unacceptable.
c. The Sign’s color and value (shades of light and dark) should be harmonious with Building materials.
Strong contrasts in color or value between the Sign and Building that draw undue visual
attention to the Sign at the expense of the overall architectural composition shall be avoided.
d. In the case a Sign is Illuminated, a reverse channel letter that silhouettes the Sign against a
lighted Building face is desirable. Illumination of a Sign should be accompanied by accent lighting
of the Building’s distinctive Architectural Features and especially the Facade area surrounding
the Sign. Illuminated Signs on unlit Buildings are unacceptable. The objective is a visual lighting
emphasis on the Building with the lighted Sign as subordinate. Automatic electric changing Signs
acceptable under the Miami-Dade County Code Section 33-96.1 may be reviewed for compliance
under this Section.
e. Feature lighting of the Building, including exposed light elements that enhance Building lines, light
sculpture or kinetic displays that meet the criteria of the Miami Dade County art-in-public places
under Miami-Dade County Code Section 2-11.15, shall not be construed as Signage subject to
these regulations.
I.1
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 11. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
11.1 ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM XI.3
11.2 REFERENCES XI.3
11.3 PUBLIC ART MASTER PLAN AND PUBLIC ART PROGRAM GUIDELINES XI.3
11.4 APPLICABILITY XI.3
11.5 RESERVED XI.4
11.6 RESERVED XI.4
11.7 GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS - PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENT XI.4
I.2
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 11. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
I.3
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 11. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
11.1 ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM
The Public Art Program shall be administered by the Public Art Division, a division within the City’s
Planning Department.
11.2 REFERENCES
See Chapter 62, Article XVI, of the City Code regarding the AIPBB, procedures, and other applicable
requirements.
11.3 PUBLIC ART MASTER PLAN AND PUBLIC ART PROGRAM GUIDELINES
The Public Art Division shall prepare both a Public Art Master Plan and Public Art Program Guidelines
as defined in Article 1, Section 1.5. The Public Art Master Plan and the Public Art Program Guidelines
shall be prepared and subject to approval of the City Commission, pursuant to a recommendation by the
AIPPB. The Commission, pursuant to a recommendation by the AIPPB, shall also review and approve
amendments to the Public Art Master Plan and the Public Art Program Guidelines, as may be proposed
by the Public Art Division.
11.4 APPLICABILITY
a. Government Development Projects including but not limited to those by the City, a Community
Redevelopment Agency, the County, the State, or any other governmental agency shall comply
with the provisions of Section 11.7 of this Article.
b. The Building Department will calculate the pertinent Public Art Fee in accordance with this Article.
When disputes arise in determining the Public Art Fee, the Developer(s) shall provide the Building
Department and the Public Art Division a copy of the executed notarized construction services
contract(s) for the Government Development Project so that the City can accurately determine
the Construction Cost and properly calculate the Public Art Fee based upon the anticipated
Construction Cost.
c. The AIPPB, at a public hearing, may waive the following from the Public Art Program upon recommendation
from the Public Art Division:
1. The reconstruction of Structures which have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other act
of God.
2. The restoration or rehabilitation of a portion(s) of a Historic Resource as defined in Article 1,
Section 1.5. that does not alter the size or occupancy load of the Structure.
3. The repair or rehabilitation of a Structure for the installation of fire sprinklers or improvements
pursuant to the American with Disabilities Act.
4. Government Development Projects funded by grant(s) that prohibit the use of grant funds
for purposes not specified under the grant(s).
I.4
AS ADOPTED - JANUARY 2018
MIAMI 21 ARTICLE 11. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
5. Affordable Housing Developments not otherwise required to provide Public Art pursuant to
Section 2-11.15 of the Miami-Dade County Code, as amended.
11.5 RESERVED
11.6 RESERVED
11.7 GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS - PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENT
a. All Developers for Government Development Projects shall provide for the acquisition of Art
equivalent in value to not less than one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the Project Cost of all
Government Development Projects. Acquisition, commissioning, and selection of Art for Government
Development Projects shall be in accordance with the criteria and standards set forth in
the adopted Public Art Master Plan and Public Art Program Guidelines and subject to approval
by the AIPPB. To the extent the total amount is not used for the acquisition, selection, or commissioning
of Art, the remainder may be used for:
1. Public Art Program or administrative costs, repair and maintenance of any Art acquired under
this Section, or insurance for any Art; or
2. To supplement other acquisition, commissioning, or selection of Art under this Section or the
costs to transport, relocate, or remove Art in, on, or near government facilities which have
already been constructed.
b. Private funds used for Government Development Projects on land owned by the City, County,
State, federal or any other governmental agency and on private property are subject to a one and
a one-half percent (1.5%) Public Art Fee to be paid into the Fund prior to issuance of a master
building permit.
c. The AIPPB, upon a public hearing, may exempt the following from the Public Art Program upon
recommendation from the Public Art Division:
(i) The requirements of Section 11.7(a) may be waived by resolution of the AIPPB when a
Government Development Project is funded by grant(s) that prohibit the use of grant funds
for purposes not specified under the grant(s); or
(ii) Government Development Projects or portions thereof that do not include Structures.
A.1
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A.1. CORAL GATE (NCD-1)
1.1 Boundaries 5
1.2 Intent 5
1.3 Effect of NCD-1 district designation 5
1.4 Principal uses and structures; prohibitions 5
1.5 Permitted accessory uses and structures 5
1.6 Prohibitions 5
1.7 Height 5
1.8 Off-street Parking Requirements 6
A.2. VILLAGE WEST ISLAND DISTRICT AND CHARLES AVENUE (NCD-2)
2.1 Boundaries 6
2.2 Intent 6
2.3 Effect of NCD-2 district designation. 6
2.4 Residential 7
2.5 Village West Island Commercial Districts 10
A.3. COCONUT GROVE NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT NCD-3
3.1 Boundaries 15
3.2 Intent 16
3.3 Effect of district designation 16
3.4 Additional notice and review 16
3.5 Coconut Grove Corridors 17
3.6 Single-Family Residential District 17
3.6 Reserved for Coconut Grove NCD-3 (R-2) Two-Family Residential District 21
3.7 Reserved for Coconut Grove NCD-3 (R-3) Multifamily Medium-Density Residential District 21
3.8 Coconut Grove NCD-3 Commercial Districts 21
A.3.8 Reserved. Coconut Grove NCD-3 Sub-District Architectural Guidelines. 25
A.2
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
A.3
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
AMENDMENTS TO MIAMI 21
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
13494 1-22-2015 Clarification of Single Family lot setback
requirement applicability
14-01074zt
A.4
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
A.5
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
A.1. CORAL GATE (NCD-1)
1.1 Boundaries
Generally described as bounded by Douglas Road to the west, along the rear of properties on the north
side of SW 18th Terrace, along the rear of properties on the west side of Coral Gate Drive, SW 16th
Street on the north, SW 32nd Avenue on the east, and along the rear of properties on the south side of
SW 21st Street. More specifically depicted on the Miami 21 Atlas.
1.2 Intent
The Coral Gate neighborhood is a stable single-family neighborhood located within the Coral Way Area.
Its proximity to the Coral Way commercial corridor has left the neighborhood with the threat of inappropriate
commercial intrusion that may disrupt the quality of this well-maintained and stable single-family
neighborhood. The purpose of this Neighborhood Conservation District is to eliminate uses that have the
potential of bringing commercial intrusion into the neighborhood and also to eliminate the possibility of
incompatible infill structures that are too tall and could deteriorate the historic quality of this low-density
neighborhood. The intent is that this neighborhood be a pure single-family neighborhood.
1.3 Effect of NCD-1 district designation
The effect of these NCD-1 regulations shall be to modify transect regulations included within the NCD
boundaries to the extent indicated herein.
1.4 Principal uses and structures; prohibitions
Principal uses and structures are as permitted generally or conditionally in the underlying transect, except
the following uses shall not be permitted:
a. Adult daycare centers
b. Child daycare centers
c. Primary and secondary schools
1.5 Permitted accessory uses and structures
Only the following accessory uses and structures are permitted in conjunction with a single family residence:
a. Detached garages and car shelters.
b. Garden sheds.
1.6 Prohibitions
Home occupations shall not be permitted.
1.7 Height
Height is limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet from flood level or average sidewalk elevation,
whichever is higher. No variances for height shall be allowed.
A.6
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
1.8 Off-street Parking Requirements
Dwellings: Dwellings, minimum two (2) spaces per unit; such spaces may be permitted in a tandem
fashion.
Places of worship: For places of worship, a reduction of up to twenty-five (25) percent in required offstreet
parking shall be permissible by Exception, provided findings are made that clearly show such
reduction is reasonable based on such factors as facility proximity to mass transit, facility visitation policy,
possible negative impact on the neighborhood, and the like.
A.2. VILLAGE WEST ISLAND DISTRICT AND CHARLES AVENUE (NCD-2)
2.1 Boundaries
Generally described as bounded by Douglas Road on the west, US 1 and Bird Road on the North, Mc-
Donald Street and Abitare Way on the east, and Franklin Avenue and a portion of Marler Avenue along
the south. More specifically depicted on the Miami 21 Atlas.
2.2 Intent
Village West Island District is of special and substantial public interest due to the unique role of Grand
Avenue and Douglas Road as the “Main Streets” for the surrounding Village West Island District Community
and the unique Caribbean and Bahamian character and heritage of the Village West Island District
in general. On Charles Avenue this NCD-2 will help define the uses and designs of buildings and help
maintain the scale and character of the existing neighborhood. Both Village Island West and Charles
Avenue illustrate the incomparable legacy of the African-American community to the City of Miami. The
intent of NCD-2 is to identify and recognize this historical significance; to promote gateways, gathering
places and activities corresponding to its culture and heritage; to compliment the character of the entire
community and promote the history of the Island District; and to promote its successful revitalization
and restoration.
Charles Avenue (originally Evangelist Street) has historically housed some of the original Bahamian
settlements within the Village West Island District that occupies the neighborhoods around the intersection
of Douglas Road and Grand Avenue. This street has been degraded through demolition, abandonment
and redevelopment and thereby diminishing the historic integrity to become a historic district;
however, it is of special and substantial public interest due to its historic identity and remaining historic
structures. This designation will encourage appropriate infill to preserve the context of historic sites on
Charles Avenue, including: the Mariah Brown House, home of the first Bahamian settler; the Historic
Black Cemetery; the E.F. Stirrup House, home of the first black doctor; historical churches, and several
other historic homes.
2.3 Effect of NCD-2 district designation.
The effect of these NCD-2 regulations shall be to modify transect regulations included within the NCD
boundaries to the extent indicated herein.
A.7
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as to prohibit additional structures or neighborhoods to
become Historic Preservation Overlays.
All demolition permits shall require a Waiver and be referred to the Planning Department for review under
the Tree Preservation Ordinance. All submittals shall contain a tree survey by a certified arborist.
2.4 Residential
All T3, Single-Family Residential zoning regulations shall apply within the Village West Island District and
Charles Avenue, hereafter referred to as NCD-2, except as modified below. If any such requirements
conflict, NCD-2 requirements shall apply.
2.4.1 Charles Avenue
a. All new construction, major alterations, and additions on Charles Avenue shall be required to be
reviewed by the process of Waiver. To ensure the compatibility of new construction on Charles
Avenue, the design for any new construction shall also be reviewed by the Urban Development
Review Board for its compatibility of scale, materials, roof slope, general form, massing and
ornamental details.
b. Any requests for the demolition of structures that are over fifty (50) years in age along Charles
Avenue shall be referred to the Historic Preservation Officer for review of historical significance.
c. The architectural guidelines contained in the Village West Island District are intended to produce
visual compatibility among the buildings on Charles Avenue and throughout the District representing
building traditions of early South Florida, the Caribbean, and the early African-American
settlers.
2.4.2 Single Family Residential District
a. Adjacent lots or lots in the same subdivision under single ownership, or developed by a single
builder or developer shall not employ the same, similar or duplicate architectural plans. Adjacent
buildings under such conditions shall be substantially differentiated in massing, footprint, and
exterior detailing.
b. Front yards
All front yards in the NCD-2 shall be designed in a way that minimizes the impact of garage fronts
and off-street parking. Front yards shall provide a more permeable surface and use abundant
landscaping and tree canopy throughout.
c. Building Envelope
For the purpose of this section, a building site shall be defined as one or more lots or portions
of lots that are aggregated to form a single family residential site including vacant lots and all
permissible accessory uses and structures. Building sites shall not include any portions of land
under a different zoning transect.
d. Height
Height is limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet measured to the midpoint between the
A.8
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
eave and roof top and is measured from flood level or average sidewalk elevation, whichever
is higher. In addition to the maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet measured to the mid-point
of the roof top and eave, chimneys, cupolas or other non-habitable architectural features of
twenty-five (25) square feet in area or less may reach a maximum height of thirty (30) feet or as
required by the fire code. For Lots with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, the
height limitation for accessory structures shall be thirteen (13) feet.
e. Green Space
The minimum green space requirement shall be three-tenths (0.3) times the Lot area. The use of
permeable material for surfaces in the required yard may allow a 25% reduction in the required
green space.
f. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures are as permitted in the underlying transect zone, except that detached
garages or car shelters on lots ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger may include
a second story as long as the allowable floor lot ratio and building footprint are not exceeded.
Said second story may only be used as an owner occupied accessory structure. Two-story accessory
structures shall have the same setback requirements as specified for two-story principal
buildings.
g. Additional Limitations and requirements
1. Lots and building sites:
Wherever an existing single-family residence or lawful accessory building(s) or structure(s)
is located on one or more platted lots or portions thereof, such lots shall thereafter constitute
only one building site and no permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one
single-family residence except by Warrant. Such structures shall include but not be limited
to swimming pools, tennis courts, walls, and fences or other at grade or above ground improvements.
No building sites in existence prior to September 24, 2005 shall be diminished in
size except by Warrant, subject to the criteria specified in Article 4, Table 12 Design Review
Criteria.
2. Garages and Driveways:
(a) On new construction or garage additions, no garage shall be located along the same front
setback line as the front wall of a residential structure unless the garage door(s) does
not face the street. Garage structures with access openings that face the street shall
be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front wall of the principal residential
structure.
(b) Garage structures with access openings that face the street on corner lots which have
a maximum depth of less than sixty (60) feet, may be set back a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from the front wall of the principal residential structure.
(c) Notwithstanding the requirements of the Public Works Department, driveways shall have
a maximum width of ten (10) feet within the first five (5) feet of all street-front required
setbacks.
(d) Driveways within a single building site shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to each other.
(e) Except as required for the driveway approach, no portion of any driveway in a required
yard adjacent to a street shall be within five (5) feet of any property line other than as
may be required to allow for turnaround maneuver, in which case said driveway shall be
A.9
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
constructed of permeable material in its entirety.
(f) Tandem parking shall be allowed.
(g) Garage doors which are more than nine (9) feet wide shall not be allowed.
3. Fences:
All fences located within any street-front setback area shall be covered from the public rightof-
way view by plant material except when said fence is faced or constructed with oolitic
limestone.
4. Landscaping:
All landscape shall comply with the City’s landscape and tree protection ordinances.
h. Setbacks
1. Principal Building:
Setbacks are variable to allow for a variety in architecture and placement of the building
footprint. Projections of buildings into required setbacks shall be permitted subject to the
criteria and requirements specified herein.
(a) Minimum Front Setbacks:
The minimum front setback shall be thirty (30) feet. The structure may project a maximum
of ten (10) feet into the minimum required setback of thirty (30) feet provided said projection
does not exceed thirty (30) feet in width along the front of the building. Unenclosed
porches, entries, or loggias may project a maximum of fifteen (15) feet into the minimum
required setback of thirty (30) feet. On corner lots the structure may project a maximum
of fifteen (15) feet into the minimum required setback of thirty (30) feet.
(b) Minimum Side Setbacks:
The minimum side setback shall be five (5) feet, except for corner lots where the minimum
side setback adjacent to the street shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum total side
setbacks to be distributed shall be as established in the following table:
TABLE INSET:
(c) Minimum Rear Setbacks:
The minimum rear setback shall be twenty (20) feet.
(d) Accessory Buildings:
The minimum side setbacks shall be ten (10) feet.
The minimum rear setback shall be ten (10) feet.
The maximum width of said connection shall be ten (10) feet.
Building Site Size
in Square Feet
Interior Lots
First Story of
Structure
Interior Lots
Second Story of
Structure
Corner Lots
First Story of
Structure
Corner Lots
Second Story of
Structure
Less than 7,500 10 feet 15 feet 15 feet 20 feet
7,500 -- 10,000 15 feet 25 feet 15 feet 25 feet
More than 10,000 25 feet 35 feet 25 feet 35 feet
A.10
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
2.5 Village West Island Commercial Districts
a. Limitation.
The square footage of individual retail establishments within Coconut Grove Corridors defined in
Appendix A, section 3.5 shall be limited to a maximum size of twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in total floor area used for retail and related services, except as may be modified below for
“large-scale retail establishments.” Retail specialty centers as defined in City Code Sec. 4-2 located
adjacent to Coconut Grove Corridors listed in Appendix A, section 3.5, may be approved
by a Warrant. Special event Class I permits are exempted from the limitations of this section.
b. “Large-scale retail establishment” defined.
A “large-scale retail establishment” for the purposes of NCD-2 is defined as a retail establishment
or combination of commercial retail establishment(s), including membership establishments with
any commercial retail use, of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in gross floor area. The
gross floor area includes building gross floor area and ancillary outdoor storage or merchandise
display areas. For the purposes of this definition, the floor area does not include motor vehicle
parking or loading areas. For the purpose of determining the applicability of the twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of floor area, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent stores or retail
tenants that share common checkout stands or a controlling interest, or storage areas, shall be
considered one establishment.
c. Exception required for Large Scale Retail establishments.
A “large-scale retail establishment” within the Coconut Grove Corridors listed in Appendix A,
section 3.5 shall be permitted only by Exception.
d. Site requirements.
In addition to all requirements in the applicable zoning district,”large-scale retail establishments”
must meet the following site criteria and limitations:
1. Maximum size of retail establishment.
The maximum size of any individual retail establishment within any Coconut Grove Corridor
shall be seventy thousand (70,000) square feet. No individual retail establishment within a
Large Scale Retail establishment shall be permitted which exceeds seventy thousand (70,000)
square feet.
2. Minimum lot dimensions.
“Large-scale retail establishments” may be permitted exclusively in lots having a minimum
net area of two (2) acres. Properties which do not meet the two-acre size limitation shall be
limited to individual establishments of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less.
3. Minimum setbacks and build-to lines
Large Scale Retail establishments shall have the following minimum setbacks:
(a) Any front or side setback abutting a public right-of-way or non-residentially zoned property
build-to line is twenty (20) feet. The area from the build-to line to the right-of-way line shall
be used for permanent sidewalks with illumination, pedestrian amenities, or landscaping,
except in areas as required for emergency access, or where driveway entrances are located.
Landscaping in this setback area shall count toward the green space requirements.
A.11
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
This area may not be used for parking or loading at any time.
(b) Side or rear lot line abutting a residentially zoned property: setback is fifty (50) feet. The
setback shall include a 20-foot heavily landscaped buffer area. If an access alley, parking,
loading door, delivery area, or inventory storage area is present along this side of the
property, then the setback area shall also include an eight-foot-high masonry wall inside
of the 20-foot landscape buffer.
4. Building orientation and facades.
(a) Building facades and elevations shall be designed to minimize the visual impacts of the
scale of the building.
(b) Large-scale retail structures may be oriented with their entrances toward arterial or collector
roadways as defined in the City Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Any side with regular public ingress/egress point(s) is to be considered a front. Regular
public ingress/egress to the building shall not be located facing residential uses. There
may be more than one (1) front. Front and side facade design shall include the following
design features to minimize scale impacts and promote activated street frontages:
(i) Building design variations at intervals no greater than fifty (50) feet.
(ii) Storefront windows, with interior spaces visible and lit from within at night, equal to at
least fifty (50) percent of the linear length of ground-floor wall on building front elevations
as defined herein. Window spacing should be such that no more than twenty (20)
percent of the length of the wall may have an uninterrupted length without storefront
windows.
5. Vehicular access.
Primary ingress and egress to the site must be provided from the arterial(s) and not from
secondary roads or collectors and subject to the following:
(a) Except as required for emergency access, vehicular driveways shall not be along local
roadways as defined in the City Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Except where required for emergency access or other compelling public safety reasons,
vehicular driveways shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of residentiallyzoned
land along the same side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the
driveway.
(c) Delivery vehicle access/egress shall be clearly defined in the site plan, and shall only be
from arterial roadways, and located no less than one hundred (100) feet from residentiallyzoned
land along the same side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the
driveway.
(d) Where large and bulk merchandise sales are expected, customer pick-up access/egress
shall be clearly defined in the site plan, and shall only be from arterial roadways, and
located no less than one hundred (100) feet from residentially-zoned land along the same
side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the driveway.
6. Parking and loading requirements.
(a) One (1) space per every two hundred (250) square feet of gross floor area shall be required
for a “large-scale retail establishment.” All required parking must be provided onsite.
(b) Along collector roads as defined by the City Comprehensive Plan, setback buffers, building
design or other features shall screen parking such that no more than thirty (30) percent
A.12
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
of the parking lot or facilities are visible from the roadway.
(c) Along local roads as defined by the City Comprehensive Plan, setback buffers, building
design or other features shall completely screen parking such that the parking lot or
facilities are not visible from the roadway, except for distances as required by driveways
or emergency access.
(d) All loading and deliveries shall be adjacent to an arterial roadway. Said loading and delivery
areas shall be screened from public view by an eight-foot wall.
7. Green space.
A “large-scale retail establishment” shall implement landscaping in an area equal in size to,
or greater than, fifteen (15) percent of the gross lot area. Landscaping shall be implemented
generally so as to provide ample shade areas in the parking lot and abutting sidewalks and
to minimize the visual impact of the structure and parking space on the streetscape. To this
end, a landscape plan for the site shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review
and approval by the Planning and Zoning Advisory Board as part of the required Exception.
8. Buffer.
Wherever the property abuts another property with a more restrictive zoning designation, a
“large-scale retail establishment” shall provide a twenty-foot wide heavily landscaped buffer.
This buffer shall include Florida native trees at no less than fifteen (15) to twenty (20) feet in
height, with a diameter at breast height of no less than four (4) to five (5) inches spaced on
15-foot centers. Also included in this buffer shall be hedging and ground cover. This buffer
shall be included in the required landscape plan.
9. Fences and walls.
Fences and walls shall be erected to a minimum height of eight (8) feet wherever the property
abuts another property with a more restrictive zoning designation.
e. Location of “large-scale retail establishment.”
A “large-scale retail establishment” shall be located exclusively on a lot having frontage on one
(1) or more arterial roads.
f. Hours of operation.
Except for special events requiring Class I permits, a “large-scale retail establishment” shall open
no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on weekends and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and shall close no later than
11:00 p.m. on weekends and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays. Deliveries to or from any “large-scale
retail establishment” shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. through 3:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday.
g. Variances prohibited.
No variances from the provisions set forth in the site requirements or hours of operation are
permitted.
2.5.1 Mixed Use Cultural District
Boundaries: all properties located on Grand Avenue between Margaret Street on the east and the City
limits on the west, and Douglas Road between Grand Avenue on the south and Day Avenue on the
north.
A.13
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
The Mixed Use Cultural District is intended to give a distinctive cultural character to retail and commercial
uses on Grand Avenue and Douglas Road. The intent is to enhance these corridors as a tourist
destination, encourage heritage retail and cultural/historic businesses, support current resident-owned
businesses, promote a cultural facade, provide more culturally themed businesses, establish a critical
mass of retail and provide a culturally themed bridge to all other parts of the District by promoting the
culture of the community in this short corridor and entranceway to the commercial main street. To this
end, the district is dedicated primarily to culturally themed boutiques, gift shops and book stores, hair
salons, apparel, restaurants and cafes, music shops and outdoor plazas, straw markets, cultural facilities,
art and upscale cultural entertainment that reflect a Caribbean culture.
a. Use Regulations
The Mixed Use Cultural District shall permit the following Uses in addition to those which are
permitted in the underlying transect zones:
1. Permanent structures providing for a Straw Market with Caribbean crafts, foods, apparel,
souvenirs, and other goods attractive to tourists, subject to a Waiver with a mandatory referral
to the district NET Administrator, and limited to the following items for sale: Heritage
retail foods, apparel, souvenirs; bookstores and gift shops with cultural themes; hair salons,
including outdoor hair braiding; and music and entertainment reflective of that found in the
Caribbean.
2. “Large-scale retail establishments” exclusively for the sale of groceries and not exceeding
forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall be permitted within the Mixed Use Cultural District
only for properties with an underlying T5 Transect Zone by process of Warrant. “Groceries”
are defined as food products, dry groceries (such as meats, poultry, seafood, sushi, dairy
products, frozen foods, fruits, vegetables, deli items, prepared foods, baked goods, health and
beauty products, pharmaceuticals, and alcoholic beverages) or services commonly provided
in a grocery store in Miami-Dade County.
3. Other permissible uses along ground floor locations include:
Bars, saloons, taverns, private clubs, supper clubs, including those with dancing and live
entertainment are permitted in such ground floor locations along primary streets or elsewhere
within the district only by Warrant, and only subject to limitations on buffer overlay districts.
4. Sales display and outdoor dining within open or partially open space.
5. Vending in open space as per the City of Miami’s Vending in Open Space Regulations.
b. Height
In order to ensure appropriate scale of infill development along Grand Avenue and Douglas Road,
irrespective of the underlying zoning limitations, new single-Use structures shall be limited to a
maximum of fifty (50) feet and mixed-use structures shall be limited to sixty-two (62) feet to be
accommodated in no more than five (5) stories.
c. Architectural Guidelines
All establishments and businesses in the Mixed Use Cultural District shall conform to the Village
Island West and Grand Avenue Architectural and Urban Design Guidelines and shall maintain
a facade that is consistent with Caribbean architectural facades as described and as examples
A.14
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
are shown within the guidelines.
d. Additional Regulations
1. Existing businesses established prior to the adoption of this code shall be allowed to remain
in the Mixed Use Cultural District regardless of their cultural theme without being considered
nonconformities.
2. Underground parking shall be permitted in T3 Transect Zones by Warrant for those properties
which abut T5 Transect Zones along Grand Avenue between SW 37th Avenue and
SW 32nd Avenue. Any T3 designated properties which have underground parking shall be
required to be developed with Residential Structures for Residential Use on the surface of
the underground parking structure. No replat is required if the T3 Transect Zone properties
are tied to the property abutting Grand Avenue by a covenant-in-lieu of Unity of Title. Density
limitations shall apply as per the underlying Transect Zone without the limitation of one (1)
unit per lot of record for T3-R and two (2) units per lot of record for T3-O and the following
minimum setbacks shall apply:
(a) T3-R Properties
(i) Front: twenty (20) feet
(ii) Side: five (5) feet
(iii) Rear: zero (0) feet
(b) T3-O Properties
(i) Front: ten (10) feet
(ii) Side: Zero (0) feet
(iii) Rear: Zero (0) feet
(c) Minimum required setbacks may be reduced through the Warrant process.
2.5.2 Market District
Boundaries: all properties fronting on Grand Avenue between Commodore Plaza Street to the east and
Elizabeth Street to the west.
The Market District is intended to foster community markets along a portion of Grand Avenue relating
to the sale of fruits, vegetables and other crafts indigenous of the Caribbean Islands. The Caribbean
Market allows for a tourism destination similar to those found throughout Caribbean nations and heritage
of the surrounding community.
a. Use Regulations.
The Market District area shall permit the following uses, in addition to those which are permitted
in the underlying transect zone:
1. Farmer’s markets and Caribbean crafts and food markets that specialize in the sale of crafts
and fresh fruits and vegetables are permitted within this district, subject to a Warrant with
a mandatory referral to the district NET Administrator. All regulations contained in this code
are applicable, and further subject to the following limitations:
A.15
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(a) Any outdoor market must be located on a parcel of no less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet of lot area.
(b) An outdoor market shall be limited to no more than sixty-five (65) percent of the area of
the subject parcel in display area.
(c) An outdoor market may not include any permanent structures. All display tables and other
such material must be removed at the end of the permitted time of operation.
(d) The outdoor market display area shall be located along the Grand Avenue frontage and be
set back no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any abutting residentially zoned property.
(e) No outdoor market may be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet
from another outdoor market.
(g) Only handmade crafts, fresh fruits and vegetables, prepared raw foods and drinks derived
from fresh fruits and vegetables may be sold in an outdoor market within this district.
b. Additional Regulations
1. All establishments and businesses in the Market District shall conform to the Village Island
West and Grand Avenue Architectural and Urban Design Guidelines and shall maintain a
facade that is consistent with Caribbean architectural facades as described and as examples
are shown within the guidelines.
2. Existing businesses established prior to the adoption of this code shall be allowed to remain
in the Market District regardless of their cultural theme without being considered nonconformities.
A.3. COCONUT GROVE NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT NCD-3
3.1 Boundaries
Generally described as bounded by Douglas Avenue on the west, Franklin Avenue and a portion of Marler
Avenue along the north (Douglas Road – Arbitare Way), Arbitare Way and McDonald Avenue along
the west (Main Hwy – Bird Road), Bird Road on the south (McDonald Ave – US 1), US 1 on the north,
Rickenbacker Causeway on the east, Biscayne Bay along the east and south, Prospect Drive and along
the rear of properties on the south side of Battersea Road to Douglas Road. More specifically depicted
on the Miami 21 Atlas.
a. Coconut Grove Sub-Districts:
1. North Grove- bounded by U.S. 1 on the north, Rickenbacker Causeway on the east, Biscayne
Bay on the south and S.W. 27th Avenue on the west.
2. Center Grove- bounded by U.S. 1 on the north, S.W. 27th Avenue on the east, Oak Street
on the south, and S.W. 32nd Avenue on the west.
3. South Grove- bounded by Loquat Avenue, Kumquat Avenue, Franklin Avenue, and Main
Highway on the north, along the eastern edge of properties located east of Munroe Drive
on the east, Biscayne Bay, and Prospect Drive, Battersea Road, and Le Jeune Road on the
south, and Le June Road on the west.
4. Village Center- bounded by Oak Street and Tigertail Avenue on the north, S.W. 27th Avenue
on the east, Biscayne Bay, along the western edge of the Barnacle State Park, Main Highway,
Via Abitare Way and SW 32nd Avenue on the west.
A.16
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
3.2 Intent
The intent of the Coconut Grove Neighborhood Conservation District NCD-3 is to establish a protective
series of legislative elements to preserve the historic, heavily landscaped character of Coconut Grove’s
residential areas; enhance and protect Coconut Grove’s natural features such as the tree canopy and
green space; and protect the architectural variety within the unique single family neighborhood that
comprises Coconut Grove. The community of Coconut Grove predates the City of Miami, and is known
for its character, derived from lush landscaping, and naturally occurring vegetation and trees, and its
unique property sizes and shapes; bay views; geologic features; proximity to Biscayne Bay; public open
space; recreational opportunities; commercial services; and a special character imparted by its tropical
vegetation and historic structures.
Properties shall not be platted, re-platted or configured in any way that destroys a median, green space,
landscape easement or road configuration that contributes to the character of the subdivision within the
NCD-3 area.
3.3 Effect of district designation
The effect of these NCD-3 regulations shall be to modify transect regulations included within the NCD
boundaries to the extent indicated herein.
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as to prohibit additional structures or neighborhoods to
become Historic Preservation Overlays.
All demolition permits shall require a Waiver and be referred to the Planning Department for review under
the Tree Preservation Ordinance. All submittals shall contain a tree survey by a certified arborist.
3.4 Additional notice and review
a. Additional notice required for Exception and Variance applications.
All Coconut Grove neighborhood or homeowner associations that wish to receive a courtesy
notice of Exception or Variance applications in their areas shall register with their Neighborhood
Enhancement Team (NET) Office on a yearly basis. Such registration shall consist of a letter to
the Director of the Planning Department or to the Zoning Administrator, in which the association
shall request such notification and shall specify the name, address and telephone number of
the official representative of the association designated to receive said notice and a list of all
the officers of said association. At the time of initial application for an Exception or Variance,
the applicant shall obtain the list of all registered neighborhood and homeowner associations
pertaining to the application in question from the Planning Director or the Zoning Administrator
and shall notify in writing the official representative of all such registered associations in writing,
by certified mail, of the application. The applicant shall submit with the application these certified
receipts. If any such association have any comments or recommendations, such comments and
recommendations shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator
no later than fifteen (15) days from receipt of such notification. Late or misdelivered comments
shall not be considered.
b. All properties located within the Village Center shall be reviewed by the Coordinated Review
A.17
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Committee.
3.5 Coconut Grove Corridors
The sub-districts are demarcated, traversed or connected by important corridors subject to their own
unique characteristics and considerations. The Coconut Grove corridors are as follows and include the
rights of way and the Lots immediately adjacent to the right of way:
• South Bayshore Drive
• Tigertail Drive
• S.W. 27th Avenue
• Bird Avenue
• MacDonald Street
• Main Highway
• Douglas Road
• Grand Avenue
• Le Jeune Road
a. Improvements and new development on these corridors shall conform to the following pedestrian
safety and comfort standards:
1. Where sidewalks exist, the pedestrian shall be buffered from vehicular traffic with streetscape
elements and landscaping.
2. Uses to be developed on these corridors shall promote pedestrian activity, such as porches,
loggias, windows, entries, plazas, and ground floor retail uses where permissible.
3. The number and dimensions of curb cuts and driveways shall be minimized to reduce the
pedestrian/vehicular conflicts up to the minimum permissible by the controlling jurisdiction.
3.6 Single-Family Residential District
The single family residential district is intended to protect the low density residential and dominant tree
canopy characteristics of Coconut Grove and prevent the intrusion of additional density, uses, and height.
All T3, Single-Family Residential zoning regulations shall apply within the Coconut Grove NCD-3 Single-
Family Residential District, hereafter referred to as NCD-3, except as modified below. If any such
requirements conflict, NCD-3 requirements shall apply.
a. Adjacent lots or lots in the same subdivision under single ownership, or developed by a single
builder or developer shall not employ the same, similar or duplicate architectural plans. Adjacent
buildings under such conditions shall be substantially differentiated in massing, footprint, and
exterior detailing.
b. Front yards
All front yards in the NCD-3 shall be designed in a way that minimizes the impact of garage fronts
and off-street parking. Front yards shall provide a more permeable surface and use abundant
landscaping and tree canopy throughout.
c. Building Envelope
For the purpose of this section, a building site shall be defined as one or more lots or portions
of lots that are aggregated to form a single family residential site including vacant lots and all
A.18
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
permissible accessory uses and structures. Building sites shall not include any portions of land
under a different zoning transect.
d. Height
Height is limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet measured to the midpoint between the
eave and roof top and is measured from flood level or average sidewalk elevation, whichever
is higher. In addition to the maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet measured to the mid-point
of the roof top and eave, chimneys, cupolas or other non-habitable architectural features of
twenty-five (25) square feet in area or less may reach a maximum height of thirty (30) feet or as
required by the fire code. For Lots with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, the
height limitation for accessory structures shall be thirteen (13) feet.
e. Green Space
The minimum green space requirement shall be three-tenths (0.3) times the Lot area. The use of
permeable material for surfaces in the required yard may allow a 25% reduction in the required
green space.
f. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures are as permitted in the underlying transect zone, except that detached
garages or car shelters on lots ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger may include
a second story as long as the allowable floor lot ratio and building footprint are not exceeded.
Said second story may only be used as an owner occupied accessory structure. Two-story accessory
structures shall have the same setback requirements as specified for two-story principal
buildings.
g. Additional Limitations and requirements.
1. Lots and building sites:
Wherever an existing single-family residence or lawful accessory building(s) or structure(s)
is located on one or more platted lots or portions thereof, such lots shall thereafter constitute
only one building site and no permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one
single-family residence except by Warrant. Such structures shall include but not be limited
to swimming pools, tennis courts, walls, and fences or other at grade or above ground improvements.
No building sites in existence prior to September 24, 2005 shall be diminished in
size except by Warrant, subject to the criteria specified in Article 4, Table 12 Design Review
Criteria.
2. Garages and Driveways:
(a) On new construction or garage additions, no garage shall be located along the same front
setback line as the front wall of a residential structure unless the garage door(s) does not
face the street. Garage structures with access openings that face the street shall be set
back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front wall of the principal residential structure.
(b) Garage structures with access openings that face the street on corner lots which have a
maximum depth of less than sixty (60) feet, may be set back a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from the front wall of the principal residential structure.
(c) Notwithstanding the requirements of the Public Works Department, driveways shall have
a maximum width of ten (10) feet within the first five (5) feet of all street-front required
setbacks.
A.19
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(d) Driveways within a single building site shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to each other.
(e) Except as required for the driveway approach, no portion of any driveway in a required
yard adjacent to a street shall be within five (5) feet of any property line other than as
may be required to allow for turnaround maneuver, in which case said driveway shall be
constructed of permeable material in its entirety.
(f) Tandem parking shall be allowed.
(g) Garage doors which are more than nine (9) feet wide shall not be allowed.
3. Fences:
All fences located within any street-front setback area shall be covered from the public rightof-
way view by plant material except when said fence is faced or constructed with oolitic
limestone.
4. Landscaping:
All landscape shall comply with the City’s landscape and tree protection ordinances.
h. Single Family lots
1. Setbacks:
(a) Principal Building:
Setbacks are variable to allow for a variety in architecture and placement of the building
footprint. Projections of buildings into required setbacks shall be permitted subject to the
criteria and requirements specified herein.
(i) Minimum Front Setbacks:
The minimum front setback shall be thirty (30) feet. The structure may project a maximum
of ten (10) feet into the minimum required setback of thirty (30) feet provided
said projection does not exceed thirty (30) feet in width along the front of the building.
Unenclosed porches, entries, or loggias may project a maximum of fifteen (15) feet
into the minimum required setback of thirty (30) feet. On corner lots the structure may
project a maximum of fifteen (15) feet into the minimum required setback of thirty (30)
feet.
(ii) Minimum Side Setbacks:
The minimum side setback shall be five (5) feet, except for corner lots where the
minimum side setback adjacent to the street shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum total
side setbacks to be distributed shall be as established in the following table:
TABLE INSET:
Building Site Size
in Square Feet
Interior Lots
First Story of
Structure
Interior Lots
Second Story of
Structure
Corner Lots
First Story of
Structure
Corner Lots
Second Story of
Structure
Less than 7,500 10 feet 15 feet 15 feet 20 feet
7,500 -- 10,000 15 feet 25 feet 15 feet 25 feet
More than 10,000 25 feet 35 feet 25 feet 35 feet
A.20
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(iii) Minimum Rear Setbacks:
The minimum rear setback shall be twenty (20) feet.
(iv) Accessory Buildings:
The minimum side setbacks shall be ten (10) feet.
The minimum rear setback shall be ten (10) feet.
The maximum width of said connection shall be ten (10) feet.
i. Single Family Large Lot Residential designation
1. Lot size
Minimum lot size is limited to ten thousand (10,000) square feet and the minimum lot width
is limited to one hundred (100) feet in order to preserve the large lot suburban character of
certain neighborhoods within Coconut Grove.
2. Limitations on yards
All yards adjacent to South Bayshore Drive shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet.
j. Single Family Oversized Lot Residential designation.
1. Lot Size
Minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and minimum lot width shall
be one hundred (100) feet.
2. Limitations on yards
All yards adjacent to South Bayshore Drive shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet.
k. Single Family Estate Lot Residential designation.
The intent of these regulations is to allow existing Estate Lots to be developed as single-family
estates of a spacious character together with Botanical Gardens, private non-commercial recreational
facilities and accompanying structures compatible with residential surroundings. This
district is designed to protect and preserve the existing character of estates and allow the building
of vacant land considered appropriate for such development in the future.
1. Lot Size
Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre (43,560 square feet) and a minimum lot width of one
hundred (100) feet.
2. Limitations on yards
All yards adjacent to South Bayshore Drive shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet. Bay
windows and balconies may project a maximum of three (3) feet into a yard setback.
3. Accessory Uses and Structures
(a) Accessory structures shall comply in all other aspects of the underlying single family residential
(T3) district unless stated otherwise. Enclosed accessory buildings shall be used
only for occupancy of nonpaying guests of the owners of the primary residence or bona
A.21
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
fide members of the family or household staff, and no kitchen or cooking facilities shall
be constructed or used therein except by approval by the Planning Director of a written
agreement with the City stating that such accessory structure will be used only by family
members or household staff. The property owner must execute and record in the public
records a Declaration of Restriction stating that the use of the site will be reserved for a
single family residence. No accessory structure shall be used as or converted to a dwelling
unit without the recorded Declaration of Restriction. Further, if any accessory structure
and use is subdivided from the principal structure and use to which it is accessory or,
alternately, if the principal structure is demolished or removed, the use of such accessory
structure shall be terminated until a new principal structure and use is established on the
lot on which the accessory structure and use is located.
(b) Attached or unattached accessory structures include: private garages, swimming pools,
cabanas, bedrooms, household staff cottage. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit
the construction of an enclosed accessory building containing bedrooms with bath
facilities to be used in connection with and as a part of the primary residence within the
building lines as provided in this section.
(c) Open awnings or trellises must meet the setback requirements and applicable open space
and lot coverage requirements. These structures may not be converted to permanent
additions if such conversion would increase the lot coverage of the principal structure
above the allowed percentage.
4. Height
Height is limited to two full stories from grade or minimum FEMA elevation as defined within
this code. Height is measured to the bottom of the eave. Variations to the Height requirement
may be allowed for skylights or solar panels not exceeding three (3) feet above the roof. Such
structures shall not cover more than ten (10) percent of the roof structure.
5. Botanical Gardens
A Botanical Garden is allowed by Exception. A Botanical Garden shall require a minimum of
5 acres and may also include the following:
(a) Educational facilities including building for meeting and classrooms
(b) Scientific research laboratory
(c) Offices to serve the Botanical Garden
(d) Residential living units for visiting scholars
(e) Garden maintenance area
(f) Gift shop or bookstore area. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to areas
not visible from public streets
3.6 Reserved for Coconut Grove NCD-3 (R-2) Two-Family Residential District
3.7 Reserved for Coconut Grove NCD-3 (R-3) Multifamily Medium-Density Residential District
3.8 Coconut Grove NCD-3 Commercial Districts
a. Limitation
A.22
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
The square footage of individual retail establishments within Coconut Grove Corridors defined
in 3.5, and in the Village Center sub-district as defined in 3.1, shall be limited to a maximum size
of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in total floor area used for retail and related services,
except as may be modified below for “large-scale retail establishments.” Retail specialty centers
as defined in City Code Sec. 4-2 located adjacent to Coconut Grove Corridors listed in 3.5, may
be approved by a Warrant. Special event Class I permits are exempted from the limitations of
this section.
b. “Large-scale retail establishment” defined
A “large-scale retail establishment” is defined for the purposes of NCD-3 as a retail establishment
or combination of commercial retail establishment(s), including membership establishments with
any commercial retail use, of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in gross floor area. The
gross floor area includes building gross floor area and ancillary outdoor storage or merchandise
display areas. For the purposes of this definition, the floor area does not include motor vehicle
parking or loading areas. For the purpose of determining the applicability of the twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of floor area, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent stores or retail
tenants that share common check out stands or a controlling interest, or storage areas, shall be
considered one establishment.
c. Exception required for “large scale retail establishments.”
A “large-scale retail establishment” within the Coconut Grove Corridors listed in 3.5 shall be
permitted only by Exception.
d. “Large scale grocery stores.”
Retail establishments exclusively for the sale of groceries and not exceeding forty thousand
(40,000) square feet located within the underlying T5 or T6 Transect Zones abutting US-1 (Federal
Hwy.) may be permitted by Warrant. “Groceries” is defined as food products, dry groceries
(such as household products and paper goods), and other items typically sold (such as meats,
poultry, seafood, sushi, dairy products, frozen foods, fruits, vegetables, deli items, prepared
foods, baked goods, health and beauty products, pharmaceuticals, and alcoholic beverages) or
services commonly provided in a grocery store in Miami-Dade County.
e. Site requirements
In addition to all requirements in the applicable zoning district, “large-scale retail establishments”
must meet the following site criteria and limitations:
1. Maximum size of retail establishment
The maximum size of any individual retail establishment within any Coconut Grove Corridor shall
be seventy thousand (70,000) square feet. No individual retail establishment within a Large
Scale Retail establishment shall be permitted which exceeds seventy thousand (70,000)
square feet.
2. Minimum lot dimensions
“large-scale retail establishments” may be permitted exclusively in lots having a minimum net area
of two (2) acres. Properties which do not meet the two-acre size limitation shall be limited to
individual establishments of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less.
3. Minimum setbacks and build-to lines
A.23
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Large Scale Retail establishments shall have the following minimum setbacks:
(a) Any front or side setback abutting a public right-of-way or non-residentially zoned property
build-to line is twenty (20) feet. The area from the build-to line to the right-of-way line shall
be used for permanent sidewalks with illumination, pedestrian amenities, or landscaping,
except in areas as required for emergency access, or where driveway entrances are located.
Landscaping in this setback area shall count toward the green space requirements. This area
may not be used for parking or loading at any time.
(b) Side or rear lot line abutting a residentially zoned property: setback is fifty (50) feet. The
setback shall include a 20-foot heavily landscaped buffer area. If an access alley, parking,
loading door, delivery area, or inventory storage area is present along this side of the property,
then the setback area shall also include an eight-foot-high masonry wall inside of the 20-foot
landscape buffer.
4. Building orientation and facades
(a) Building facades and elevations shall be designed to minimize the visual impacts of the
scale of the building.
(b) Large-scale retail structures may be oriented with their entrances toward arterial or collector
roadways as defined in the City Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Any side with regular public ingress/egress point(s) is to be considered a front. Regular
public ingress/egress to the building shall not be located facing residential uses. There
may be more than one (1) front. Front and side facade design shall include the following
design features to minimize scale impacts and promote activated street frontages.
(d) Building design variations at intervals no greater than fifty (50) feet.
(e) Storefront windows, with interior spaces visible and lit from within at night, equal to at
least fifty (50) percent of the linear length of ground-floor wall on building front elevations
as defined herein. Window spacing should be such that no more than twenty (20) percent
of the length of the wall may have an uninterrupted length without storefront windows.
5. Vehicular access
Primary ingress and egress to the site must be provided from the arterial(s) and not from
secondary roads or collectors and subject to the following:
(a) Except as required for emergency access, vehicular driveways shall not be along local
roadways as defined in the City Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Except where required for emergency access or other compelling public safety reasons,
vehicular driveways shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of residentiallyzoned
land along the same side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the
driveway.
(c) Delivery vehicle access/egress shall be clearly defined in the site plan, and shall only be
from arterial roadways, and located no less than one hundred (100) feet from residentiallyzoned
land along the same side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the
driveway.
(d) Where large and bulk merchandise sales are expected, customer pick-up access/egress
shall be clearly defined in the site plan, and shall only be from arterial roadways, and
located no less than one hundred (100) feet from residentially-zoned land along the same
side of the street, as measured from the nearest point of the driveway.
A.24
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
6. Parking and loading requirements
(a) One (1) space per every two hundred (250) square feet of gross floor area shall be required
for a “large-scale retail establishment.” All required parking must be provided onsite.
(b) Along collector roads as defined by the City Comprehensive Plan, setback buffers, building
design or other features shall screen parking such that no more than thirty (30) percent
of the parking lot or facilities are visible from the roadway.
(c) Along local roads as defined by the City Comprehensive Plan, setback buffers, building
design or other features shall completely screen parking such that the parking lot or
facilities are not visible from the roadway, except for distances as required by driveways
or emergency access.
(d) All loading and deliveries shall be adjacent to an arterial roadway. Said loading and delivery
areas shall be screened from public view by an eight-foot wall.
7. Green space
A “large-scale retail establishment” shall implement landscaping in an area equal in size to,
or greater than, fifteen (15) percent of the gross lot area. Landscaping shall be implemented
generally so as to provide ample shade areas in the parking lot and abutting sidewalks and
to minimize the visual impact of the structure and parking space on the streetscape. To this
end, a landscape plan for the site shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review
and approval by the Planning and Zoning Advisory Board as part of the required Exception.
8. Buffer
Wherever the property abuts another property with a more restrictive zoning designation, a
“large-scale retail establishment” shall provide a twenty-foot wide heavily landscaped buffer.
This buffer shall include Florida native trees at no less than fifteen (15) to twenty (20) feet in
height, with a diameter at breast height of no less than four (4) to five (5) inches spaced on
15-foot centers. Also included in this buffer shall be hedging and ground cover. This buffer
shall be included in the required landscape plan.
9. Fences and walls
Fences and walls shall be erected to a minimum height of eight (8) feet wherever the property
abuts another property with a more restrictive zoning designation.
f. Location of “large-Scale Retail establishment”
A “large-scale retail establishment” shall be located exclusively on a lot having frontage on one
(1) or more arterial roads.
g. Hours of operation
Except for special events requiring Class I permits, a “large-scale retail establishment” shall open
no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on weekends and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and shall close no later than
11:00 p.m. on weekends and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays. Deliveries to or from any “large-scale
retail establishment” shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. through 3:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday.
A.25
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
h. Variances prohibited
No variances from the provisions set forth in the site requirements or hours of operation are permitted.
A.3.8 Reserved. Coconut Grove NCD-3 Sub-District Architectural Guidelines.
A.26
AS ADOPTED - MAY 2015
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX A: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
General Principles
Public access waterfront walkways shall: 5
Bulkheads or Seawalls 5
Natural Shorelines 6
Design Standards for Bulkheads or Seawalls 6
Design Standards for Waterfront Walkways 6
Safety Buffer Zone 6
Circulation Zone 7
Passive Zone 7
Transition and Security Zone 8
Standards and Guidelines for Design Elements
Landscaping 8
Lighting 9
Signage 9
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
AMENDMENTS TO MIAMI 21
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
General Principles
Public access waterfront walkways shall:
1. Feel public. No one should feel as if he or she is intruding on private property. The public
should feel welcome and at ease to move along the entire length of the waterfront. Signage
should clearly establish the public’s right to use the walkway.
2. Be usable. Young and old, handicapped and joggers, lovers, fishermen, business and men
and women, everyone should find the waterfront usable. Potential conflicts between active
and passive users should be prevented through segregation of waterfront walk use zones.
(See Design Standards below).
3. Provide visual access. The attraction is the water. All landscaping, furniture, lighting, guard rails
and planters should be subordinated to enhance maximum visibility to the water. Simplicity
of design is preferred. The views of adjacent private development should not be obstructed.
4. Enhance visual quality. Parking and service areas must be completely screened from the
walkway. Materials, color and forms should complement the natural shoreline environment.
5. Connect to other public areas. Public parks, transit stops, thoroughfares, midblock walkways,
shopping areas, and publicly accessible plazas should connect to the waterfront.
6. Take advantage of waterfront setting. Where practical, boating and fishing activities should
be incorporated into waterfront designs. Elevated viewing areas, historically interpretive
markers and signs are desirable. Boat access from the water to the land is encouraged.
Bulkheads or Seawalls
1. Bulkheads and Seawalls constructed on properties north of the Rickenbacker Causeway
and along the Miami River or Biscayne Bay shall be constructed five (5) feet above National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). Bulkheads and seawalls constructed on properties south
of the Rickenbacker Causeway and on Biscayne Bay shall be constructed six (6) feet above
NGVD. All other bulkheads located in the City of Miami shall meet the minimum Miami-Dade
County Standards.
2. Bulkheads or Seawalls shall be constructed eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches in width
at the top and meet all City of Miami departments’ requirements. The top of the bulkhead or
seawall shall be at a constant elevation for the length of the bay / river walk.
3. Deviations to the requirements may be granted by the Director of Public Works to construct
bulkheads or seawalls at a height other than the standard NGVD set by the City due to
a justifiable request. Any deviations from the City standard bulkhead elevation where a
waterfront walkway is being proposed would require the property owner to construct, on
the applicant’s property, a connecting transition at a consistent A.D.A. compliant width and
grade to the waterfront walkway on adjacent properties. All requests for a deviation to the
mandated bulkhead elevation shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Works and
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
shall include all appropriate architectural and engineering or other documentation needed
to make a determination.
Natural Shorelines
1. Walkways along a natural shoreline or rip rap shoreline may be set back from the edge of
the shoreline and meander within the waterfront setback area.
2. Areas with natural shorelines must transition to adjacent properties in elevation and alignment
to create a cohesive baywalk or riverwalk circulation.
Design Standards for Bulkheads or Seawalls
1. The top of the bulkhead or seawall shall be at a constant elevation for the length of the waterfront.
It shall be eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches wide at the top.
2. Safety ladders of stainless steel or galvanized steel shall be placed a maximum of 100 feet
apart along the face of the seawall or bulkhead, to allow for climbing out of the water at low
tide.
3. The top of the seawall/bulkhead shall be six (6) to eight (8) inches higher than the surface
of the adjacent baywalk or riverwalk safety zone.
4. The inside edge of the seawall/bulkhead shall be beveled.
Design Standards for Waterfront Walkways
Waterfront walkway landscaped areas should be landscaped with native plant materials. Shade trees are required
within the Passive/Transition Zones and may also be planted along the Safety Buffer Zone, in lieu of palms, to
create an allee of trees. Shrubs, low shrubs, and groundcovers (low level plantings) should be planted at the
base of trees and palms to enhance waterfront walkway aesthetics and to help buffer the walkway perimeters.
The following walkway zones are listed in order from the landward edge of the bulkhead cap and progressing
landward towards the private property. NOTE: the top of the bulkhead cap shall be six (6”) to eight (8”) inches
above the waterfront walkway elevation.
Safety Buffer Zone
Safety Buffer Zone - A minimum three (3) to four (4) foot wide area adjacent to the bulkhead. (See Plan Detail-
3’ minimum where there is no planting, 4’ minimum where planting beds are provided.)
1. Since railings, walls and/or other barriers are not desirable along the water’s edge, waterfront
users need to be warned when coming close to the water with a minimum three (3) foot wide
safety buffer zone consisting of a rough textured surface that discourages walking.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
2. Paving within the safety buffer zone shall be a type of cobble stone with “river rock,” approximately
¾ to 1 ½ inches in diameter, set in concrete leaving a relief of ¼ to ½ inches or
similar aggregate pavers with ADA domes.
3. Planting beds shall be a minimum four (4) feet wide with trees or palms planted at grade
providing shade to pedestrians and low level plantings provided at the base of the trees or
palms. Landscape lighting may be provided to accentuate trees or palms in this area.
4. In areas between the planting beds, a minimum three (3) foot wide uniform exposed aggregate
finish such as a river rock textured surface shall be provided to warn pedestrians of the
water’s edge meeting Americans with Disabilities Standards.
5. Bollard lighting within the textured surface adjacent to the Circulation Zone shall be installed
to provide pedestrian / pathway lighting.
Circulation Zone
Circulation Zone – A minimum fifteen (15) to sixteen (16) foot wide unobstructed linear pedestrian walkway.
(See Plan Detail- 15’ minimum where adjacent plantings are provided in the Safety Zone, 16’ minimum where
there are no plantings in the Safety Zone.)
1. The waterfront circulation zone shall consist of a linear pedestrian walkway or promenade
and shall be a minimum fifteen (15) feet wide.
2. The walkway may meander along the shoreline; however all offsets in the alignment of the
walkway shall not exceed six (6 ) feet and be spaced not less than fifty (50) feet apart.
3. Obstructions to movement (trees, bollards, lighting, etc.) within the circulation zone shall not
reduce the clear width of the walkway to less than fifteen (15) feet at any point.
4. The Circulation Zone shall be constructed of non-slip paving materials with high aesthetic
appearance and structural qualities to support emergency vehicle access.
5. Variable textures and materials may be used to surface the promenade.
6. The promenade surface shall be at a constant elevation, and shall be accessible to handicapped
persons throughout the entire length of the waterfront.
Passive Zone
Passive Zone – A minimum three (3) foot wide area interspersed with shade trees, low level plantings, site
furniture, lighting and accessories.
1. The area for sitting, accent landscaping and concessions shall be located along the inland
side of the waterfront, and shall be not less than three (3) feet wide.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
2. Short lengths of the passive zone may be elevated eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches
above the level of the promenade for enhanced bay and river views.
3. All benches shall have back rests, and their placement shall emphasize direct views of the
water.
4. Site furniture may include overhead canopies, concessions, etc. and shall be confined to this
zone. All furniture shall be permanently installed preferably by direct burial in concrete.
6. Accessories include benches, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, pedestrian scale light
poles and landscape lighting. Appropriate additional furniture including overhead canopies
or shelters, drinking fountains, etc., shall be confined to the passive zone.
7. The passive zone may be paved in plain concrete or the paver on the main circulation zone.
Transition and Security Zone
Transition Zone – A minimum three (3) foot wide area, immediately adjacent to the Passive Zone to buffer private
development from the waterfront walkway and collect stormwater.
1. To buffer private development from the adjacent waterfront a minimum three (3) foot wide
transition zone shall border the waterfront facility.
2. This visual and functional transition from public to private space shall generally be marked
by low level shrubbery and overhead shade or ornamental trees.
3. Security to limit public access to private property may be provided by fences, grade changes
or retaining walls. All screens and walls shall be landscaped to reduce their visual impact on
the walkway.
4. For adjacent developments that serve the public (i.e., restaurants, shops, hotels, entertainment,
etc.) provision of wide, visible and easy pedestrian access to the waterfront shall be
assured.
5. In general, landscaping and security barriers shall not visually screen the waterfront from
adjacent active uses, such as retail restaurants, or entertainment.
Standards and Guidelines for Design Elements
Landscaping
1. Palms may be used along either edge of the waterfront, but Coconut Palms or Sabal Palms
are particularly appropriate for the water’s edge.
2. Raised planters, if used, shall be confined to the passive zone, and all planter walls shall
double as sitting walls, fifteen (15) to thirty (30) inches in height.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
3. Plant material shall be primarily native salt-tolerant species.
Lighting
1. Lighting at the water’s edge shall be confined to eight (8) inch diameter bollards, which shall
be twenty-four (24) to thirty (30) inches high and spaced approximately twenty (20) feet on
center.
2. Bollards shall be one hundred (100) watt MV with down illumination not extending beyond
the bulkhead line.
3. Overhead lighting shall be confined to the passive zone and consists of down lighting with
lamps not over fourteen (14) feet high, 175 watt MV, and spaced approximately fifty (50) feet
on center.
4. Up lighting of landscaping is encouraged.
5. Mercury vapor, metal halide lamps or similar “white” light luminaires shall be used.
6. Colored lighting, except for private signs, shall not be used.
7. Simple contemporary fixture design shall be used as opposed to highly stylized, vintage or
period designs.
Signage
1. All public access waterfront walks shall be marked with the standard “Public Shore” sign.
2. All major public access points, including park walkways, roadways, dedicated midblock walks
and public plazas, shall be marked with “Public Shore” signs.
3. Adjacent accessible publicly oriented private development, such as cafes or shops, shall
identify the use with signage in the transition zone.
4. Uniformly designed historic or environmental markers and descriptive plaques shall be placed
in the passive zone.
5. Signage shall identify access points and adjacent activities (cafes, shops, etc.) for boaters.
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
A
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
C.1
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SD-27 MIDTOWN MIAMI SPECIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 627.1 SD-27.1 Midtown Miami East Special District. C.6
627.1.1 Intent. C.7
627.1.2 Effect of SD-27.1 district designation. C.7
627.1.3 Class II Special Permit. C.7
627.1.4 Principal uses and structures. C.8
627.1.5. Accessory Uses. C.9
627.1.6. Building Placement and buildable area. C.9
627.1.7 Maximum height, Build-to, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements. C.11
627.1.9 Upper Level Floorplates. C.13
627.1.10 Street Grid. C.13
627.1.11 Streetscape. C.13
627.1.12. Buildings. C.14
627.1.13. Building Functionality. C.14
627.1.14. Surface Parking and Parking Garages. C.15
627.1.15. Open Space. C.15
627.1.16. Off-Street Parking. C.16
627.1.17. Off-Street Loading. C.16
627.1.18. Sign Regulations. C.17
Sec. 627.2. Midtown Miami West.
627.2.1. Intent. C.17
627.2.2. Effect of SD-27.2 district designation. C.18
627.2.3. Class II Special Permit. C.18
627.2.4. Principal Uses and Structures. C.18
627.2.5. Accessory Uses. C.20
627.2.6. Building Placement and Buildable Area. C.20
627.2.7. Maximum Height, Build-To, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements. C.21
627.2.8. Street Grid/Blocks. C.22
627.2.9. Streetscape. C.22
627.2.10. Buildings. C.24
627.2.11. Building Functionality. C.24
627.2.12. Surface Parking and Parking Garages. C.25
627.2.13. Open Space. C.25
627.2.14. Off-street Parking. C.25
627.2.15. Off-street Loading. C.26
627.2.16. Sign Regulations. C.26
C.2
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
C.3
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
AMENDMENTS TO MIAMI 21
ORDINANCE DATE APPROVED DESCRIPTION LEGISLATIVE
ID
13235 11-18-2010 Minor and non-substantial modifications
throughout the Code
10-00956zt
C.4
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
C.5
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
SD-27 MIDTOWN MIAMI SPECIAL DISTRICT
The objective of this District is to promote neighborhood redevelopment through medium to high density mixed
use development. Due to intensity of infill development and redevelopment in the SD-27 Districts, population
and the overall level of commercial and retail activity will greatly increase.
Combined with the proximity of the SD-27 Districts to downtown and other revitalizing neighborhoods, convenient
and reliable transportation along the Midtown Miami Special District can connect the neighborhoods, jobs,
residences and activity centers and expand greater revitalization.
The character of the district is to include a wide range of pedestrian oriented activities that would facilitate a
vibrant mixed-use community setting, permitting the development of flexible live-work spaces as determined by
market forces, including mixed-use loft development. Ground level activities and uses with strong pedestrian
orientation are mandated to front streets to generate a lively pedestrian street life.
The District is intended for medium scale projects of diverse architectural design. Buildings will be restricted
as to height, setbacks, and will require habitable uses for portions of the building closest to the street. Unified
landscaping, paving, street furniture, storefront design, signage and building facade guidelines, as well as incentives
that would allow for the rehabilitation of significant historic resources.
For the purpose of the SD 27, the following definitions shall apply:
Active Uses: The principle component of the SD-27 district is ground floor active uses which promote pedestrian
activity. An active use is any use that provides a public entrance from the street with an interior use that
serves the general public. This may include retail, office, educational facilities, entertainment, and live-work.
Big-Box retail is defined as a single retail store comprised of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Build-To Line: An alignment established a certain distance from the base building line to a line along which a
building shall be constructed. Build-to dimensions are established in Sections 627.1.7 and 627.1.8 for each
street frontage and require that primary building frontages (excluding colonnades, arcades and awnings) be
constructed at the dimension provided for a minimum of x (x) percent of the lineal building frontage. Pursuant
to Sections 627.1.7 and 627.1.8, colonnades and arcades may encroach the specified build-to line provided a
minimum unobstructed pedestrian space of five (5) feet is provided. Colonnades and arcades shall not encroach
upon the base building line. Furthermore, Build-To lines are subject to compliance with the City of Miami Vision
Clearance requirements of Article 908.
Gateway: The SD-27 District promotes the design of buildings as gateway structures by providing greater allowable
height at strategic street intersections within the district. The gateway sites shall be as follows:
(1) The Southeast corner of the intersection of North Miami Avenue and Northeast 36th Street;
(2) The Southwest corner of the intersection of Northeast 36th Street and Northeast 2nd Avenue: and
(3) The Southeast corner of the intersection of Northeast 34th Street and Northeast 1st Place.
Liner Uses: Building uses that serve to conceal uses such as parking garages and service areas. When liner
uses contain ground floor space, such space shall be designed to accommodate retail and/or other uses that
promote pedestrian traffic and shall have entrances directly accessible from a public sidewalk or open space.
Live-work: Live-work describes residential units that have a commercial and/or office component accessed
through an external street entrance. The intent of this use is to provide efficient housing with the opportunity for
workspace that can contribute active uses at the ground floor. Home occupations pursuant to the provisions of
C.6
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
906.5.2 shall also qualify as live-work, except that additional parking, defined in 906.5.2.f. shall not be required.
Mixed Use: The SD-27 District promotes multiple uses within the same lot and on adjoining lots by permitting
multiple principal uses within the underlying district. A mixed use building or parcel exists when there is more
than one use and must include a combination of residential, retail, office, and/or live-work use. Specifically
excluded from the definition of Mixed Use is a building of only residential and/or live work uses. The accessory
or secondary use of a Mixed Use building shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total floor area
of the building. For the purposes of calculating mixed uses, live-work uses shall be allowed to count towards
residential or commercial uses, but shall not be allowed to count towards more than one use.
Open Space: Any parcel of land or water, excluding public right of way, that is at ground level or open to the
sky and designed and intended for the common use of the residents, tenant and the general public and may
include parks, linear parks, plazas, and landscape areas. Additionally, canopy trees and large palms planted
within pedestrian zones of the public right-of-way in accordance with the design standards shall respectively each
count as four hundred (400) square feet and one hundred seventy-five (175) square feet of open space. Open
Space is substantially free of structures other than structures that contribute to the common use of the space.
Smart Growth: Planning techniques founded upon and promoting any or all of the following principles:
(1) Using land resources more efficiently through compact building forms, infill development, and
moderation in street and parking standards in order to lessen land consumption and preserve
natural resources and promote multi-modal transportation;
(2) Supporting the location of stores, offices, residences, school, recreation spaces, and other public
facilities within walking distance of each other in compact neighborhoods that are designed to
provide alternate opportunities for easier movement and interaction;
(3) Providing a variety of housing choices to create a diverse community;
(4) Supporting walking, cycling, and transit as attractive alternatives to driving; providing alternative
routes that disperse rather than concentrate traffic congestion; lowering traffic speeds in neighborhoods;
(5) Connecting infrastructure and development decisions to minimize future costs by creating neighborhoods
where more people use existing services and facilities; by integrating development
and land use with transit routes and stations; and
(6) Improving the development standards review process and development standards so that developers
are encouraged to apply the principles stated above.
Story: A space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if
there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. Portions of buildings
constructed below grade shall not count toward an allowable number of stories, provided that at least fifty (50)
percent of the total floor perimeter is at least five (5) feet below grade.
(Ord. No. 12447, § 2, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 12688, § 2, 5-26-05)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 12688, § 2, adopted May 26, 2005, changed the title of § 627 from “SD-27 FEC Corridor”
to “SD-27 Midtown Miami Special District.” The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.
Sec. 627.1 SD-27.1 Midtown Miami East Special District.
The Midtown Miami East Special District area is bounded by Northeast 36th Street on the north and FEC
greenway on the east. On the south, the area is bounded by the centerline of Northeast 29th Street between
the FEC Greenway and Midtown Boulevard and by the centerline of Northeast 34th Street between Midtown
C.7
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
Boulevard and Buena Vista Avenue. On the west, the area is bounded by the centerline of Buena Vista Avenue
between Northeast 36th Street and Northeast 34th Street and by the centerline of Midtown Boulevard between
Northeast 34th Street and Northeast 29th Street.
627.1.1 Intent.
The Midtown Miami East District regulations are intended to provide for a method to allow for planning initiatives
that achieve unique or innovative development not otherwise provided for in the zoning ordinance. These
planning initiatives may include, but are not limited to, Smart Growth as defined in Section 627. The standards
and procedures of this district are intended to promote flexibility and diversity in design and permit planned diversification
and integration of uses and structures, with limitations and regulations as deemed necessary to be
consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
SD 27 Design Standards provide more detailed clarification to this ordinance and are incorporated by reference.
This district is of special and substantial public interest given its proximity to Downtown Miami and the Omni
Area, the Design District, Miami Beach, the Wynwood Neighborhood and to future proposed commuter transit
facilities within the Florida East Coast Railway (FEC) Corridor. The intent of the district is to: (1) promote the
efficient use of land resources through compact building forms, infill development, and moderation in street and
parking standards in order to reduce automobile traffic and promote multi-modal transportation; (2) promote
the creation of a Miami midtown environment through intensive urban mixed-use development with a twentyfour
hour activity pattern; (3) Enhance the pedestrian environment and connectivity of the existing surrounding
areas by extending the city street grid through the district; and (4) Provide intensive new housing opportunities
needed to sustain future commercial growth and commuter transit facilities. To this end, the district promotes
streetscapes and mixed-use buildings designed to provide pedestrians with lively, interesting, well-landscaped
and highly usable public spaces with a maximum interrelationship with ground floor building uses.
Concerning building uses and overall buildable area, mixed-use development is encouraged by providing greater
floor area ratios and overall building height than that of single use buildings. Furthermore, additional height is
provided for on sites that abut significant open space and/or are designated as strategically located visual gateways
as defined in Section 627. Yard and setback areas are minimal and are required to be developed as an
integral part of the overall pedestrian streetscape. Ground floor build-to lines are provided in order to establish
a continuous building frontage that enhances and provides spatial definition for the urban streetscapes.
Although no specific requirements are contained, it is further intended that buildings be designed utilizing environmentally
sensitive methods, including, but not limited to, passive and active solar techniques, green-roofs,
the utilization of environmentally sustainable materials and efficient mechanical systems.
627.1.2 Effect of SD-27.1 district designation.
The SD-27.1 Midtown Miami East Special district shall supplant districts or portions of districts included within
the SD boundaries to the extent indicated herein in the official zoning atlas.
627.1.3 Class II Special Permit.
627.1.3.1. When required.
A Class II Special Permit shall be required prior to approval of any permit (except special permits pursuant to
Article 13) affecting the height, bulk, location or exterior configuration of any existing building or the construction
of a new building; or for the implementation of signage, awnings, fences or any other improvement visible
from a public right-of-way.
C.8
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.1.3.2. Considerations in making Class II Special Permit determinations.
The purpose of the Class II Special Permit shall be to ensure conformity of the application with the expressed
intent of this district, with the general considerations listed in section 1305, and with the special considerations
contained in the SD-27 Design Standards incorporated herein by reference.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this zoning ordinance, a Major Use Special Permit is required for nonresidential
uses in a single building that exceed four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet and residential
units in a single building that exceed four hundred (400) dwelling units, or any combined use which exceeds
two thousand five hundred (2,500) parking spaces.
Any variances (as defined in Article 19) sought from the provisions of the SD 27.1 regulations shall require
such deviation to be considered within the process for a Major Use Special Permit as defined in Article 17; i.e.
increased development thresholds as set forth above shall not apply.
627.1.4 Principal uses and structures.
The following uses shall be permitted within the district, subject to the provisions of Section 627.1.7:
1. Neighborhood convenience goods and services, including food stores (grocery, meat, seafood,
produce, delicatessen, bakery, confectioneries, ice cream), drugstores, newsstands,
dry cleaners, barber and beauty shops, and shoe repair stores.
2. Retail establishments open to the general public as follows: Antique stores, art stores and
commercial art galleries; bicycle sales; book and stationery stores; china and crockery stores;
drugstores; floor covering; florist, including plant and shrub sales; food carts and vendors;
gift shops; hardware stores; hobby shops; home appliance stores; home furnishing stores;
interior decoration supply stores; establishments for the sales of boating and fishing supplies
(excluding outdoor sales of boats); jewelry stores; leather goods; luggage stores; music
stores; newsstands; office supply stores; optical goods stores; package liquor stores (without
drive-through facilities); paint and wallpaper; pet shops; photographic supply stores; restaurant
supply stores; tobacco shops; toy stores; television, radio, and other electronics stores;
videotape sales and rentals; variety and sundry stores; establishments for sale of wearing
apparel; Such establishments may provide incidental repair, maintenance, adjustment or
alteration services as appropriate, but facilities, operation and storage in relation to such
services shall not be visible from any street or street related pedestrian open space. Aside
from antique stores, art galleries, jewelry, bookstores and wearing apparel establishments,
no such retail establishments shall deal in secondhand merchandise.
3. Service establishments as follows: Interior decorator, Banks, savings and loan and financial
institutions; duplicating centers including letter and photostating services; driving school
agencies; locksmiths; medical or dental offices less than five thousand (5,000) square feet;
opticians; photographic service; business and professional offices; tailoring; dressmaking;
millinery or drapery fabrication, except where products are for office premises sale; rental of
recreation and sporting equipment.
4. All Residential uses as per the R-4 High Density Residential Zoning District.
5. Hotels.
6. Shops for the sale, assembly, customization or repair open to the general public as follows:
Awnings and Canvas; Carpentry; Construction of models for design purposes; Custom
C.9
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
woodworking and furniture; Glass; Signs; and Upholstery.
7. Public and private recreational facilities and community service facilities.
8. Production of art and handicrafts (but not mass-produced items) incidental to sale at retail
on the premises.
9. Restaurants, brewery restaurants, tearooms and cafes (without drive-through facilities),
including those with dancing and live entertainment.
10. Bars, cocktail lounges, saloons and taverns, supper clubs and nightclubs, including those
with live entertainment open to the general public.
11. Art galleries, auditoriums; theaters (including open air theaters) and cinemas, museums,
libraries and similar cultural uses.
12. Structures for operating public transportation.
13. Parking lots and garages subject to Sections 627.1.5, 627.1.7 and 627.1.12.
14. Public or private educational facilities.
15. Cellular communications in accordance with the provisions of the C-1 Restricted
Commercial Zoning district.
The following uses shall be permitted by Class I Special Permit:
1. Outdoor photographic stage sets.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of 906.9, up to ten (10) street and open space special events
per calendar year within the district.
627.1.5. Accessory Uses.
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and
structures, approved in the same permit proceedings, and initiated or completed within any time limits established
generally or in relation to the special permit, shall be permitted subject to limitations by these or generally
applicable regulations. Other accessory uses and structures shall require a Class II Special Permit.
No aboveground off-street parking or loading area shall be permitted between any front portion of a building
and the front line of a lot adjoining any street; provided, however that off-street parking for bicycles may be
permitted in such areas, subject to limitations and requirements as to location, design and number established
in connection with special permits.
627.1.6. Building Placement and buildable area.
1. Minimum lot requirements. No specific dimensional requirements are established in this
district, but lots shall be of sufficient width and area to conform with other requirements and
limitations of these and other lawful regulations.
C.10
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
2. Floor Area Limitations. Floor area limitations of the SD 27.1 district shall be as follows:
(a) The floor area ratio shall not exceed one and seventy-two hundredths (1.72) times the
gross lot area for single use buildings.
(b) The floor area for all mixed-use buildings shall not exceed three (3.0) times the gross
lot area. Ground floor retail in mixed-use buildings shall not be included in floor area
calculations.
(c) Allowable increase in floor area up to five tenths (0.5) will be provided for payment into
the FEC Corridor Neighborhood Improvement Trust Fund, as set forth in Chapter 62 of
the City of Miami Code.
3. Density. Density shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) residential units/net acre.
4. Height Limitations.
(a) Height limitations shall be as provided in Section 627.1.7. It is the intent of the District
to provide for design variation, therefore height is regulated by an allowable number of
stories and an allowable height threshold, whichever is less. Notwithstanding any provisions
of Section 627.1.7, a height increase of ten (10) percent shall be allowed as a
non-substantial amendment, subject to the approval of the Director of Planning.
(b) Parking structures shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height. Notwithstanding any
provisions of this Section, a height increase of up to ten (10) percent shall be allowed as
a non-substantial amendment, subject to the approval of the Director of Planning.
5. Maximum and Minimum Setback Requirements and Build-To Lines.
Setback requirements for the SD 27.1 district are measured perpendicular to and from the
base building line. Platted public right of way lines shall be defined as the base building line.
When platted right of way lines at street intersections are rounded, setbacks shall be measured
from projected right of way lines and not from the rounded portions of such lines. The
SD-27 Design Standards provide further clarification of the requirements provide herein. The
maximum and minimum setbacks and build-to requirements shall be as provided in Section
627.1.7 and below as follows:
(a) Maximum Ground Floor Setback for all Streets. For the first twenty-five (25) feet in
elevation above the public right-of-way, no building facade shall be set back more than
a depth of ten (10) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 627.1.7. Off-street
parking shall not be allowed within the maximum setback. Building frontage may exceed
the maximum setback requirement, provided that the resultant setback is designed and
improved as public open space.
(b) Minimum Setbacks and Build-To Lines.
(i) Minimum setbacks and build-to requirements shall be as provided in Section 627.1.7.
In order to allow for building and streetscape design variation, an accumulative maximum
of forty (40) percent of any street or side setback frontage may have no podium
and tower setback requirements as defined in Section 627.1.7.
(ii) Colonnades may encroach the setback and build-to requirements provided that a
C.11
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
minimum of five (5) feet of sidewalk must remain clear of all obstructions. In addition,
awnings and upper story balconies may encroach the setback and build-to requirements
by a distance of seven (7) feet. In no case shall colonnades and upper story
balcony encroachments be allowed beyond the base building/property line. Awnings
may encroach base building property line by a distance of seven (7) feet into the
right-of-way.
(iii) Building frontages along East Coast Avenue and above sixteen (16) stories or one
hundred seventy-five (175) feet in height (above the public sidewalk), whichever is
less, shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the East Coast Avenue net property frontage.
This requirement is applicable for all building frontages within fifty (50) feet of
the base building line.
6. Gateway Designations.
As provided in Section 627, gateway sites shall be as follows:
(1) The SW corner of the intersection of NE 36th Street and NE 2nd Avenue; and
(2) The SE corner of the intersection of NE 34th Street and NE 1st Place.
627.1.7 Maximum height, Build-to, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements.
TABLE INSET:
SD 27.1 Maximum height, Build-to, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements
Street/Classification Height/Number of Stories Ground Floor Building/Setback Podium Setback** Tower Setback** Uses
Midtown Boulevard 300’ and 28 stories 200’
for mixed-use on the
western side of the street
0’ setback on the eastern side 15’ setback above
75’ for buildings
designated as a
gateway
70’ setback above
120’ elevation
65% active
ground floor
uses required
Primary 350’ and 33 stories if designated
as a gateway 1
20’ Build-To on the western
side (maximum allowable enchroachment
for 80’ of linear
frontage)
No setback
requirements for
gateway 1 buildings
Liner uses on all
parking structures
35’ setback above 30’ elevation
on the western side
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
Buena Vista Avenue 60’ for commercial singleuse
0’ Build-To N/A All SD 21.1 uses
permitted
Primary 200’ for mixed-use on the
eastern side of street
15’ setback above 30’ elevation
on the east side
Liner Uses on
parking structures
East Coast Avenue 300’ and 28 stories adjacent
to the FEC corridor
5’ setback 15’ setback above
75’ elevation
N/A Liner Uses on
parking structures
Tertiary 350’ and 33 stories if designated
as a gateway
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
NE 36th Street
Primary
350’ and 33 Stories 9’ Build-To with colonnade or
awning
15’ setback above
75’ elevation east of
Midtown Boulevard
N/A 65% active
ground floor
uses required
15’ setback above
60’ elevation west of
Midtown Boulevard
Liner uses on all
parking structures
C.12
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
NE 29th Street 300’ and 28 stories 9’ Build-To with colonnade or
awning
30’ setback above
75’ elevation
N/A 65% active
ground floor
uses
Primary Liner uses on all
parking
Structures
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
NE 30th, NE 32nd, NE
35th Street
300’ and 28 Stories 5’ setback 15’ setback above
75’ elevation
N/A All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
Secondary 350’ and 33 stories if designated
as a gateway 1
Restaurant or
Retail Uses are
required along
70’ at intersection
with Midtown
Boulevard
NE 34th Street (East of
Midtown)
300’ and 28 stories 0’ setback 15’ setback above
75’ elevation
N/A 65% active
ground floor
uses required
Primary 120’ for mixed-use or theater/
entertainment/civic
use 200’ for mixed-use
Liner uses on all
parking structures
NE 31st NE 33rd
Street and NE 34th
Terrace (sdie setbacks)
300’ and 28 stories 20’ Build-To 55’ above 75’ elevation
N/A Liner uses
on all parking
structures and
ground floor
Tertiary 300’ and 33 stories if designated
as a gateway 1
35’ setback above 25’ elevation
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
FEC Corridor (No
Street frontage)
300’ and 28 stories 40’ Build-To 55’ setback above
75’ elevation
N/A Liner uses on all
parking structures
350’ and 33 stories if designated
as a gateway
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
Dedicated Open
Space greater than
4,000 square feet
300’ and 28 stories 0’ Build-To N/A N/A Liner uses on all
parking structures
350’ and 33 stories if designated
as gateway1
All SD 27.1 uses
permitted
* Podium setbacks are for elevations between seventy-five (75) feet and one hundred twenty (120) feet.
** Tower setbacks are for elevations greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
1. Gateway designations shall be as defined in Section 627.1.6.
2. Height limitations as described herein shall not prohibit additional height allowances as described
in section 627.1.6.
C.13
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.1.9 Upper Level Floorplates.
All building footprints above one hundred twenty (120) feet in elevation shall not exceed forty (40) percent of
the net lot area.
627.1.10 Street Grid.
New streets and avenues in the SD27.1 District shall align with the existing city street grid. The north/south
spacing between new streets shall not exceed six hundred twenty (620) feet from centerline of street to centerline
of street. The east/west spacing between new avenues shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet from
centerline of avenue to centerline of avenue.
For the purpose of this ordinance streets shall be categorized as “primary”, “secondary” and “tertiary” as follows:
1. Primary Streets: Northeast 34th Street, Northeast 36th Street, Midtown Boulevard and
Northeast 29th Street.
2. Secondary Streets: Northeast 30th Street, Northeast 32nd Street and Northeast 35th Street.
3. Tertiary Streets: Northeast 31st Street, Northeast 33rd Street, Northeast 34th Terrace and
East Coast Avenue.
For further clarification, refer to the SD 27 Design Standards.
627.1.11 Streetscape.
All exterior space as defined in the SD 27.1 Zoning Ordinance shall conform to the following standards and are
subject to approval by the Director of the City of Miami Public Works Department and other authorities having
jurisdiction. Denial of these requirements by such authorities for reasons of public health, safety and welfare
shall not constitute a variance from this Ordinance. Recommendations beyond the requirements provided herein
are provided in the supplemental SD 27 Design Standards.
1. All required yards, setbacks, and sidewalk area within the public right-of-way adjacent to
streets shall be a continuous pedestrian space. For all sidewalks, an area a minimum of 5’
wide must remain clear of all obstructions to ensure adequate pedestrian circulation.
2. Street furniture shall be as defined in the SD 27 Design Standards. Street furniture shall be
part of the urban streetscape to encourage pedestrian activity and provide such amenities
as: trash receptacles, benches, bollards, pedestrian lighting, bicycle racks, parking meters,
street signs, transit shelters, tables, chairs, and water fountains. Trash receptacles and
benches shall be provided at a minimum of two hundred (200) foot intervals on both sides of
Northeast 34th Street and Midtown Boulevard. Bicycle racks shall be provided at six hundred
(600) foot intervals on both sides of Northeast 34th Street and Midtown Boulevard. These
may be located in the pedestrian areas as long as pedestrian flow patterns are continuous.
3. All specified plant material shall be Florida #1 or better. Refer to the Florida Grades and
Standards Manual. All shade trees shall have high wind resistance. Additionally, all trees and
shrubs shall be native to Florida or have sub-tropic, drought tolerant characteristics.
4. Palm trees shall be provided in the sidewalk area at a minimum spacing of twenty-five (25)
feet. Large palms shall have a minimum height of sixteen (16) feet and small palms shall
have a minimum height of eight (8) feet.
5. Shade trees shall be provided in the sidewalk area at a minimum spacing of forty (40) feet
on center with an eight (8) foot continuous canopy spread at planting and a twenty-five (25)
foot spread at maturity with a 3” caliper at planting. Such trees shall have a minimum height
C.14
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
of fourteen (14) feet at planting and twenty-five (25) feet at maturity.
6. Only one shade tree species may be used for each individual street. Such species shall
be determined by the City of Miami Planning and Zoning Department through the Class II
Permit process.
7. All requirements for street medians shall adhere to the recommendations provided in the
supplemental SD 27 Design Standards.
627.1.12. Buildings.
All buildings abutting “primary streets” as defined in the SD 27.1 Zoning Ordinance shall conform with the following
standards:
1. A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the linear frontage of any lot abutting a “primary
street” shall contain ground floor space designed to accommodate retail and other uses that
promote pedestrian traffic. The design of such space shall meet the standards listed below,
except for buildings that are intended primarily for residential use, where ground floor pedestrian
oriented uses would be inappropriate or disruptive to the residential use.
(a) All ground level space designed for pedestrian oriented uses shall have external entrances
directly accessible from public sidewalk space. At least one (1) external entrance
shall be located along the frontage of the primary street or on the corner intersection of
the primary street and any other street. Additionally, each building use, such as a retail
store with a cafe or restaurant, shall have separate entrances. All such entrances shall
be transparent.
(b) For the first ten (10) feet of height above the public sidewalk elevation, the exterior building
wall shall contain windows and/or doorways of transparent glass covering at least
fifty (50) percent of the wall area. Additionally, the base of all transparent openings shall
be no more than thirty (30) inches above the sidewalk.
(c) Arcades and colonnades shall be at least seven (7) feet wide and twelve (12) feet high.
A minimum of five (5) feet of the sidewalk must remain clear of all obstructions to ensure
adequate pedestrian circulation.
2. The remaining frontage of thirty-five percent (35%) may be dedicated to entrances, lobbies,
customer driveways, architectural treatment, or non-pedestrian oriented uses. No portion
of a building wall that does not contain transparent glass shall be constructed with a flat,
unarticulated surface for a distance of greater than twelve (12) feet.
627.1.13. Building Functionality.
All exterior space as defined in the SD 27.2 Zoning Ordinance shall conform to the following standards, except
as provided:
1. Service access and loading areas shall not be permitted to front the following streets or portions
thereof; Northeast 36th Street; Midtown Boulevard; Northeast 29th Street; and within
side setbacks (mews) as required in Section 627.1.7.
C.15
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
2. Service access and loading areas shall be enclosed within buildings or screened from public
view with architectural walls and/or landscaping.
3. All dumpsters shall be concealed on three sides by a solid structure, and on the fourth side
by an opaque gate.
4. Utility boxes, meters, and HVAC equipment shall be concealed within buildings or screened
from public view.
627.1.14. Surface Parking and Parking Garages.
Surface parking and parking structures shall conform with the following standards:
1. Off-street parking is not permitted along frontages of primary streets.
2. Vehicular access to parking structures shall not be permitted on the following streets: NE 36th
Street; NE 29th Street; and Midtown Boulevard. Access shall be allowed along the western
edge of Midtown Boulevard north of NE 34th Street.
3. Blank, unarticulated walls will not be permitted for parking podium facades that are not lined
with uses. Such facades shall have architectural treatments designed to be compatible with
neighboring buildings. Ramps, stairwells and any other portion of a garage should be buffered
with the use of decorative grilles and screens, landscaping, and other varied materials.
4. As required in Section 627.1.7, liner uses are required on all levels of parking garages except
when such construction of uses would interfere with the ventilation requirements of applicable
building codes. Such ventilation requirements shall be met with the least possible disruption
to a continuous liner use program as required in Section 627.1.7 and shall be accommodated
on secondary and tertiary street frontages.
627.1.15. Open Space.
A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross lot area shall be provided as open space as defined in Section 627,
except as follows:
1. Since the intent of the district is to provide significant common public open space, the minimum
open space requirement may be aggregated among parcels or lots under common
ownership and located in a common location within the district. Such aggregation of open
space shall be improved as provided in Section 627.
2. Pursuant to the District plat, open space platted by easement within the District shall be allowed
to be substituted for the requirements provided herein. Such platted open space shall
be improved as provided in Section 627.
3. Within the block bounded by Northeast 36th Street, Midtown Boulevard, Northeast 34th Street
and Buena Vista Avenue, one (1) acre of open space shall be provided and may be used for
open space aggregation provided in 627.1.15.1. Such open space shall be contiguous and
centrally located within the block and shall be in addition to required Streetscape improvements
provided in Section 627.1.10.
C.16
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.1.16. Off-Street Parking.
A. Requirements.
Since it is intended to promote the use of multi-modal transportation and that automobile traffic
be minimized, the off-street parking requirements shall be as follows:
1. For residential uses, one (1) space per dwelling unit
2. For Live/Work uses, one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of net floor area.
3. For hotel or motel uses, one (1) space per three (3) lodging units.
4. For theaters, one (1) space per each eight (8) fixed seats.
5. For all other uses, one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of net floor area.
Valet parking shall be allowed to satisfy off-street parking requirements.
B. Off site parking permitted.
Notwithstanding the limitations of section 918, offsite parking shall be permitted by Class II
Special Permit without limitation on percentage of the required number of spaces or maximum
distance from the principal use when located within the SD-27.1 zoning district. Furthermore,
there shall be no required demonstration or findings of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
in providing required parking on the site, provided that the location of the offsite parking is
within one thousand (1,000) feet radius of the principal use, or there are permanent provisions
made to transport the offsite parking patrons to and from the principal site at the property owner’s
expense.
627.1.17. Off-Street Loading.
The off-street loading requirements shall be as follows:
1. For residential uses:
(a) Berth minimum to be twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet by fifteen (15) feet in height;
(b) One (1) berth for every one hundred (100) residential units or fraction thereof.
2. For non-residential uses:
(a) Berth minimum to be twelve (12) by fifty-five (55) feet by fifteen (15) feet in height;
(b) For non-residential floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000) up to fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet, one (1) berth total. No berths are required for floor area less than
twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet;
(c) For non-residential floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, two
(2) berths total;
(d) For non-residential floor area up to two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet,
three (3) berths total;
(e) For non-residential floor area up to five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, four
(4) berths total.
3. Mixed use projects shall comply with loading requirements per use as specified above.
Since it is intended to promote the most efficient use of land, notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 922.1 and 922.4, the maneuvering of trucks within the public right of way for the
purposes of off-street loading shall be allowed by a Class II Special Permit. Additionally,
C.17
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
tandem loading berths shall be allowed by a Class II Special Permit.
627.1.18. Sign Regulations.
See Article 10 sign regulations as for SD-8, and in addition, the SD-27 Design Standards for sign regulations
and limitations.
(Ord. No. 12448, § 2, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 12689, § 2, 5-26-05; Ord. No. 12724, § 2, 7-28-05; Ord. No. 12757,
§ 2, 1-26-06)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 12689, § 2, adopted May 26, 2005, changed the title of § 627.1 from “SD-27.1 Buena
Vista Yard” to “SD-27.1 Midtown Miami East Special District.” The historical notation has been preserved for
reference purposes.
Sec. 627.2. Midtown Miami West.
The Area is bounded by Northeast 36th Street on the north and North Miami Avenue on the west. On the south,
the area is bounded by the centerline of Northeast 34th Street between Buena Vista Avenue and Midtown
Boulevard and by Northeast 29th Street between North Miami Avenue and Midtown Boulevard. On the east, the
area is bounded by the centerline of Buena Vista Avenue between Northeast 36th Street and Northeast 34th
Street and by the centerline of Midtown Boulevard between Northeast 34th Street and Northeast 29th Street.
627.2.1. Intent.
The Midtown Miami West district regulations are intended to provide a method to allow for planning initiatives that
achieve a unique or innovative development that is not otherwise provided for in the zoning ordinance. These
planning initiatives may include, but are not limited to, Smart Growth as defined in Section 627. The standards
and procedures of this district are intended to promote flexible design and permit planned diversification and
integration of uses and structures, with limitations and regulations as deemed necessary to be consistent with
the City’s Comprehensive Plan and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. Design standards
supplement this ordinance and provide more detailed clarification.
This district is of special and substantial public interest given its proximity to Downtown Miami and the Omni
Area, the Design District, Miami Beach, the Wynwood Neighborhood and to future proposed commuter transit
facilities within the Florida East Coast Railway (FEC) Corridor. The intent of the district is to: (1) Promote the
creation of a Miami midtown environment through intensive urban retail mixed-use development with a twenty-four
hour activity pattern; and (2) Enhance the pedestrian environment and connectivity of the existing surrounding
areas by extending the city street grid through the district. To this end, the district promotes streetscapes and
mixed-use buildings designed to provide pedestrians with lively, interesting, well-landscaped and highly usable
public spaces with a maximum interrelationship with ground floor building uses.
Concerning building uses and overall buildable area, mixed-use development is encouraged by providing greater
floor area ratios and overall building height than that of single use buildings. Furthermore, additional height is
provided for sites that abut significant open space and/or are designated as strategically located visual gateways
as defined in Section 627. Yard and setback areas are minimal and are required to be developed as an
integral part of the overall pedestrian streetscape. Ground floor build-to lines are provided in order to establish
a continuous building frontage that enhances and provides spatial definition for the urban streetscape.
Although no specific requirements are contained herein, it is further intended that buildings be designed utilizing
environmentally sensitive methods, including, but not limited to, passive and active solar techniques, greenroofs,
the utilization of environmentally sustainable materials and efficient mechanical systems.
C.18
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.2.2. Effect of SD-27.2 district designation.
The SD-27.2 Midtown Miami West district shall supplant districts or portions of districts included within the SD
boundaries to the extent indicated in the official zoning atlas.
627.2.3. Class II Special Permit.
Section 627.2.3.1. When required.
A Class II Special Permit shall be required prior to approval of any permit (except special permits pursuant to
Article 13) affecting the height, bulk, location or exterior configuration of any existing building or the construction
of a new building.
Section 627.2.3.2. Considerations in making Class II Special Permit determinations.
The purpose of the Class II Special Permit shall be to ensure conformity of the application with the expressed
intent of this district, with the general considerations listed in section 1305, and with the special considerations
contained in the Design Standards.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning code, a Major Use Special Permit is required for non-residential
uses in a single building that exceed 400,000 square feet of floor area and residential units in a single building
that exceed 400 dwelling units, or any combined use which exceeds 2,500 parking spaces in a single building.
Any variances (as defined in Article 19) sought from the provisions of the SD 27 regulations shall require such
deviation to be considered within the process for a Major Use Special Permit as defined in Article 17 and the
increased development thresholds as set forth above shall not apply.
627.2.4. Principal Uses and Structures.
The following uses shall be permitted within the district, subject to the provisions of Section 627.2.7:
1. Neighborhood convenience goods and services, including food stores (grocery, meat, seafood,
produce, delicatessen, bakery, confectioneries, ice cream), drugstores, newsstands,
dry cleaners, barber and beauty shops, and shoe repair stores.
2. Retail establishments open to the general public as follows: big box retail (retail establishments
greater than 20,000 square feet of floor area), antique stores, art stores and commercial
art galleries; bicycle sales; book and stationery stores; china and crockery stores;
drugstores; floor covering; florist, including plant and shrub sales; food carts and vendors;
gift shops; hardware stores; hobby shops; home appliance stores; home furnishing stores;
interior decoration supply stores; establishments for the sales of boating and fishing supplies
(excluding outdoor sales of boats); jewelry stores; leather goods; luggage stores;
music stores; newsstands; office supply stores; optical goods stores; package liquor stores
(without drive-through facilities); paint and wallpaper; pet shops; photographic supply stores;
restaurant supply stores; tobacco shops; toy stores; television, radio, and other electronics
stores; videotape sales and rentals; variety and sundry stores; establishments for sale of
wearing apparel; wholesale establishments open to the general public; or any other similar
use customarily found in a major retail shopping center. Such establishments may provide
incidental repair, maintenance, adjustment or alteration services as appropriate, but facilities,
operation and storage in relation to such services shall not be visible from any street
or street related pedestrian open space. Aside from antique stores, art galleries, jewelry,
bookstores and wearing apparel establishments, no such retail establishments shall deal in
secondhand merchandise.
C.19
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
3. Service establishments as follows: Interior decorator, banks, savings and loan and financial
institutions; duplicating centers including letter and photostating services; driving school
agencies; locksmiths; medical or dental offices less than five thousand (5,000) square feet;
opticians; photographic service; business and professional offices; tailoring; dressmaking;
millinery or drapery fabrication, except where products are for office premises sale; rental of
recreation and sporting equipment.
4. All Residential as per the R-4 Zoning District.
5. Hotels.
6. Production Studios.
7. Shops for the sale, assembly, customization or repair open to the general public as follows:
awnings and canvas; carpentry; construction of models for design purposes; custom woodworking
and furniture; glass; signs; and upholstery.
8. Public and private recreational facilities and community service facilities.
9. Production of art and handicrafts (but not mass-produced items) incidental to sale at retail
on the premises.
10. Restaurants, brewery restaurants, tearooms and cafes (without drive-through facilities),
including those with dancing and live entertainment.
11. Bars, cocktail lounges, saloons and taverns, supper clubs and nightclubs, including those
with live entertainment open to the general public.
12. Art galleries, auditoriums; theaters (including open air theatres) and cinemas, museums,
libraries and similar cultural uses.
13. Structures for operating public transportation.
14. Parking lots and garages subject to Sections 627.2.5, 627.2.7 and 627.1.12.
15. Public or private educational facilities.
16. Cellular communications in accordance with the provisions of the C-1 Zoning district.
17. Drive-Through facilities on “secondary” and “tertiary” streets.
The following uses shall be permitted by Class I Special Permit:
1. Outdoor photographic stage sets.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of 906.9, up to ten (10) street and open space special events
per calendar year within the district.
C.20
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.2.5. Accessory Uses.
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and
structures, approved in the same permit proceedings, and initiated or completed within any time limits established
generally or in relation to the special permit, shall be permitted subject to limitations by these or generally
applicable regulations. Other accessory uses and structures shall require a Class II Special Permit.
No aboveground off-street parking or loading area shall be permitted between any front portion of a building
and the front line of a lot adjoining any street; provided, however that off-street parking for bicycles may be
permitted in such areas, subject to limitations and requirements as to location, design and number established
in connection with special permits.
627.2.6. Building Placement and Buildable Area.
1. Minimum lot requirements. No specific dimensional requirements are established in this
district, but lots shall be of sufficient width and area to conform with other requirements and
limitations of these and other lawful regulations.
2. Floor Area Limitations. Floor area limitations of the SD 27.2 district shall be as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, the floor area ratio shall not exceed one and seventy-
two hundredths (1.72) times the gross lot area for single use commercial buildings.
(b) The floor area for all mixed-use buildings shall not exceed three (3.0) times the gross
lot area.
(c) Allowable increase in floor area up to five tenths (0.5) will be provided for payment into
a Neighborhood Improvement Trust Fund.
3. Density. Density shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) residential units/net acre and in no
case shall exceed a total of one thousand five hundred (1,500) units within the entire district.
4. Maximum Heights.
(a) Maximum heights shall be as provided in Section 627.2.7.
(b) All parking structures shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height, except as otherwise
provided in Section 627.2.12.
5. Maximum and Minimum Setback Requirements and Build-To Lines
(a) Setback requirements shall be measured perpendicular to and from the base building
line. Platted public right of way lines shall be defined as the Base Building Line. When
platted right of way lines at street intersections are rounded, setbacks shall be measured
from projected right of way lines and not from the rounded portions of such lines. The
Design Standards provide further clarification of the requirements provided herein. The
maximum and minimum setbacks and build-to requirements shall be as provided in Section
627.2.7 and below, as follows:
(b) For the first twenty-five (25) feet in elevation above the public right-of-way, no building
facade shall be set back more than a maximum depth of ten (10) feet, except as otherwise
provided in Section 627.2.7. Off-street parking shall not be allowed within the maximum
setback. Building frontage may exceed the maximum ground floor setback requirement,
provided that the resultant area between the building frontage and the base building line
is designed and improved as public open space.
C.21
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
(c) Colonnades encroach the setback and build-to requirements provided that a minimum
of five (5) feet of sidewalk must remain clear of all obstructions. In addition, awnings and
upper story balconies may encroach the setback and build-to requirements by a distance
of seven (7) feet. Upper story architectural features may encroach the setback and buildto
requirements by a distance of five (5) feet but shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of
the building frontage.
(d) Build-To Lines shall only be applicable for 60% of the street frontage.
6. Gateway Designations. As provided in Section 627, the gateway site shall be the Southeast
corner of the intersection of Northeast 36th Street and North Miami Avenue. Such designation,
for the purposes of height limitations, setback and build-to requirements shall apply for
a north/south dimension of one hundred fifty (150’) feet and an east/west dimension of four
hundred (400’) feet.
627.2.7. Maximum Height, Build-To, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements.
TABLE INSET:
SD 27.2 Maximum height, Build-To, Minimum Setback and Use Requirements
Street/Classification Height Ground Floor Building
To
Mid-level Setback* Upper-level Setback** Uses
Midtown Boulevard
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
residential or mixeduse
20’ Build-To Area
between the building
frontage and based
building building line
shall be improved as
open space. Maximum
Allowable encroachment
(0’ build-to) for
80’ of linear frontage
per block
35’ setback above 60’
elevation
N/A All SD 27.2 uses
permitted except that
Big Box retail shall not
be permitted from 31st
Street to 36th Street.
Liner uses on all parking
structures
Buena Vista Avenue
(north of 34th Street)
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use
0’ Build-To N/A 15’ setbackl above 60’
elevation
All SD 27.2 uses
permitted
Buena Vista Avenue
(south of 34th Street)
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use or theaters
0’ Build-To N/A 15’ setback above 60’
elevation
All SD 27.2 uses
permitted
NE 36th Street
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use or theaters
9’ setback with colonnade
or awning Maximum
Setback of 20’
N/A 15’ setback above 60’
elevation
All SD 27.2 uses permitted
Liner uses on
all parking structures
except as otherwise
provided in Section
627.2.12
NE 29th Street
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed use
N/A N/A N/A All SD27.2 uses permitted
Liner uses on
all parking structures
except as otherwise
provided in Section
627.2.12
North Miami Avenue
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use 200’ for
mixed use and gateway
1 requirement
9’ Build-To with
colonnade or awning
5’ build-to from centerline
of NE 36th Street
south for a distance
of 315’
N/A 15’ setback above 60’ All SD 27.2 uses permitted
Liner uses on
all parking structures
except as otherwise
provided in Section
627.2.12
C.22
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
NE 34th Street
Primary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use
0’ Build-To 15’ setback above 20’
elevation
N/A All SD 27.2 uses permitted
Liner uses on
all parking structures
except as otherwise
provided in Section
627.2.12
NE 32nd Street Secondary
60’ for commercial
single-use 120’ for
mixed-use
0’ Build-To 10’ setback above 20’
elevation
N/A 30% active ground
floor uses All SD 27.2
uses permitted
NE 31st Street Secondary
60’ for commercial single-
use 120’ for mixeduse
0’ Build-To N/A N/A 30% active ground floor
uses All SD 27.2 uses
permitted
NE 30th 33rd, 35th
Street and NE 34th
Terrace Secondary
60’ for commercial single-
use 120’ for mixed
use
0’ Build-To N/A N/A 30% active ground floor
uses All SD 27.2 uses
permitted
Dedicated Open Space
greater than 1 acre
60’ for commercial single-
use 120’ for mixeduse
0’ Build-To N/A N/A All SD 27.2 uses permitted
Interior Side 60’ for commercial single-
use 120’ for mixeduse
0’ Setback N/A N/A All SD 27.2 uses permitted
* Mid-level setbacks are for elevations between twenty (20) feet and sixty (60) feet.
** Upper-level setbacks are for elevations greater than sixty (60) feet.
1. Gateway designations shall be as defined in Section 627.2.6.
627.2.8. Street Grid/Blocks.
Northeast 34th Street and Northeast 36th Street shall extend through the SD27.2 District and shall align with
the existing city street grid west of North Miami Avenue. Northeast 31st Street shall extend through the SD 27.2
District and shall generally align with the existing street grid west of North Miami Avenue North of Northeast
34th Street, the north/south spacing between new streets shall not exceed eight hundred twenty-five (825)
feet from centerline of street to centerline of street. South of Northeast 34th Street, the north/south spacing
between new streets shall not exceed seven (700) feet from centerline of street to centerline of street. The east/
west spacing between new avenues shall not exceed seven hundred twenty-five (725) feet from centerline of
avenue to centerline of avenue. Open Space, with an area of at least one (1) acre, may be substituted in lieu
of a new Street or Avenue.
For the purpose of this ordinance, streets shall be categorized as “primary” and “secondary” as follows:
1. Primary Streets: North Miami Avenue, Northeast 34th Street, Northeast 36th Street, Midtown
Boulevard, Northeast 29th Street, Buena Vista Avenue.
2. Secondary Streets: Northeast 30th Street, Northeast 31st Street, Northeast 32nd Street;
Northeast 33rd Street, Northeast 35th Place and Northeast 35th Street.
Refer to the SD 27.2 Design Standards for additional Design Standards and Guidelines regarding streets.
627.2.9. Streetscape.
All exterior space as defined in the SD 27.2 Zoning Ordinance shall conform to the following standards and
are subject to approval by the Director of the City of Miami Department of Public Works and other authorities
having jurisdiction. Denial of these requirements by such authorities for reasons of public health, safety and
welfare shall not constitute a variance from this Ordinance.
C.23
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
Refer to the SD 27.2 Design Standards for additional Design Standards and Guidelines regarding streetscapes.
1. All required setbacks and sidewalk area within the public right-of-way adjacent to streets shall
be a continuous pedestrian space. For all sidewalks, an area a minimum of five (5’) feet wide
must remain clear of all obstructions to ensure adequate pedestrian circulation.
2. For all streets, the ground floor of buildings shall be set back from the property line, where
necessary, to provide a minimum sidewalk width of ten (10) feet from face of building to curb
line. Unless otherwise prohibited by setback requirements of the SD 27.2 Zoning District,
the upper floors of buildings may overhang this setback. The setback area shall be improved
to meet the adopted design standards of the SD 27.2 Zoning District for the adjacent public
sidewalk including pavement treatment, landscaping, street lighting and awnings.
3. Street furniture shall be as defined in the SD 27 Design Standards. Street furniture shall be
part of the urban streetscape to encourage pedestrian activity and provide such amenities as:
trash receptacles, benches, bollards, pedestrian lighting, bicycle racks, parking meters, street
signs, transit shelters, tables and chairs. Trash receptacles and benches shall be provided
at a minimum of two hundred (200) foot intervals on both sides of Northeast 34th Street and
Midtown Boulevard. Bicycle racks shall be provided at six hundred (600) foot intervals on
both sides of Northeast 34th Street and Midtown Boulevard. These may be located in the
pedestrian areas as long as pedestrian flow patterns are continuous. Greater spacing may
be allowed by Class II Special Permit if such spacing is required:
(1) To promote or enhance pedestrian safety, or
(2) To maintain compliance with the SD 27 Design Standards.
4. All specified plant material shall be Florida #1 or better. Refer to the Florida Grades and
Standards Manual. All shade trees shall have high wind resistance. Additionally, all trees and
shrubs shall be native to Florida or have subtropic, drought tolerant characteristics.
5. Palm trees shall generally be provided in the sidewalk area at a minimum spacing of twentyfive
(25) feet, except that greater spacing may be allowed by Class II Special Permit if such
spacing is required: 1) to promote or enhance pedestrian safety or 2) to maintain compliance
with the SD 27 Design Standards.
6. Large palms shall have a minimum height of sixteen (16) feet and small palms shall have a
minimum height of eight (8) feet.
7. Shade trees shall be provided in the sidewalk area at a minimum spacing of forty (40) feet
on center with an eight (8) foot continuous canopy spread at planting and a twenty-five (25)
foot spread at maturity with a 3” caliper at planting. Such trees shall have a minimum height
of fourteen (14) feet at planting and twenty-five (25) feet at maturity.
8. In order to provide for a unified street character, only one shade tree species may be used
for each individual street within the entirety of the SD 27 district. Such species selection is
subject to approval by Class II Special Permit.
C.24
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
627.2.10. Buildings.
All buildings abutting “primary streets” as provided in Section 627.2.8, shall conform to the following standards:
1. A minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the linear frontage of any lot abutting a “primary”
street, and thirty (30) percent of any lot abutting a “secondary” street, shall contain ground
floor space designed to accommodate retail and other uses that promote pedestrian traffic.
The design of such space shall meet the standards listed below, except for buildings that are
intended primarily for residential use, where ground floor pedestrian oriented uses would be
inappropriate or disruptive to the residential use.
(a) All ground level space designed for pedestrian oriented uses shall have external entrances
directly accessible from public sidewalk space. At least one (1) external entrance
shall be located along the frontage of the primary street or on the corner intersection of
the primary street and any other street or the frontage of public open space. Additionally,
each building use, such as a retail store with a cafe or restaurant, shall have separate
entrances. All such entrances shall be transparent.
(b) For the first ten (10) feet of height above the public sidewalk elevation, the exterior
building wall shall contain windows and/or doorways of transparent glass covering at
least fifty (50) percent of linear frontage (to be calculated at a height over 30 inches) of
each building; plazas and openings into pedestrian entrances and spaces shall count
towards the 50% transparency requirement specified in this section. Additionally, the base
of all transparent openings shall be no more than thirty (30) inches above the sidewalk.
Display windows may count towards the transparency requirement and may encroach
upon specified setback and build-to lines by a distance no greater than thirty (30) inches,
provided that a minimum of five (5) feet of sidewalk must remain clear of all obstructions.
(c) Arcades and colonnades, where proposed shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and twelve
(12) feet high. A minimum of five (5) feet of the sidewalk must remain clear of all obstructions
to ensure adequate pedestrian circulation.
(d) No portion of a building wall that does not contain transparent glass shall be constructed
with a flat, unarticulated surface for a distance of greater than twenty (20) feet. In addition,
any building frontage on North Miami Avenue that exceeds three hundred (300) feet
shall incorporate a major break of at least thirty (30) feet in width by ten (10) feet in depth
at ground level. Such breaks shall be improved as open space and/or provide building
access and occur on axis with the existing city street grid.
2. The remaining frontage of thirty-five percent (35%) may be dedicated to entrances, lobbies,
customer driveways, architectural treatment, or non-pedestrian oriented uses. No portion
of a building wall that does not contain transparent glass shall be constructed with a flat,
unarticulated surface for a distance of greater than twenty (20) feet.
627.2.11. Building Functionality.
All exterior space as defined in the SD 27.2 Zoning Ordinance shall conform to the following standards, except
as provided:
1. Service access and service loading areas shall not be permitted to front the following streets
or portions: North Miami Avenue south of Northeast 34th Street; Midtown Boulevard; Buena
Vista Avenue; and Northeast 29th Street.
C.25
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
2. Service loading areas shall be enclosed within buildings or screened from public view with
architectural walls and/or landscaping.
3. All dumpsters shall be concealed on three sides by a solid structure, and on the fourth side
by an opaque gate.
4. Utility boxes, meters, and HVAC equipment shall be concealed within buildings or screened
from public view.
627.2.12. Surface Parking and Parking Garages.
Surface parking and parking structures shall conform to the following standards:
1. Ground level off-street parking is not permitted along frontages of primary streets.
2. Blank, unarticulated walls shall not be permitted for parking garage facades that are not lined
with uses. Such facades shall have architectural treatments designed to be compatible with
adjacent buildings. Ramps, stairwells and any other portion of a garage should be buffered
with the use of decorative grilles and screens, landscaping, and other varied materials.
3. As provided in Section 627.2.7, liner uses are generally required on parking garages that front
primary streets. When required, ground level parking facilities must be lined with active uses.
Upper level parking facilities that do not incorporate liner uses shall be setback no less than
85’ and shall not exceed a height of 50’. All other requirements provided herein shall apply.
627.2.13. Open Space.
A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross lot area shall be provided as open space as defined in Section 627,
except as follows:
1. Since the intent of the district is to provide significant common public open space, the minimum
open space requirement may be aggregated among parcels or lots under common
ownership and located in a common location within the district. Such aggregation of open
space shall be improved as provided in Section 627.
2. Pursuant to the District plat, dedicated open space platted within the District shall be allowed
to be substituted for the requirements provided herein. Such platted open space shall be
improved as provided in Section 627.
627.2.14. Off-street Parking.
In recognition of the pedestrian oriented, mixed-use nature of the SD 27.2 District, it is anticipated that visitors
to the District will park once and visit more than one destination. Therefore the required amount of off-street
parking will be lower in the SD 27.2 District than in other Districts of the City.
A. Requirements. The off-street parking requirements shall be as follows:
1. For residential uses, one (1) space per dwelling unit
2. For hotel or motel uses, one (1) space per three (3) lodging units.
C.26
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
3. For theaters, one (1) space per each eight (8) fixed seats.
4. For all other uses, one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. There
shall be no requirement when uses are within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of a public
parking facility with a capacity equal to or greater than the requirements provided herein.
B. Off site parking permitted. Notwithstanding the limitations of section 918, off-street parking requirements
for all uses within the SD 27.2 District can be provided by parking facilities that are
owned by a unit of local government, including a community development district, provided that
the parking facilities: a) are located within the SD 27.2 District and b) have a capacity equal to
or greater than the requirements provided herein.
627.2.15. Off-street Loading.
The off-street loading requirements shall be as follows:
1. For residential uses:
(a) Berth minimum to be twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet by fifteen (15) feet in height;
(b) One (1) berth for every one hundred twenty (120) residential units or fraction thereof.
2. For non-residential uses:
(a) Berth minimum to be twelve (12) by fifty-five (55) feet by fifteen (15) feet in height;
(b) For non-residential floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000) up to fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet, one (1) berth total;
(c) For non-residential floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, two
(2) berths total;
(d) For non-residential floor area up to two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet,
three (3) berths total;
(e) For non-residential floor area up to five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, four
(4) berths total.
Since it is intended to promote the most efficient use of land, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 922.1
and 922.4, the maneuvering of trucks within the public right of way for the purposes of off-street loading shall
be allowed by a Class II Special Permit.
627.2.16. Sign Regulations.
Signs within the district shall comply with the regulations of the C-2 Liberal Commercial District as provided in
Article 10.
See Article 10 for sign regulations and limitations.
(Ord. No. 12480, § 2, 1-22-04; Ord. No. 12509, § 2, 3-25-04; Ord. No. 12724, § 2, 7-28-05)
C.27
AS ADOPTED - JULY 2012
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 12724, § 2, adopted July 28, 2005, changed the title of § 627.2 from “Buena Vista Yard
West” to “Midtown Miami West.” The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Miami
Worldcenter
Development Standards
August 20, 2014
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 1
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
I. Introduction Page 2
II. Regulating Plan Page 5
III. Street Design Page 8
a. Street System
b. Parking, Loading, and Service Access
c. Streets
i. NE 1st Avenue
ii. NE 2nd Avenue
iii. N. Miami Avenue
iv. NE 6th Street
v. MWC Promenade (formerly NE 7th St)
vi. NE 8th Street
vii. NE 9th Street
viii. NE 9th Paseo
ix. NE 10th Street
x. NE 11th Street
xi. FEC railway corridor
d. Typical Intersection
e. Typical Raised Intersection
IV. Building Design Page 32
a. Building Continuity
b. Architectural Scaling Elements
c. Building Materials and Finishes
d. Building Entries
e. Fenestration
f. Roofs
g. Services and Utilities
h. Lighting
i. Awnings and Canopies
j. Balconies and Terraces
k. Signage
l. Parking
Table of Contents
2 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
I. Introduction
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 3
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Introduction
The Miami Worldcenter is a multi-block mixed-use development immediately north of
the Central Business District in downtown Miami. It is generally defined by NE 2nd
Avenue to the east, North Miami Avenue to the west, NE 11th Street to the north, and
NE 6th Street to the south.
Spanning over thirty acres, the Miami Worldcenter is planned to include a dynamic mix
of retail, restaurant, entertainment, hospitality, residential, office, and other uses that
will create a vibrant, walkable pedestrian environment with a unique sense of place and
a modern design statement driven by Miami’s unique physical context, culture, and
architectural heritage.
The Miami Worldcenter Development Standards will establish appropriate standards
for the design of streets, public spaces, and buildings within the MWC Special District
area. These Development Standards shall be considered the guiding principles for all
new development.
Overview
Intent
Conceptual Rendering
Artist rendering of
project looking west
4 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Diagrams and Illustrations Map 1
Miami
WorldCenter
Site
location of the Miami Worldcenter site
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 5
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
II. Regulating Plan
6 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Regulating Plan
The Miami Worldcenter project was guided by the goal of establishing a memorable,
pedestrian district with a strong integrated public realm. This includes an interconnected
system of well-defined streets, plazas, promenades, paseos, and other pedestrian
spaces tailored to Miami’s climate.
The regulating plan for Miami Worldcenter summarizes the general configuration of
the open space within the site area, including major civic spaces, publicly accessible
sidewalks, paseos, and pedestrian-only thoroughfares. The regulating plan also defines
the location of open spaces and significant towers within the district.
Overview
Intent
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 7
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Diagrams and Illustrations Regulating Plan
Tract A
8 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
III. Street Design
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 9
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Street System
A unified street system with a clear hierarchy has been developed at Miami Worldcenter.
Narrow streets set the stage for larger, more significant streets, each street having a
distinct personality and function to create a range of experiences. This will include
variation in scale, enclosure, materials, sidewalk width, and retail character.
Designated as a prominent street at Miami Worldcenter, NE 1st Avenue serves as a
primary connection from the Central Business District and Downtown.
A gateway street defined by the elevated Metromover train and intense residential
development along the east side of the street near Biscayne Boulevard. Improvements
to areas around the Metromover are contemplated to improve the pedestrian experience
and to improve transit ridership and accessibility.
A north-south neighborhood gateway street providing linkages to the Central Business
District and the Omni Neighborhood.
East-west perimeter street with a strong connection to the Port of Miami.
Pedestrian-only promenade with retail and restaurant activity, connecting the American
Airlines Arena to the east and the future FEC development to the west.
Major east-west street connecting the American Airlines Arena and the Biscayne
Waterfront to the Overtown Transit Village and I-95 to the west.
East-west street, a portion of which will be a covered pedestrian Paseo.
A Tree-lined street that provides an east-west linkage between the Overtown
Neighborhood and Museum Park.
Mixed-use street with a focus on entertainment uses.
Existing freight rail corridor between the MWC Promenade and NE 6th Street.
NE 1st Avenue
Page 13-14
NE 2nd Avenue
Page 16-18
N. Miami Avenue
Page 15
NE 6th Street
Page 19
MWC Promenade (formerly NE 7th)
Page 20-21
NE 8th Street
Page 22-23
NE 9th Street
Page 24-25
NE 10th Street
Page 26-27
NE 11th Street
Page 28
FEC Corridor
Page 29
Overview
Streets
10 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
street plan for the Miami Worldcenter site
Diagrams and Illustrations Street System
Streets
MWC Promenade
Paseos
NE 8th Street
NE 9th Street
NE 10th Street
NE 11th Street
NE 1st Ave.
NE 2nd Ave.
N. Miami Ave.
NE 7th Street
NE 6th Street
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 11
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Diagrams and Illustrations
S
S
S
S S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
PARKING & SERVICE DIAGRAM
SERVICE ACCESS
PARKING ENTRANCE AND EXIT
PARKING EGRESS ONLY
P
P
S
NE 8th Street
NE 9th Street
NE 10th Street
NE 11th Street
NE 1st Ave.
NE 2nd Ave.
N. Miami Ave.
Parking, Loading, and Service Access Diagram
NE 7th Street
NE 6th Street
NW 8th Street
NW 10th Street
* For illustrative purposes only. Final service and parking locations shall be in accordance with site plan approval.
12 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 1st Avenue
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 13
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 1st Avenue
14 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 1st Avenue
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 15
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
N. Miami Avenue
16 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 2nd Avenue
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 17
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 2nd Avenue - Alternate
18 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 2nd Avenue - Gateway Plaza
1:12
Ramp
Max
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 19
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 6th Street
20 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
MWC Promenade (formerly NE 7th Street)
Illustrative Section
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 21
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Section
MWC Promenade (formerly ne 7th street)
22 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Accessway Section
NE 8th Street
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 23
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 8th Street
24 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 9th Street
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 25
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
NE 9th Paseo
Illustrative Street Section
26 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 10th Street
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 27
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 10th Street
28 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
NE 11th Street
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 29
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Illustrative Street Section
FEC Rail Corridor
30 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Typical Intersection
Street intersections at Miami Worldcenter may be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly
environment. Curb extensions may be utilized to protect pedestrians and minimize
crossing distances. Enhanced paving materials and raised intersections may be utilized
to further improve the pedestrian environment. Quality materials are encouraged.
Minimize curb radius to minimize pedestrian crossing distance and reduce automobile
speed (approximately 25’ radius).
Curb extensions at intersections and selected mid-block crossing zones
Overview
Description
Example
Seattle, WA
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 31
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Typical Raised Intersection
Street intersections at Miami Worldcenter may be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly
environment. Curb extensions may be utilized to protect pedestrians and minimize
crossing distances. Enhanced paving materials and raised intersections may be utilized
to further improve the pedestrian environment. Quality materials are encouraged.
Minimize curb radius to minimize pedestrian crossing distance and reduce automobile
speed (approximately 25’ radius).
Curb extensions at intersections and selected mid-block crossing zones.
Overview
Description
Example
32 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
IV. Building
Design
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 33
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Building Continuity
yy To establish a high standard of excellence in building design.
yy To develop a district with a distinct sense of form and place.
yy To avoid the development of streets with varying levels of design quality.
Individual structures shall be continuous in design with no street facing side unimproved.
Architectural details (including roof lines, cornices, and parapets) shall continue around
all sides of a structure.
Comparable materials shall be used on all sides of a structure.
Intent
Standards
Example
Peninsula Hotel
N. Michigan Ave, Chicago
34 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Architectural Scaling Elements
yy To avoid large areas of undifferentiated or blank building facades.
yy To create a comfortably scaled and thoughtfully detailed pedestrian environment
through the use of well-designed architectural forms and details.
yy To create building facades that take advantage of Miami’s sunny climate to reinforce
changes in plane, material texture, and detail through the interplay of light and
shadow.
Architectural scaling elements should be used to reduce the appearance of large
building facades. Variation in building scaling may include changes in wall plane or
height and may relate to primary building entries, important corners or other significant
architectural features.
Architectural detail may relate to but not necessarily mimic traditional building details,
such as pilasters and belt courses, to establish a human-scale vocabulary.
Balconies and terraces are strongly encouraged for residential uses. These elements
shall be incorporated into vertical and horizontal shifts and building massing wherever
possible.
Intent
Standards
Example
San Diego, CA
Balconies incorporated into projecting
bay windows
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 35
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Examples
Lumina Building, London
France
Architectural Scaling Elements
36 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Building Materials and Finishes
yy To encourage human scaled buildings through the use of smaller material modules.
yy To ensure the consistent use of high quality materials appropriate to the urban
environment.
yy To promote the use of environmentally responsible building materials.
All building materials to be used shall express their specific properties. For example,
heavier more permanent materials (masonry) generally support lighter materials (stucco
and glass).
Building materials at the lower floors shall respond to the character of the pedestrian
environment through such qualities as scale, texture, color and detail.
Building materials shall be selected with the objectives of quality and durability within
an urban context.
The use of recycled, locally produced, and energy and resource responsible building
materials is encouraged.
Intent
Standards
Example
Quality building materials used for
storefront in Paris, France
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 37
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Examples Building Materials and Finishes
38 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
yy To enhance the scale, activity, and function of building facades by orienting building
entries to streets and other public spaces.
yy To reinforce the convenience of pedestrian activity and circulation along the street
by creating multiple external, street oriented entries to ground floor,
pedestrian-active uses.
Entries to ground floor uses shall be direct and as numerous as possible to encourage
active pedestrian use.
Each commercial use with an exterior, street-oriented exposure shall have an individual
public entry from the street.
All street-oriented building entries shall be directly connected to the public sidewalk via
paved walk, stair, or ramp.
Primary building entries shall be emphasized by recessing the door a minimum of 3’-0”,
changes in wall plane or building massing, differentiation in material and/or color and
greater level of detail.
Entries shall be well lighted to announce the principle use and to provide for safety and
security.
Building Entries
Intent
Standards
Example
Trilogy Building
Boston, MA
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 39
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Fenestration
yy To provide a high degree of transparency at the lower levels of building facades.
yy To maximize the visibility of pedestrian active uses.
yy To provide an active, human scaled architectural pattern along the street.
yy To establish a pattern of individual windows and exterior openings within building
facades that provides a greater variety of scale through material variation, detail and
surface relief.
The Facades on retail Frontages shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass
no less than seventy percent (70%) of the linear ground floor facade and any second floor
facade fronting pedestrian-active uses such as breezeways, hallways, or bridges, and shall
be constructed of transparent materials, or otherwise designed to allow pedestrians to
view activities inside the building or displays related to those activities. Security screens
shall be seventy percent (70%) open.
For retail stores with an area of 35,000 sf or more along Frontages, the required area of
glass in a retail facade shall be equal to 50% of the length of the unencumbered facade
times 12’ in height. For purposes of satisfying this glass requirement, the area of glass
can be measured to a height of 16’ above grade.
No reflective coating shall be on the exterior surface of the glass.
Transparent glass shall possess a minimum 60% light transmittance factor.
No portion of the façade shall be of highly reflective glass (maximum reflectance factor
of .25).
Inclusion of human scaled proportions and elements in fenestration patterns, architectural
detail, surface relief, texture and materials shall be encouraged.
Intent
`
Standards
40 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Roofs
Intent
Standards
Examples
A variety of vegetation, terraces, and
other amenities can be used to create
different roof top spaces.
yy To integrate all building systems within a complete architectural form.
yy To develop roof forms that will make a positive contribution to the streetscape and
to the Miami skyline.
yy To activate roofs with active uses, such as restaurants, bars, tower amenities, sports
fields and gathering areas, and green spaces.
yy Encourage rooftop terraces and open spaces for the enjoyment of residents.
yy Encourage green roof design to reduce “heat island” effect.
General Standards:
yy All mechanical, electrical and telecommunications systems shall be screened from
view of surrounding streets, public open spaces and structures.
yy At least 25% of aggregate roof areas for the projects (excluding tower footprints and
areas utilized for mechanical equipment) shall be planted as “green” roof gardens or
public terraces (amenity decks). Remaining roof areas shall use light-colored/highalbedo
materials.
yy Any screening devices employed to conceal mechanical equipment shall be consistent
with the architectural character and composition of the building.
yy A Roof Structure is an enclosed habitable space.
yy Towers shall be spaced at least 60’ apart.
Roof Structures (also refer to Roof Diagram on Page 41)
Roofs that are 30,000 square feet or larger may include Roof Structures. All Roof
Structures shall be developed in accordance with the following standards:
yy Roof Structures which include habitable uses shall be counted towards the
permissable FLR.
yy Roof Structures may cover up to 40% of the roof, excluding tower footprints.
yy Roof Structures shall be limited to two (2) stories and no more than 40 feet in height.
yy Roof Structures shall be located at least 30 feet in distance from an abutting Tower
on the same Roof or Podium.
yy Roof Structures must be set back at least 10 feet from the edge of the Roof or Podium.
yy Roof Structures shall be located at least 30 feet in distance from an abutting Roof
Structure on the same Roof or Podium.
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 41
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Roofs
Roof Diagram
This diagram illustrates potential areas
for roof structures (shown in gray)
and minimum setbacks for towers
and roof structures.
Note: No other tower can be closer than
100’ to the Signature Tower.
Note: Roof Structures may cover up
to 40% of the roof, excluding tower
footprints.
* For illustrative purposes only. Final building configuration and location shall be in accordance with site
plan approval.
42 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Services and Utilities
yy Minimize the visual impact of building services and utilities on the public realm.
yy Provide safe and convenient access for loading, maintenance, and utilities.
Loading bays and service entrances shall not exceed 45’ in width (except by Warrant).
Loading and service entrances are discouraged along NE 1st Avenue (refer to “Parking,
Loading & Service Access Diagram on page 11”). The spacing of parking garage
entrances shall not be less than 60’ (except by Warrant).
Mechanical equipment and exposed utilities should be located on building roofs or
within the building envelope whenever possible to preserve the public realm. These
elements should be incorporated into the overall building design and should not be
visible from the public right-of-way.
Exhaust louvers and air fans must be located above the 2nd Floor and are prohibited
along any portion of a building facing the MWC Promenade. This restriction includes
any walls that are not parallel to the street or are set back from the face of adjoining
buildings.
Intent
Standards
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 43
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Diagrams and Illustrations
Garage Entrance Spacing
Service Entrance Drive
RAMP
1:12 MAX
RAMP
1:12 MAX
RAMP 1:12 MAX
FLUSH
FLUSH
FLUSH
Services and Utilities
44 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Lighting
yy The use of lighting should be integrally designed as part of the built environment
and should reflect a balance for the lighting needs with the contextual ambient
light level of the surrounding area.
yy Lighting intensities should be controlled to assure that light spillage and glare are
not directed at adjacent properties, neighboring areas, motorists, or the sky.
Building lighting should primarily be utilized to highlight special architectural features,
building entries, and to illuminate sidewalk areas. Architectural lighting that results in
“hot spots” should be avoided.
Sidewalk lighting shall be designed for an average of 1.0 foot-candle horizontally and
vertically, as measured 6’-0” above ground, and shall maintain a uniformity ratio not to
exceed 5:1 (note: these numbers are in accordance with the Illumination Engineering
Society of North America Handbook, Ninth Edition)
Full cut-off fixtures and shielding shall be utilized to effectively control glare and light
trespass.
Building lighting shall be carefully located so as not to shine into residential living space
(on or off the property) or into public rights-of-way.
Internally-illuminated awnings are not permitted.
Lighting fixtures should be appropriate to the style of architecture or aesthetically
concealed from view.
LED lighting integrated into building glazing will be allowed as part of an overall signage
plan approved by Warrant.
Intent
Standards
Example
Effective lighting strategies from Paris
and Miami Beach
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 45
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Examples Lighting
46 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
yy Encourage the use of awnings, canopies, and porte cocheres to provide visual
interest, protection from the elements, and a sense of enclosure.
yy Encourage awning and canopy designs that complement and enhance the
architecture of the building which they serve.
yy Encourage sun shading devices for public spaces, balconies, and roof terraces.
Awnings and canopies should be used primarily for weather protection.
Internally-illuminated awnings are not permitted.
The minimum height of awnings and other ground level canopies shall be 8’-0” from the
lowest point to the sidewalk.
Awnings should typically be constructed of metal, canvas, or other high quality materials.
No plastic or vinyl materials are permitted.
Awnings and Canopies
Intent
Standards
Example
The awnings help to shade this cafe
area while creating an atmosphere of an
outside room.
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 47
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Seville Arizona Center, Phoenix, AZ
Meatpacking District, New York City
Venice, Italy
Paris
Examples Awnings and Canopies
48 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Balconies and Terraces
yy To maintain open sight lines along the public right-of-way.
yy To provide signs of human habitation.
Balconies shall be encouraged for residential uses to foster an indoor-outdoor connection.
Balconies are allowed to project 6’ into the street corridor above the streetwall height,
except that they may not project beyond the Base Building Line or face of an arcade
(refer to Appendix D Section 9(b)).
Balconies and terraces are encouraged to be incorporated into the overall massing of
the a building.
Cantilevered balconies shall be designed to complement the overall architectural design
of the building.
Intent
Standards
Example
The cantilevered balconies compliment
the overall design of the building and
are not visually obtrusive.
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 49
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Signage
yy To create an organized and integrated system of signs, sign structures, lighting,
and graphics that respects and enhances the character of the surrounding district.
• To provide high quality signs with creative graphic design and durable materials
appropriate to an urban setting.
yy To create signs and graphic elements that respects the architecture of the building
which they serve.
yy To prevent visual clutter.
Mixed-use and commercial buildings shall provide locations on the commercial areas
of the building façade that are specifically designed to accommodate changeable tenant
signage including wall signs, projecting signs, and window signs. Structure, materials,
detailing and power sources shall be designed with consideration of signage installation
requirements and shall be readily adaptable and repairable as tenant sign needs change.
Locations for illuminated signage shall be oriented to the public right-of-way and shall
avoid facing residential uses.
Orientation of any illuminated sign or light source shall be directed or shielded to reduce
light trespass and glare.
Signs should fit within the architectural features of the façade and complement the
building’s architecture.
Graphic design for all signs shall reflect consistency, simplicity, neatness, and minimum
wording to minimize visual clutter and to maximize legibility.
Sign colors should be limited in number and should be compatible with the façade.
Intent
Standards
50 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Example
Example
Examples Signage
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards 51
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
yy Minimize the visual impact of structured and surface parking.
yy Encourage parking garage design that is compatible with the overall building design
and composition.
yy Minimize impacts of parking garage entrances on major pedestrian activity zones
yy Provide adequate access to parking structures and surface parking lots
yy Maintain active public uses along the street level.
All required parking spaces less any applicable parking reductions shall be located in
parking structures or on-street.
The ground floor of all separate parking structures shall contain active public-oriented
uses.
Parking structures shall include a habitable liner or an Architectural Screening Layer
to minimize the visual impact of parking on the public realm. The Architectural
Screening Layer shall include architectural elements that effectively screen cars, lighting,
garage ceilings, and slab edges. The design of the Architectural Screening Layer shall
complement the overall building design.
Parking structures may encroach into the Second Layer above the ground level provided
that an Architectural Screening Layer is provided.
The ground portion of a parking structure may encroach into the Second Layer for up
to 20% of the parking structure Frontage Line to accommodate ramping and vertical
circulation provided that an Architectural Screening Layer is provided.
Parking can be provided off-site by process of Waiver as per Section 11(c).
Parking
Intent
Standards
Example
Parking garage incorporated into
overall building design.
52 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
Liner and Architectural Screening Layer Examples Parking
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
February 20, 2014 1
Parking and Loading
This table describes the standards for Parking and Loading. Standards shall include the followinig:
Off-Street Parking Standards
Angle of Parking Access Aisle Width
One Way Traffic One Way Traffic Two Way Traffic
Single Loaded Double Loaded Double Loaded
90 23 ft. 23 ft. 23 ft.
60 12.8 ft. 11.8 ft. 19.3 ft.
45 10.8 ft. 9.5 ft. 18.5 ft.
Parallel 10 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
Standard Stall Dimension: 8.5 ft. x 18 ft. min.
Notes:
* Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet of paved width for one-way
* Pedestrian entrances shall be at least 3 feet from stall, driveway or access aisle
* Allowable slopes, paving and drainage as per Florida Building Code
* Off-street parking facilities shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet
Where such a facility is the be used by trucks or loading uses, the minimum clearance shall be 15 feet
* Ingress vehicular control devices shall be located so as to provide a minimum driveway of 20 feet
in length between the building line and dispenser
* For landscaping requirements of parking lots, refer to Miami-Dade County Landscape Ordinance.
Loading Berth Standards Notes
Residential From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf Berth Types
Berth Size Loading Berths Residential*: 240 sf = 12 ft x 20 ft
420 sf 1 per first 200 units Commercial: 420 sf = 12 ft x 35 ft
240 sf 1 per each additional 200 units Industrial**: 660 sf = 12 ft x 55 ft
or fraction of 200 All Berth Types: 15 ft height clearance
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths * Residential and Loading berths shall
680 sf 1 per first 200 units be setback a distance equal to their length
240 sf 1 per each additional 200 units ** 1 industrial berth may be substituted
or fraction of 200 by 2 Commercial berths
Lodging From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths ***Required loading spaces may be reduced by
420 sf 1 per first 300 rooms process of warrant upon submittal of a shared
240 sf 1 per 200 rooms service management plan.
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths
680 sf 1 per 300 rooms
240 sf 1 per 200 rooms
Office From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Commercial Berth Size Loading Berths Area
Industrial** 420 sf 1st 25k sf - 50k sf
420 sf 2nd 50k sf - 100k sf
420 sf 3rd 100k sf - 250k sf
420 sf 4th 250k sf - 500k sf
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths Area
680 sf 1/ 500k sf
appendix d - table 1
IV.22
AS ADOPTED - APRIL 2013
LOADING BERTH STANDARDS T5, T6, CS, CI-HD & CI DISTRICT NOTES
RESIDENTIAL* From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf Berth Types
Residential*: 200 sf = 10 ft x 20 ft x 12 ft
Commercial**: 420 sf = 12 ft x 35 ft x 15 ft
Industrial***: 660 sf= 12 ft x 55 ft x 15 ft
* Residential loading berths shall be set back
a distance equal to their length.
** 1 Commercial berth may be substituted by
2 Residential berths
*** 1 Industrial berth may be substituted by 2
Commercial berths.
A required Industrial or Commercial loading
berth may be substituted by a Commercial
or Residential loading berth, by Waiver, if
the size, character, and operation of the
Use is found to not require the dimensions
specified and the required loading berth
dimension could not otherwise be provided
according to the regulations of this Code.
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
LODGING From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
OFFICE
COMMERCIAL**
INDUSTRIAL***
From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
Loading Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Area
25K sf - 50K sf
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
Loading Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Area
25K sf - 50K sf
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1 /
Area
500K sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1 /
Area
500K sf
ARTICLE 4. TABLE 5 BUILDING FUNCTION: PARKING AND LOADING
The shared Parking Standards Table provides the method for calculating shared parking for buildings
with more than one Use type. It refers to the parking requirements that appear in Table 4.
The parking required for any two Functions on a Lot is calculated by dividing the number of spaces
required by the lesser of the two uses by the appropriate factor from this Table and adding the result to
the greater use parking requirement.
For instance: for a building with a Residential Use requiring 100 spaces and a Commercial Use requiring
20 spaces, the 20 spaces divided by the sharing factor of 1.2 would reduce the total requirement to
100 plus 17 spaces. For uses not indicated in this chart on a mixed use lot a sharing factor of 1.1 shall
be allowed. Additional sharing is allowed by Warrant.
SHARING FACTOR
Function with Function
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LODGING LODGING
OFFICE OFFICE
COMMERCIAL 1.4 COMMERCIAL
1.1
1.2 1.7
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.2
1
1
1
1
1.7
1.3
1.2
ANGLE OF
PARKING
ACCESS AISLE WIDTH
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
SINGLE LOADED
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
TWO WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
90 23 ft 23 ft 23 ft
60 12.8 ft 11.8 ft 19.3 ft
45 10.8 ft 9.5 ft 18.5 ft
Parallel 10 ft 10 ft 20 ft
Standard stall: 8.5 ft x 18 ft minimum
• Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet of paved width of a one-way drive and 20 feet for a two-way
drive for parking area providing 10 or more stalls.
• Pedestrian entrances shall be at least 3 feet from stall, driveway or access aisle.
• Allowable slopes, paving, and drainage as per Florida Building Code.
• Off-street Parking facilities shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet. Where such a facility is
to be used by trucks or loading Uses, the minimum clearance shall be 12 feet Residential and 15 feet
Commercial and Industrial.
• Ingress vehicular control devices shall be located so as to provide a minimum driveway of 20 feet in
length between the Base Building Line and dispenser.
• For requirements of parking lots, refer to Article 9 and the City of Miami Off-street Parking Guides
and Standards.
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
SHARED PARKING STANDARDS
MIAMI 21
table 1
Parking and Loading
This table describes the standards for Parking and Loading. Standards shall include the followinig:
Off-Street Parking Standards
Angle of Parking Access Aisle Width
One Way Traffic One Way Traffic Two Way Traffic
Single Loaded Double Loaded Double Loaded
90 21 ft. 21 ft. 21 ft.
60 12.8 ft. 11.8 ft. 19.3 ft.
45 10.8 ft. 9.5 ft. 18.5 ft.
Parallel 10 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
Standard Stall Dimension: 8.5 ft. x 18 ft. min.
Notes:
* Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet of paved width for one-way
* Pedestrian entrances shall be at least 3 feet from stall, driveway or access aisle
* Allowable slopes, paving and drainage as per Florida Building Code
* Off-street parking facilities shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet
Where such a facility is to be used by trucks or loading uses, the minimum clearance shall be 15 feet
* Ingress vehicular control devices shall be located so as to provide a minimum driveway of 20 feet
in length between the building line and dispenser
* For landscaping requirements of parking lots, refer to Miami-Dade County Landscape Ordinance.
Loading Berth Standards Notes
Residential From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf Berth Types
Berth Size Loading Berths Residential*: 200 sf = 10 ft x 20 ft
420 sf 1 per first 200 units Commercial: 420 sf = 12 ft x 35 ft
200 sf 1 per each additional 200 units Industrial**: 660 sf = 12 ft x 55 ft
or fraction of 200 All Berth Types: 15 ft height clearance
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths * Residential and Loading berths shall
660 sf 1 per first 200 units be setback a distance equal to their length
200 sf 1 per each additional 200 units ** 1 industrial berth may be substituted
or fraction of 200 by 2 Commercial berths
Lodging From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths ***Required loading spaces may be reduced by
420 sf 1 per first 300 rooms process of warrant upon submittal of a shared
200 sf 1 per each additional 200 rooms service management plan.
or fraction of 200
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths
660 sf 1 per first 300 rooms
200 sf 1 per each additional 200 rooms
or fraction of 200
Office From 25,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Commercial Berth Size Loading Berths Area
Industrial** 420 sf 1st 25k sf - 100k sf
420 sf 2nd 100k sf - 200k sf
420 sf 3rd 200k sf - 300k sf
420 sf 4th 300k sf - 500k sf
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size Loading Berths Area
660 sf 1/ 500k sf
* Access aisle width may not be reduced .
Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
table 2
Square: An open space available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes.
A square is spatially defined by building frontages with streets on at least one
frontage. Its landscape shall consist of pavement, lawns, and trees. The minimum
size shall be 1/8 acre.
Plaza: An open space available for civic purposes and programmed activities. A
plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages and may include street frontages.
Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement and trees. The minimum size
shall be 1/8 acre.
Courtyard / Garden: An open space spatially defined by buildings and street
walls, and visually accessible on one side to the street.
Playground: An open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children.
A playground shall be fenced and may include open shelter. Playgrounds may be
interspersed within residential areas and may be placed within a block.
Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There shall be no
minimum or maximum size.
Paseo: An accessway restricted to pedestrian use and limited, controlled vehicular
access that connects streets, plazas, alleys, garages and other public use spaces.
Paseos must have a minimum width of 20’ and may be covered.
Civic Space
This table describes the standards for Civic Space. Civic spaces may be at multiple levels and may be
landscaped and/or paved. Civic Spaces shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk. Civic Spaces may
be publicly or privately owned.
Pedestrian Walkways: These include enclosed atrium spaces and open and enclosed
walkways. Paseos will provide additional options for pedestrian movement within the
project.
August 20, 2014 Miami Worldcenter Development Standards
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
table 3 (page 1)
Building Disposition
This table describes the standards for Building Disposition. Standards shall include the following:
Lot Occupation
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.
b. Lot Width 100 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage
* Podium 80% max
* Tower 20,000 sq. ft. max. floor plate for Residential and Lodging
22,500 sq. ft. max. floor plate for Residential and Lodging for Tract A
27,500 sq. ft. max. floor plate for MWC Signature Residential Tower in Tract A
30,000 sq. ft. max. floor plate for Commercial and Mixed Use
d. Floor Lot Ratio 18
e. Building Frontage 70% min.
f. Open Space Requirement 10% Net Lot Area min.
g. Density 500 du/acre max.
Building Setback
a. Building Frontage See Regulating Plan, Street Sections, and Roof Structures
b. Side See Regulating Plan, Street Sections, and Roof Structures
c. Rear See Regulating Plan, Street Sections, and Roof Structures
Building Height
a. Min. Height 2 stories
b. Max. Height Unlimited
building disposition
Miami Worldcenter Development Standards August 20, 2014
miami 21 appendix d: miami worldcenter
table 3 (page 2)
building disposition
(see street design for
specific street guidelines)
parking disposition

Appendix E - Brickell City Centre

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS, AN AMENDMENT TO THE PREVIOUSLY-APPROVED "BRICKELL CITY CENTRE" SPECIAL AREA PLAN ("BCC SAP") PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 3, SECTION 3.9 AND ARTICLE 7, SECTION 7.1.2.8 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, BY ADDING ADDITIONAL PROPERTIES GENERALLY LOCATED IN THE EASTERN PORTION OF THE BLOCK BOUNDED BY SOUTHEAST 7TH STREET ON THE NORTH, SOUTHEAST 8TH STREET ON THE SOUTH, THE 8TH STREET METRO MOVER STATION RIGHT-OF-WAY ON THE WEST, AND BRICKELL AVENUE ON THE EAST, MIAMI, FLORIDA; MORE SPECIFICALLY DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT "A"; THE ADDITIONAL EASTERN PORTION OF THE BLOCK COMBINES WITH THE ORIGINALLY-APPROVED "BCC PLAZA" TO CREATE THE "ONE BCC" BLOCK; THE AMENDMENT PROPOSES: A) ADDING APPROXIMATELY 67,620 SQUARE FEET (1.55 ACRES) OF LOT AREA FOR A TOTAL COMBINED LOT AREA OF 503,948 SQUARE FEET (11.57 ACRES); B) INCREASING THE RETAIL / ENTERTAINMENT AREA BY 58,307 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 723,575 SQUARE FEET; C) INCREASING THE OFFICE SPACE BY 36,333 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 961,400 SQUARE FEET; D) INCREASING THE RESIDENTIAL COMPONENT BY 256 UNITS FOR A TOTAL OF 1,400 UNITS; E) INCREASING HOTEL KEYS BY 120 FOR A TOTAL OF 385 KEYS; AND F) INCREASING THE PARKING SPACES ABOVE GROUND AND BELOW GRADE BY 308 SPACES FOR A TOTAL OF 5,057 SPACES. THE SQUARE FOOTAGES ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE AT TIME OF BUILDING PERMIT NOT TO EXCEED A TOTAL OF 9,071,064 SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA OR LESS THAN 25,197 SQUARE FEET OF CIVIC SPACE OR NOT LESS THAN 50,395 SQUARE FEET OF OPEN SPACE; FURTHERMORE, AMENDING THE ZONING ATLAS OF ORDINANCE NO 13114, BY CHANGING THE ZONING CLASSIFICATION OF THE ADDITIONAL SELECTED PROPERTY FROM "T6-48A-O" URBAN CORE ZONE AND "T6-48B-O" URBAN CORE ZONE TO "T6-48B-O" URBAN CORE ZONE; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Generally Located in the Eastern Portion of the Block Bounded by SE 7th Street on the North, SE 8th Street on the South, the 8th Street Metro Mover Right-of Way to the West, and Brickell Avenue on the East [Commissioner Marc David Sarnoff - District 2]

APPLICANT(S): Spencer Crowley, Esquire, on behalf of Brickell City Centre Project LLC, and Daniel J. Alfonso, City Manager, on behalf of the City of Miami

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommended approval with conditions*.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval with conditions* on to City Commission on January 15, 2014 by a vote of 9-0.
*See supporting documentation.

PURPOSE: This will allow a second amendment to the Brickell City Centre Special Area Plan to add certain lands and authorize construction of a mixed-use building.

..Body
WHEREAS, the original "Brickell CitiCentre" is a 9.038 acres Special Area Plan ("SAP"), pursuant to Article 3, Section 3.9 of the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, ("Zoning Ordinance"), generally bound by Brickell Avenue to the East, Southwest 1st Avenue to the West, Southeast 6th Street to the North and Southwest 8th Street to the South, Miami, Florida: and

WHEREAS, the applicant amended the SAP by renaming the project from "BRICKELL CITICENTRE" to "BRICKELL CITYCENTRE SAP"; and

WHEREAS, the applicant amended the Special Area Plan SAP, its Regulating Plan and Design Guidelines by adding 0.98 acres of abutting parcels to include in the Brickell CityCentre SAP project, located adjacent and north of the existing SAP and bounded by Southeast 5th Street, Southeast 1st Avenue, Southeast 5th Street, and South Miami Avenue, Miami Florida, and resulting in a total of 10.01 acres; and

WHEREAS, the applicant wishes to further amend the Special Area Plan, its Regulating Plan and Design Guidelines by adding an additional 1.55 acres to the Brickell CityCentre SAP project, generally located adjacent and east of the existing SAP and bounded by Southeast 7th Street on the North, Southeast 8th Street on the South, the 8th Street Metro Mover Right-of Way to the West, and Brickell Avenue on the East, Miami Florida, and further described in "Exhibit A" herein, resulting in a total of 11.57 acres; and

WHEREAS, the "Brickell CityCentre" SAP project integrates public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in higher or specialized quality building and streetscape design; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City of Miami Downtown area; and

WHEREAS, the expanded "Brickell CityCentre" SAP will benefit the area by creating residential units, hotel rooms, and commercial uses promoting its interaction with the adjacent areas, Brickell, Miami River and Downtown; and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, at its meeting on January 15, 2014, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No. PZAB-R-14-001 by a vote of nine to zero (9-0), item no. 5, recommending APPROVAL with conditions of the amended SAP as set forth; and

WHEREAS, revisions to the Public Benefits Section of the Regulating Plan, have been codified in Appendix E of Miami 21 as described in Exhibit "F", attached and incorporated; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission, after careful consideration of this matter, deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City of Miami and its citizens to amend its Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The amended SAP, its Regulating Plan and Design Guidelines attached hereto, is approved subject to the conditions specified herein, and with the Zoning Ordinance.

Section 3. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the amended SAP:
a. The amended SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended.
b. The development proposed in the amended SAP is expected to generate recurring fiscal benefits of approximately $5.3 million in ad valorem taxes for both the city's general fund and debt service, as well as $300,000 annually to the DDA. Approximately 2,375 permanent jobs will be created with $200 million paid for construction labor. This is equivalent to 3,447 man-years of construction work at the average annual pay rate of a construction worker in Miami-Dade County, which is $58,800 per year.
c. The City Commission further finds that:
(1) The SAP will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) The SAP will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this SAP;
(4) The SAP will efficiently use necessary public facilities;
(5) The SAP will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) The SAP will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) The SAP will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record presented and evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the SAP;
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this SAP.

Section 4. The SAP, inclusive of all exhibits, in particular, Exhibit "B", the Amended Concept Book, Exhibit "C" the Amended Regulating Plan, Exhibit "D" Amended Development Program Spreadsheet, Exhibit "E" the Amended Development Agreement, as approved, shall be binding upon the Applicant and any successors in interest.

Section 5. The amended application for SAP, which was submitted on November 22, 2013, and on file with the Hearing Boards Section of the Planning and Zoning Department, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated by reference.

Section 6. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Planning and Zoning Director to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 7. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the amended SAP as described herein and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 8. The amended SAP for the "Brickell CityCentre" is granted and approved.

Section 9. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the amended SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or amended SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 10. The provisions for this amended SAP, as approved, shall commence and become operative thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the Ordinance.

Section 11. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption and signature of the Mayor, following any applicable appeal period. {1}

Section 12. The Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended by adding "Appendix E: AMENDED BRICKELL CITYCENTRE SAP" to said Ordinance, as follows:

APPENDIX E: AMENDED "BRICKELL CITYCENTRE SAP"

CONDITIONS:

Based on analysis and findings, the Planning and Zoning Department recommends approval of the amended "Brickell CityCentre" SAP with the following conditions:

1) Meet all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department to conduct a security survey at the appropriate time, of "One BCC", at the Department's discretion, and to make recommendations concerning security measures and systems; further submit a report to the Planning and Zoning Department, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the Police Department recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the SAP, as amended, security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Director why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from the Department of Fire-Rescue indicating applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Department of Fire-Rescue in review of One BCC, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from the Department of Solid Waste that "One BCC", now included in the SAP have addressed all concerns of the said Department prior to the obtaining a shell permit.

5) Comply with the Minority Participation and Employment Plan (including a Contractor/Subcontractor Participation Plan) submitted to the City as part of the Application for Development Approval, with the understanding that the Applicant must use its best efforts to follow the provisions of the City 's Minority/Women Business Affairs and Procurement Program as a guide, as applicable.

6) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

a. Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions for "One BCC", providing that the ownership, operation and maintenance of all common areas and facilities will be by the property owner or a mandatory property owner association in perpetuity; and

b. Record in the Public Records a Unity of Title or a covenant in lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of a shell permit, provide the Planning and Zoning Department with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition number 6 above.

8) Provide the Planning and Zoning Department with an amended temporary construction plan, inclusive of "One BCC", which contains the following:

a. Temporary construction parking plan, with an enforcement policy;

b. Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and

c. Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site; said plan shall be subject to the review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Department prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan or other agreements and permits as applicable; failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this SAP.

9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department for review and approval:

a. Environmental Impact Statement for amended SAP site, inclusive of "One BCC".

b. Sufficiency Letter from the City of Miami, Office of Transportation for SAP site, inclusive of "One BCC".

c. Final determination of Public School Concurrency and Capacity Reservation for all residential development within the SAP, inclusive of "One BCC".

d. Conservation Assessment Report (project location is within an high Archeological Probability Zone)

e. Applicants shall work with City staff (Department of Capital Improvements, CIP) to identify a solution for potential conflicts that may arise between the proposed development of "One BCC" and the implementation / completion of the Greenway project on Southeast 5th Street.

f. Prior to final approval of this amendment, the applicants shall work with City staff (Office of Transportation) to review alternatives addressing traffic flow throughout Brickell Avenue.

10) The "Brickell CityCentre" SAP includes a Development Review Process which addresses the build out of the individual projects as identified in the Regulating Plan.

11) If the project is to be developed in phases and/or individual specific projects, the Applicant shall submit an interim plan, including a landscape plan, which addresses design details for the land occupying future phases of this Project in the event that the future phases are not developed, said plan shall include a proposed timetable and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director.

12) The applicant shall meet conditions identified in this Ordinance, the "Brickell CityCentre" SAP and all applicable regulations from local, state and federal agencies.

13) The proposed SAP, inclusive of "One BCC", is located within the Downtown Development of Regional Impact (DDRI) area. DDRI fees will be calculated based on final program. DDRI credits for "One BCC" may be reserved upon approval of this amendment; but without exception, all fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit.

14) Within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the amended Development Agreement specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The amended "Brickell CityCentre" SAP, as approved complies with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City of Miami, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance Code.

The proposed development does not unreasonably interfere with the achievement of the objectives of the adopted State Land Development Plan applicable to the City of Miami.


..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.

Appendix F - Design District

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS, PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 3 AND 7 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, AN AMENDMENT TO THE PREVIOUSLY APPROVED "MIAMI DESIGN DISTRICT RETAIL STREET SPECIAL AREA PLAN (SAP)", ADDING ADDITIONAL PROPERTIES LOCATED AT APPROXIMATELY 3815 AND 3840 NORTHEAST MIAMI COURT; 3825, 3852 AND 3900 NORTH MIAMI AVENUE; 20, 21, 28, NORTHWEST 39TH STREET; 30 AND 50 NORTHEAST 39TH STREET AND 4100 AND 4039 NORTHEAST 1ST AVENUE, MIAMI, FLORIDA; AS DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT "A", ATTACHED AND INCORPORATED; THE AMENDMENT PROPOSES: A) ADDING APPROXIMATELY 86,263 SQUARE FEET (1.98 ACRES) OF LOT AREA SPLIT AMONG 12 ADDITIONAL PARCELS FOR A TOTAL COMBINED LOT AREA OF 917,495 SQUARE FEET: (21.06 ACRES) SPLIT AMONG SIXTY-THREE (63) PARCELS; B) INCREASING THE COMMERCIAL SPACE BY APPROXIMATELY 422,971 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 1,374,689 SQUARE FEET; C) INCREASING THE RESIDENTIAL UNITS BY APPROXIMATELY 489 UNITS FOR A TOTAL OF 561 UNITS; D) DECREASING THE HOTEL KEYS BY ONE (1) FOR A TOTAL OF 52 KEYS; E) INCREASING THE PARKING SPACES BY APPROXIMATELY 1,181 SPACES ABOVE GROUND AND BELOW GRADE FOR A TOTAL OF 3,752 SPACES; F) INCREASING THE OPEN SPACE BY APPROXIMATELY 1,764 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 41,566 SQUARE FEET; THE SQUARE FOOTAGES ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE UP TO TEN PERCENT (10%) PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 7.1.2.5.A.28 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Approximately 3815 and 3840 NE Miami Court; 3825, 3852 and 3900 N Miami Avenue; 20, 21, 28 NW 39th Street; 30 and 50 NE 39th Street and 4100 and 4039 NE 1st Avenue [Commissioner Michelle Spence-Jones - District 5]

APPLICANT(S): Neisen O. Kasdin, Esquire, on behalf of "Miami Design District Retail Street SAP" Applicant Entities and the City of Miami

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommends approval with conditions*.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval with conditions* to City Commission on July 17, 2013 by a vote of 11-0. See companion File ID 11-01196da1.
*See supporting documentation.

PURPOSE: This will allow 12 additional parcels for a total development of approximately 21.06 acres for the "Miami Design District Retail Street SAP".

..Body
WHEREAS, the original "Miami Design District Retail Street" is a 19.08 acre Special Area Plan ("SAP") approved on July 26, 2012 (Ordinance No. 13334); pursuant to Article 3 and Article 7 of the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, ("Zoning Ordinance"), with current general boundaries of Northeast 43rd Street to the North, North Federal Highway and Biscayne Boulevard to the East, Northeast 38th Street to the South, and Notheast Miami Court and North Miami Avenue to the West, Miami, Florida; and

WHEREAS, the applicant wishes to amend the SAP Regulating Plan and Concept Book by adding 12 new properties and adjusting the original development program to include additional 86,263 square feet of lot area for a new lot area total of 917,495 square feet or approximately 21.06 acres, said parcels located approximately 3815 & 3840 Northeast Miami Court; 3825, 3852 and 3900 North Miami Avenue; 20, 21, 28 Northwest 39th Street; 30 and 50 Northeast 39th Street and 4100 and 4039 Northeast 1st Avenue, Miami Florida; and

WHEREAS, the proposed amended SAP will facilitate redevelopment and benefit the area by creating residential units, hotel rooms, commercial uses, as well as civic and open space for the enjoyment of the general public, and

WHEREAS, the amended SAP will integrate public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in higher or specialized quality building and streetscape design; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City, in general, and specifically, the Miami Design District area; and

WHEREAS, the amended SAP will create certain recurring and nonrecurring financial benefits as well as temporary and permanent jobs; and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board, at its meeting on July 17, 2013, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No. PZAB-R-13-036 by a vote of eleven to zero (11-0), item no. 1, recommending APPROVAL with conditions of the SAP as follows: 1) Remove the rezoning request of 299 NE 38 Street (Parcel 10) from the application; 2) "T4" regular setback to remain at 20 feet; 3) The Rezoning for 3720 Biscayne Boulevard (Parcel 9) is not recommended for the up-zoning of "T6-24-O" and will remain at "T6-12-O"; and 4) Developer to meet on a quarterly basis with the abutting registered associations of the Design District.; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission, after careful consideration of this matter deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City of Miami and its citizens to amend its Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The amended SAP attached hereto, is approved subject to the conditions specified herein.

Section 3. The amended SAP includes lower ranking SAP Permits as set forth in the Exhibit "C": Regulating Plan of the amended SAP which shall be reviewed for approval by Planning and Zoning, as needed.

Section 4. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the amended SAP:

a. The amended SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended.
b. Development proposed in the amended SAP is expected to cost approximately $152 million reaching a total of $443 million for the entire SAP, exclusive of land costs and developer fees. A total of 460 people will be employed at the proposed project, which will stimulate the creation of 300 direct and induced jobs and will generate approximately $2,593,699 annually in recurring and non-recurring benefits to the City (2013 dollars). The total SAP will now result in the creation of in excess of 1,230 FTE (Full Time Employees) permanent new jobs and will generate approximately $4,691,208 annually in tax revenues to the City (2013 dollars)."
c. The City Commission further finds that the amended SAP:
(1) Will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) Will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this SAP;
(4) Will efficiently use existing public or civic spaces;
(5) Will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) Will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) Will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record and the evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the SAP; and
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this amended SAP.

Section 5. The amended SAP, inclusive of all exhibits, in particular, the Exhibit "C": Amended Regulating Plan, Exhibit "D": Amended Concept Book, and Exhibit "E": Amended Development Program Spreadsheet, as approved, shall be binding upon the Applicant and any successors in interest.

Section 6. The amended application for this SAP, which was submitted on March 27, 2013 and on file with the Planning and Zoning Department, Hearing Boards Section of the, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated herein by reference.

Section 7. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Planning Director to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 8. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the SAP as described in the record, herein, and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 9. The amended SAP for the "Miami Design District Retail Street" is granted and approved.

Section 10. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the amended SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 11. The provisions for this Ordinance, as approved, shall become effective thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the Ordinance.

Section 12. The Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended by changing Appendix F: Miami Design District Retail Street SAP" to said Ordinance, as follow and incorporating: the amended SAP:

APPENDIX F: "MIAMI DESIGN DISTRICT RETAIL STREET SPECIAL AREA PLAN", AS AMENDED

Which includes:

Development Agreement

Applicants

Amended Regulating Plan

Amended Concept Book,

Amended Development Program Spreadsheet

CONDITIONS:

Based on analysis and findings, the Planning Department recommends approval of the proposed amendment to the "Miami Design District Retail Street" SAP with the following conditions:

1) Meet all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department to conduct a security survey, at the Department's discretion, and to make recommendations concerning security measures and systems; further submit a report to the Planning Department, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the Police Department recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the amended SAP security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Planning Director why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from the Department of Fire-Rescue indicating applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Department of Fire-Rescue in the review of the scope of the amended SAP, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from the Department of Solid Waste that the SAP has addressed all concerns of the said Department prior to the obtaining a shell permit.

5) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

6) Record in the Public Records:
a. A Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions providing that the ownership, operation and maintenance of all Civic and Open Spaces, and any related improvements located thereon, shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s), their successor(s), or their designee in perpetuity; and

b. A Unity of Title or a covenant in lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of a shell permit, provide the Planning Department with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition (6) above.

8) Provide the Planning Department with a temporary construction plan that addresses construction phasing and includes the following elements:

· Temporary construction parking plan, with an enforcement policy;
· Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and
· Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site: said plan shall be subject to the review and approval by the Planning Department prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan. Failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this SAP.

As applicable, Developer Parties and Retail Developer Party, as defined in the approved amended "Miami Design District Retail Street SAP", shall be responsible for securing the City's approval for any change or modification to the approved temporary construction plan. Request for approval of any change or modification to the previously approved temporary construction plan shall be submitted for review and approval no later than two weeks prior to implementation of requested change or modification.

9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department for review and approval:

· Sufficiency Letter from the City of Miami, Office of Transportation.
· Final determination of Public School Concurrency and Capacity Reservation.
· Proof of compliance with conditions established by the following department or agencies, specifically:
o City and County Public Works Departments
o Miami-Dade County Water and Sewer
o Miami-Dade County Traffic Engineering Division
o Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT); and
o Other agencies as needed

10) The amended "Miami Design District Retail Street SAP" includes a Development Review Process which addresses the build out of the individual Buildings as identified in the Regulating Plan. All development within this SAP shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director prior to the issuance of any building permit consistent with the requirements of Sec. 3.9.1.(g) of Miami 21 and the SAP.

11) If the project is to be developed in phases and/or individual specific projects, the Applicant shall submit an interim plan, including a landscape plan, which addresses design details for the land occupying future phases of this Project. In the event that the future phases are not developed, said plan shall include a proposed timetable and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Director.

12) The applicant shall meet conditions identified in this Ordinance, with the amended SAP and all applicable local, state and federal regulations.

13) Within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the Development Agreement associated with this SAP, specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

THE CITY OF MIAMI SHALL:

Establish the operative date of the associated Development Agreement as being thirty (30) days from the date of its final adoption; the final adoption date shall constitute the commencement of the thirty (30) day period to appeal the provisions of the Development Agreement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The amended "Miami Design District Retail Street SAP", as approved, complies with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City of Miami, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.


..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.

Appendix G - River Landing

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS, PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 3 AND 7 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, THE REZONING OF CERTAIN PARCELS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF APPROXIMATELY 11.45 ACRES FOR THE "RANSOM EVERGLADES SCHOOL UPPER CAMPUS SPECIAL AREA PLAN" ("SAP"), AN EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, LOCATED AT APPROXIMATELY 3552, 3575, AND 3695 MAIN HIGHWAY; AND 3171, 3173, 3175, AND 3183 ROYAL ROAD, MIAMI, FLORIDA; THE AMENDMENT PROPOSES: A) ADDING APPROXIMATELY 66,040 GROSS SQUARE FEET OF BUILDING AREA SPLIT AMONG THREE (3) NEW BUILDINGS FOR A TOTAL OF 216,451 GROSS SQUARE FEET; B) INCREASING CIVIC SPACE BY 16,338 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 141,662 SQUARE FEET; AND C) INCREASING GREEN SPACE BY 10,043 SQUARE FEET FOR A TOTAL OF 151,502 SQUARE FEET; THE SQUARE FOOTAGES ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE UP TO TEN PERCENT (10%) PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 7, SECTION 7.1.2.5.A.28 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Approximately 3552, 3575, and 3695 Main Highway; and 3171, 3173, 3175, and 3183 Royal Road [Commissioner Marc David Sarnoff - District 2]

APPLICANT(S): John K. Shubin, Esquire, on behalf of Ransom Everglades School, Inc.

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommended approval with conditions*.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval with conditions* to City Commission on March 19, 2014 by a vote of 11-0.
HISTORIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL PRESERVATION BOARD: Approved with conditions* a Special Certificate of Appropriateness on April 1, 2014 by a vote of 7-0.
*See supporting documentation.

PURPOSE: This will allow the development of the Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus project.

..Body
WHEREAS, the "Ransom Everglades Upper Campus" is an 11.45± acres proposal qualifying as a Special Area Plan ("SAP") as per Article 3, Section 3.9 of the Miami 21 Code, generally bound by Main Highway to the Northwest, the property identified as 3551 Main Highway to the Northeast, Biscayne Bay to the Southeast, and Royal Road and the property identified as 3187 Royal Road to the Southwest; and

WHEREAS, the above location housing the "Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus" is currently an existing and operating institution for over 100 years; and

WHEREAS, the current institution condition needs to improve and update constantly to meet the most advanced levels of education; and

WHEREAS, the requested amendment will facilitate the Master Planning of the Upper Campus, providing for the removal and renovation of some existing structures, allowing for the creation of additional green open space, preserving existing tree canopies and historic buildings, promoting the development of innovative LEED certified state of the art classrooms, and promoting a sustainable campus; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the quality of education provided to students and residents of the City of Miami ("City"); and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board ("PZAB"), at its meeting on March 19, 2014, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No. PZAB-R-14-022 by a vote of eleven to zero (11-0), item no. 1, recommending APPROVAL with conditions of the SAP as follows: The applicant needs to identify appropriate parking for the 58 spaces that were removed due to the proposed expansion; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission, after careful consideration of this matter deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City and its citizens to amend its Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI,
FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are adopted by reference and incorporated as fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The SAP attached hereto, is approved, subject to the conditions specified herein and to the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance, for the City of Miami.

Section 3. The SAP includes lower ranking SAP Permits as set forth in the Regulating Plan of the SAP.

Section 4. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the subject SAP:

a. The SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended.
b. The City Commission further finds that:
(1) The SAP will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) The SAP will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this SAP;
(4) The SAP will efficiently use necessary public facilities;
(5) The SAP will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) The PROJECT will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) The SAP will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record presented and evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the SAP; and
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this SAP.

Section 5. The SAP, inclusive of the Concept Book and Regulating Plan, as approved, shall be binding upon the Applicant and any successors in interest.

Section 6. The application for SAP, which was submitted on January 21, 2014, and on file with the Hearing Boards Section of the Planning Department, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated by reference.

Section 7. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Planning and Zoning Director to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 8. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the SAP as described herein and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 9. The SAP for the Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus is granted and approved.

Section 10. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 11. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption and signature of the Mayor, following any applicable appeal period.

Section 12. The Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, is hereby amended by adding "Appendix F: RANSOM EVERGLADES SCHOOL UPPER CAMPUS - SAP" to said Ordinance, as follows:

APPENDIX F: "RANSOM EVERGLADES SCHOOL UPPER CAMPUS - SAP"
Exhibit "A": Legal Description
Exhibit "C": Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus SAP Concept Book
Exhibit "D": Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus SAP Regulating Plan

CONDITIONS:

Based on analysis and findings, the City Commission aprpoves the "Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus" SAP with the following conditions:

1) Meet all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department to conduct a security survey, at the Department's discretion, and to make recommendations concerning security measures and systems; further submit a report to the Planning Department, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the Police Department recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the SAP security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Director why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from, the Department of Fire-Rescue indicating the Applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Department of Fire-Rescue in the review of the scope of the SAP, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from, the Department of Solid Waste that the SAP has addressed all concerns of the said Department prior to the obtaining a shell permit or building permit, whichever is obtained first.

5) Comply with the Minority Participation and Employment Plan (including a Contractor/Subcontractor Participation Plan) submitted to the City as part of the Application for Development Approval, with the understanding that the Applicant must use its best efforts to follow the provisions of the City's Minority/Women Business Affairs and Procurement Program as a guide, as applicable.

6) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

· Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions providing that the ownership, operation and maintenance of all common areas and facilities will be by the property owner or a mandatory property owner association in perpetuity; and

· Record in the Public Records a Unity of Title or a Covenant in Lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of a shell permit or building permit, whichever is first, provide the Planning Department with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition (6) above.

8) Provide the Planning Department with a temporary construction plan that includes the following:

· Temporary construction parking plan, with an enforcement policy;

· Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and

· Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site. Said plan shall be subject to the review and approval by the Planning Department prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan. Failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this SAP.

9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Applicant shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department for review for compliance and further approval:

· Economic study report inclusive of fiscal impact (magnitude and time of the investment, FTE average during construction period, current and future employment, recurrent city taxes or exception statement).

· Environmental Impact Statement for lots included in SAP site, including the coastal part of the bay abutting the site.

· Sufficiency Letter from the City of Miami Office of Transportation.

· Conservation Assessment Report (project location is within a high Archeological Probability Zone)

· A Certificate to Dig, pursuant to Chapter 23 of the City Code, prior to any ground disturbing activities.

· A tree survey provided by a certified arborist describing size and condition of existing trees along with a tree protection plan, tree disposition plan, and mitigation plan to the City's Chief of Environmental Resources for approval.

· All design related to the built and natural resources of the site shall assure the continued preservation of The Pagoda, the Paul Ransom Cottage, and the specimen trees, based on the designation report's identification of them as contributing resources.


REGULATING PLAN

1. The SAP has to be consistently called Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus - SAP in all related documents.
2. Add "SAP Permit" and "Parapets" in definitions.
3. Change Article 5, Section 5.3.2(g) as follow: Determinations with respect to (1) and (2) in the preceding sentence shall be made an administrative interpretation rendered by the Director by SAP Permit.
4. Clarify the inconsistency between Illustration 5.3 and Article 4, Table 2 in regards to lot coverage.
5. Keep the content of Article 2, Section 2.1.1 Title and Purpose.
6. In Article 2, Section 2.1.2:
a. Eliminate the new language "This document precedes the final architectural design and detailing, and infrastructure engineering, and therefore it is expected that adjustments may be necessary during implementation phases of design development and construction documents".
b. Modify the new language as follows: The SAP is based on the Miami 21 Zoning Code, as amended through April 20123.
c. Keep the language in Article 2, Section 2.1.2 (a) and (b). In general, only include language that is being modified.
7. Modify Article 3, Section 3.6 Single-Family Residential District (l) Schools as follows:
a. This Section shall apply only to existing Schools within the NCD-3 Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus - SAP.
b. Clarify or redefine "Building Envelope" definition.
c. In l.2(a)Minimum Setback, strike out or not include the last sentence relating to small structures less than 400 square feet.

Provide revised set of plans addressing the following comments:

COORDINATED REVIEW COMMITTEE COMMENTS
1. Provide a clear differentiation between Civic Space (B4.17) and Green Space (B4.16) for the project and incorporate in the B4.7 (zoning data).
2. Mechanical equipment located on a roof shall be enclosed by a pitched roof with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet, instead of parapets in order to reduce the perceived scale of the building.
3. The development is within a High Probability Archeological Conservation area and will require monitoring and a disposition plan should Archeological resources be found.
4. Pursuant to the easement dedication along Main Highway, please work with Miami-Dade County to verify whether the SAP's proposed setback of 45' needs to change to 35'. Please contact Jeff Cohen or Leandro Ona at Miami-Dade County Public Works.
5. The easement dedication will change the base building line (BBL) requiring it to be updated on the survey and all applicable sheets of the development plan.
6. Provide a queue analysis for the proposed drop-off/pick-up locations.
7. Consider providing an existing parking utilization analysis to demonstrate that the reduced availability would not result in increased drop-off/pick-up traffic.
8. Provide a detailed operational plan for drop-off/pick-up to include the proposed access on Royal Road.
9. Parking Zone H shall be restricted to surface or subterranean parking. If, in the future, a vertical parking component (above grade parking) is required, it shall require review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Department with review and recommendation from Urban Development Review Board (UDRB).
10. Provide a Unity of Title or Covenant in Lieu of Unity of Title for the properties involved.
11. Provide a map indicating elevation of site for FEMA requirements. Address flood zones.
12. Provide Microfilm for all existing buildings to remain.
13. Tree removal permit required (tree mitigation) if trees will be removed or relocated.
14. Any demolition requires a waiver per NCD-3 regulations.
15. Sheet B4.7 Site Zoning Summary:
a. Revise lot coverage summary. Existing lot coverage of 19.8% should have a total of 98,760 sq.ft. Proposed development of 21.9% should be 109,235 sq.ft.
b. Breakdown the parking required. How many students are enrolled in the school? How many 11th and 12th grade students are enrolled in the school?
c. Revise the entire proposed development calculation for civic space, green space, pervious space, submerged areas and impervious paving, by including the required zoning submerged areas and impervious paving calculations.
d. Note 4) should state that it will not exceed a specific height.
Additional comments may be provided upon review of a detailed re-submittal. The City of Miami reserves the right to comment further on the project as details and/or explanations are provided and may revise previous comments based on additional information provided.

10) The Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus SAP includes a Development Review Process which addresses the build out of the individual projects as identified in the Regulating Plan.

11) If the project is to be developed in phases and/or individual specific projects, the Applicant shall submit an interim plan, including a landscape plan, which addresses design details for the land occupying future phases of this Project in the event that the future phases are not developed. Said plan shall include a proposed timetable and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director.

12) The applicant shall meet conditions identified in this Ordinance, with the Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus SAP and all applicable regulations from local, state and federal agencies.

13) Within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the Development Agreement specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

THE CITY OF MIAMI SHALL:

Establish the operative date of the associated Development Agreement as being thirty (30) days from the date of its final adoption. The final adoption date shall constitute the commencement of the thirty (30) day period to appeal the provisions of the Development Agreement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Ransom Everglades School Upper Campus SAP, as approved, complies with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City of Miami, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Miami 21 Code.

The proposed development does not unreasonably interfere with the achievement of the objectives of the adopted State Land Development Plan applicable to the City of Miami.



..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.

Appendix H - Ransom Everglades

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS, AS AMENDED IN THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF MIAMI ("CITY") AND CG MIAMI RIVER OWNER, LLC., PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 3 AND 7 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS AMENDED, THE REZONING OF CERTAIN PARCELS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF APPROXIMATELY 10.2 ACRES (444,696 SQUARE FEET) INCLUSIVE OF CITY OWNED LAND, FOR THE MIAMI RIVER SPECIAL AREA PLAN ("MIAMI RIVER SAP"), A MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT APPROXIMATELY LOCATED WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE MIAMI RIVER TO THE NORTH, SOUTHWEST 7 STREET TO THE SOUTH, SOUTHWEST 2 AVENUE TO THE EAST, SOUTHWEST 3 AVENUE TO THE WEST, AND THE EASTERN PORTION OF JOSE MARTI PARK, EXTENDING NORTHWEST OF THE MIAMI RIVER AND TERMINATING AT SOUTHWEST 2 STREET, MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT "A", ATTACHED AND INCORPORATED; THE MIAMI RIVER SAP CONSISTS OF A PHASED PROJECT DIVIDED INTO FIVE (5) PARTS WHICH INCLUDES APPROXIMATELY 4,181,087 SQUARE FEET OF DEVELOPMENT CONSISTING OF THE FOLLOWING: A) APPROXIMATELY 1,678 RESIDENTIAL UNITS; B) APPROXIMATELY 330 LODGING UNITS; C) APPROXIMATELY 66,541 SQUARE FEET OF OFFICE SPACE; D) APPROXIMATELY 176,350 SQUARE FEET OF COMMERCIAL USES; E) APPROXIMATELY 2,376 PARKING SPACES; F) APPROXIMATELY 17 BOAT SLIPS; G) A MINIMUM OF 35,964 SQUARE FEET OF CIVIC SPACE; AND H) A MINIMUM OF 15,175 SQUARE FEET OF OPEN SPACE; THE MIAMI RIVER SAP WILL MODIFY THE TRANSECT ZONE REGULATIONS THAT ARE APPLICABLE TO THE SUBJECT PARCELS, WHERE A SECTION IS NOT SPECIFICALLY MODIFIED, THE REGULATION AND RESTRICTION OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE APPLY; THE NUMBERS OF FEET STATED ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE BY NOT MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT (5%) AT THE TIME OF THE BUILDING PERMIT BUT SHALL NOT EXCEED 4,181,087 SQUARE FEET OF THE DEVELOPMENT; FURTHER AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER TO RELEASE THE FOLLOWING TWO COVENANTS ON THE PROPERTY WHICH ARE NO LONGER NEEDED: COVENANT RECORDED AT OFFICIAL RECORD BOOK ("ORB") 24997 PAGE 2543, AND AT ORB 24194 PAGE 1806, RESPECTIVELY, IN THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY, FLORIDA; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Approximately located within the boundaries of the Miami River to the north, Southwest 7 Street to the south, Southwest 2 Avenue to the east, Southwest 3 Avenue to the west, and the eastern portion of Jose Marti Park, extending Northwest of the Miami River and terminating at Southwest 2 Street, Miami, Florida [Commissioner Frank Carollo - District 3]

APPLICANT(S):
Melissa Tapanes Llahues, Esq. on behalf of CG Miami River LLC.

Daniel J. Alfonso, City Manager, on behalf of the City of Miami, as co-applicant.

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommended approval with conditions. See supporting documentation. See companion File ID 15-00624da and File ID 15-00354ct.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval, with conditions, on June 3, 2015, by a 10-1 vote.

PURPOSE: This will allow the area to be Master Planned to allow a greater integration of public improvements and infrastructure and greater flexibility as part of the "Miami River Special Area Plan (SAP)."

..Body
WHEREAS, the Miami River Special Area Plan ("Miami River SAP") consists of approximately 10.2 acres of selected parcels, as described in Exhibit "A", attached and incorporated, qualifying as a Special Area Plan ("SAP") as per Article 3, Section 3.9 of the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami ("Miami 21 Code"); and

WHEREAS, the aforementioned location for the proposed Miami River SAP currently contains underutilized buildings and vacant lots, and the entire development will consist of approximately 4,181,087 square feet of development with A) approximately 1,678 residential units; B) approximately 330 lodging units; C) approximately 66,541 square feet of office space; D) approximately 176,350 square feet of commercial uses; E) approximately 2,376 parking spaces; F) approximately 17 boat slips; G) a minimum of 35,964 square feet of civic space; and H) a minimum of 15,175 square feet of open space; and

WHEREAS, the proposed Miami River SAP will facilitate the redevelopment and benefit the area by creating residential units, hotel rooms, and commercial uses as well as civic and open space for the enjoyment of the general public; and

WHEREAS, the requested Miami River SAP will integrate public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in a higher quality of specialized building and streetscape design; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City of Miami ("City"), in general, and specifically the downtown and Little Havana Miami River area; and

WHEREAS, the Miami River SAP will create certain recurring and non-recurring financial benefits as well as temporary and permanent jobs; and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board ("PZAB"), at its meeting on June 3, 2015, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No. 15-032 by a vote of ten to one (10-1), Item No. PZAB. 6, recommending APPROVAL of the Miami River SAP; and

WHEREAS, on November 19, 2015, the City Commission approved the Development Agreement with the conditions set forth in the Public Benefits Clause, as amended at the public hearing; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission after careful consideration of the matter deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City and its citizens to amend the Miami 21 Code as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The Miami River SAP, attached hereto, is approved subject to the conditions specified herein, and as amended in the Development Agreement between the City and CG Miami River Owner, LLC.

Section 3. The Miami River SAP includes lower ranking SAP Permits as set forth in the Regulating Plan of the SAP, attached hereto as "Exhibit B", which shall be reviewed for approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning.

Section 4. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the subject Miami River SAP:

a. The Miami River SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended;

b. The City Commission further finds that:
(1) The Miami River SAP will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) The Miami River SAP will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Miami River SAP;
(4) The Miami River SAP will efficiently use existing public or civic spaces;
(5) The Miami River SAP will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) The Miami River SAP will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) The Miami River SAP will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record presented and evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the Miami River SAP; and
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Miami River SAP.

Section 5. The Miami River SAP, inclusive of the Regulating Plan Exhibit "B", Concept Document Exhibit "C", and Executive Summary Exhibit "D", as approved, shall be binding upon the Applicant and any successors in interest.

Section 6. The application for the Miami River SAP, which was submitted on April 28, 2015, and on file with the Hearing Boards Section of the Department of Planning and Zoning, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated by reference.

Section 7. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Director of Planning and Zoning to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 8. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the Miami River SAP as described herein and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 9. The Miami River SAP is granted and approved.

Section 10. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the Miami River SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or Miami River SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 11. The provisions for this Miami River SAP, as approved, shall commence and become operative thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the Ordinance.

Section 12. The City Manager is hereby authorized to release the following two covenants on the property which are no longer needed: the covenant recorded at Official Record Book ("ORB") 24997 Page 2543, and at ORB 24194 Page 1806, respectively, in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida.

Section 13. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption and signature of the Mayor, following any applicable appeal period.

CONDITIONS

Based on analysis and findings, the Department of Planning and Zoning recommends approval of the Miami River SAP with the following conditions which are adopted by the City Commission:

1) Comply with all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances, and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department to conduct a security survey, at the Department's discretion, and to make recommendations concerning security measures and systems. Further submit a report to the Department of Planning and Zoning, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the Police Department recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the Miami River SAP security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Director of Planning and Zoning why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from, the Department of Fire-Rescue indicating Applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Department of Fire-Rescue in the review of the scope of the Miami River SAP, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from, the Department of Solid Waste that the Miami River SAP has addressed all concerns of said Department prior to obtaining a building permit.

5) Comply with the Minority Participation and Employment Plan (including a Contractor/Subcontractor Participation Plan) submitted to the City as part of the Application for Development Approval, with the understanding that the Applicant must use its best efforts to follow the provisions of the City's Community Small Business Enterprises ("CSBE") and Procurement Program as a guide, as applicable.

6) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

a. Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions providing that the ownership, operation, and maintenance of all common areas and facilities will be by the property owner or a mandatory property owner association in perpetuity; and
b. Record in the Public Records a Unity of Title or a Covenant in Lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the Department of Planning and Zoning and the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition (6) above.

8) Provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a temporary construction plan that address construction phasing and includes the following elements:
a. Temporary construction parking plan, with an enforcement policy;
b. Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and
c. Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site. Said plan shall be subject to the review and approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan. Failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this Miami River SAP.
As applicable, the developer of the approved Miami River SAP shall be responsible for securing the City's approval for any change or modification to the approved temporary construction plan. Request for approval of any change or modification to the previously approved temporary construction plan shall be submitted for review and approved no later than two (2) weeks prior to the implementation of such a requested change or modification.

9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the Miami River SAP, the Applicant for the Miami River SAP shall provide the Department of Planning and Zoning for review for compliance and further approval:
a. Sufficiency Letter from the City's Office of Transportation;
b. Final determination of Public School Concurrency and Capacity Reservation;
c. Conservation Assessment Report as portions of the project are located within a High Archeological Probability Zone; and
d. Proof of compliance with conditions established by the following departments or agencies, specifically:
i. City and Miami-Dade County Public Works Departments;
ii. Miami-Dade County Water and Sewer Department;
iii. Miami-Dade County Traffic Engineering Division;
iv. Florida Department of Transportation.

10) The Miami River SAP includes a Development Review Process which address the build out of the individual Buildings as identified in the Regulating Plan. All development within the Miami River SAP shall be submitted for the review and approval by the Director of Planning prior to the issuance of any building permit consistent with the requirements of Article 3, Section 3.9.1(g) of the Miami 21 Code and the Miami River SAP.

11) Within (90) days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the Development Agreement specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

12) The Applicant shall comply with the conditions identified in the Miami 21 Code, the Miami River SAP, and all applicable local, state and federal regulations.

THE CITY OF MIAMI SHALL

Establish the operative date of the associated Development Agreement as being thirty (30) days from the date of the final adoption of the Development Agreement. The final adoption date of the Development Agreement shall constitute the commencement of the thirty (30) day period to appeal the provisions of the Development Agreement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The Miami River SAP, as approved, complies with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Miami 21 Code.



..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten (10) days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.

Appendix I - Miami River

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS, AS AMENDED IN THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF MIAMI ("CITY") AND CG MIAMI RIVER OWNER, LLC., PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 3 AND 7 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS AMENDED, THE REZONING OF CERTAIN PARCELS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF APPROXIMATELY 10.2 ACRES (444,696 SQUARE FEET) INCLUSIVE OF CITY OWNED LAND, FOR THE MIAMI RIVER SPECIAL AREA PLAN ("MIAMI RIVER SAP"), A MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT APPROXIMATELY LOCATED WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE MIAMI RIVER TO THE NORTH, SOUTHWEST 7 STREET TO THE SOUTH, SOUTHWEST 2 AVENUE TO THE EAST, SOUTHWEST 3 AVENUE TO THE WEST, AND THE EASTERN PORTION OF JOSE MARTI PARK, EXTENDING NORTHWEST OF THE MIAMI RIVER AND TERMINATING AT SOUTHWEST 2 STREET, MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT "A", ATTACHED AND INCORPORATED; THE MIAMI RIVER SAP CONSISTS OF A PHASED PROJECT DIVIDED INTO FIVE (5) PARTS WHICH INCLUDES APPROXIMATELY 4,181,087 SQUARE FEET OF DEVELOPMENT CONSISTING OF THE FOLLOWING: A) APPROXIMATELY 1,678 RESIDENTIAL UNITS; B) APPROXIMATELY 330 LODGING UNITS; C) APPROXIMATELY 66,541 SQUARE FEET OF OFFICE SPACE; D) APPROXIMATELY 176,350 SQUARE FEET OF COMMERCIAL USES; E) APPROXIMATELY 2,376 PARKING SPACES; F) APPROXIMATELY 17 BOAT SLIPS; G) A MINIMUM OF 35,964 SQUARE FEET OF CIVIC SPACE; AND H) A MINIMUM OF 15,175 SQUARE FEET OF OPEN SPACE; THE MIAMI RIVER SAP WILL MODIFY THE TRANSECT ZONE REGULATIONS THAT ARE APPLICABLE TO THE SUBJECT PARCELS, WHERE A SECTION IS NOT SPECIFICALLY MODIFIED, THE REGULATION AND RESTRICTION OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE APPLY; THE NUMBERS OF FEET STATED ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE BY NOT MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT (5%) AT THE TIME OF THE BUILDING PERMIT BUT SHALL NOT EXCEED 4,181,087 SQUARE FEET OF THE DEVELOPMENT; FURTHER AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER TO RELEASE THE FOLLOWING TWO COVENANTS ON THE PROPERTY WHICH ARE NO LONGER NEEDED: COVENANT RECORDED AT OFFICIAL RECORD BOOK ("ORB") 24997 PAGE 2543, AND AT ORB 24194 PAGE 1806, RESPECTIVELY, IN THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY, FLORIDA; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Approximately located within the boundaries of the Miami River to the north, Southwest 7 Street to the south, Southwest 2 Avenue to the east, Southwest 3 Avenue to the west, and the eastern portion of Jose Marti Park, extending Northwest of the Miami River and terminating at Southwest 2 Street, Miami, Florida [Commissioner Frank Carollo - District 3]

APPLICANT(S):
Melissa Tapanes Llahues, Esq. on behalf of CG Miami River LLC.

Daniel J. Alfonso, City Manager, on behalf of the City of Miami, as co-applicant.

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommended approval with conditions. See supporting documentation. See companion File ID 15-00624da and File ID 15-00354ct.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval, with conditions, on June 3, 2015, by a 10-1 vote.

PURPOSE: This will allow the area to be Master Planned to allow a greater integration of public improvements and infrastructure and greater flexibility as part of the "Miami River Special Area Plan (SAP)."

..Body
WHEREAS, the Miami River Special Area Plan ("Miami River SAP") consists of approximately 10.2 acres of selected parcels, as described in Exhibit "A", attached and incorporated, qualifying as a Special Area Plan ("SAP") as per Article 3, Section 3.9 of the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami ("Miami 21 Code"); and

WHEREAS, the aforementioned location for the proposed Miami River SAP currently contains underutilized buildings and vacant lots, and the entire development will consist of approximately 4,181,087 square feet of development with A) approximately 1,678 residential units; B) approximately 330 lodging units; C) approximately 66,541 square feet of office space; D) approximately 176,350 square feet of commercial uses; E) approximately 2,376 parking spaces; F) approximately 17 boat slips; G) a minimum of 35,964 square feet of civic space; and H) a minimum of 15,175 square feet of open space; and

WHEREAS, the proposed Miami River SAP will facilitate the redevelopment and benefit the area by creating residential units, hotel rooms, and commercial uses as well as civic and open space for the enjoyment of the general public; and

WHEREAS, the requested Miami River SAP will integrate public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in a higher quality of specialized building and streetscape design; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City of Miami ("City"), in general, and specifically the downtown and Little Havana Miami River area; and

WHEREAS, the Miami River SAP will create certain recurring and non-recurring financial benefits as well as temporary and permanent jobs; and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board ("PZAB"), at its meeting on June 3, 2015, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No. 15-032 by a vote of ten to one (10-1), Item No. PZAB. 6, recommending APPROVAL of the Miami River SAP; and

WHEREAS, on November 19, 2015, the City Commission approved the Development Agreement with the conditions set forth in the Public Benefits Clause, as amended at the public hearing; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission after careful consideration of the matter deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City and its citizens to amend the Miami 21 Code as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The Miami River SAP, attached hereto, is approved subject to the conditions specified herein, and as amended in the Development Agreement between the City and CG Miami River Owner, LLC.

Section 3. The Miami River SAP includes lower ranking SAP Permits as set forth in the Regulating Plan of the SAP, attached hereto as "Exhibit B", which shall be reviewed for approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning.

Section 4. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the subject Miami River SAP:

a. The Miami River SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended;

b. The City Commission further finds that:
(1) The Miami River SAP will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) The Miami River SAP will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Miami River SAP;
(4) The Miami River SAP will efficiently use existing public or civic spaces;
(5) The Miami River SAP will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) The Miami River SAP will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) The Miami River SAP will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record presented and evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the Miami River SAP; and
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Miami River SAP.

Section 5. The Miami River SAP, inclusive of the Regulating Plan Exhibit "B", Concept Document Exhibit "C", and Executive Summary Exhibit "D", as approved, shall be binding upon the Applicant and any successors in interest.

Section 6. The application for the Miami River SAP, which was submitted on April 28, 2015, and on file with the Hearing Boards Section of the Department of Planning and Zoning, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated by reference.

Section 7. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Director of Planning and Zoning to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 8. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the Miami River SAP as described herein and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 9. The Miami River SAP is granted and approved.

Section 10. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the Miami River SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or Miami River SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 11. The provisions for this Miami River SAP, as approved, shall commence and become operative thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the Ordinance.

Section 12. The City Manager is hereby authorized to release the following two covenants on the property which are no longer needed: the covenant recorded at Official Record Book ("ORB") 24997 Page 2543, and at ORB 24194 Page 1806, respectively, in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida.

Section 13. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption and signature of the Mayor, following any applicable appeal period.

CONDITIONS

Based on analysis and findings, the Department of Planning and Zoning recommends approval of the Miami River SAP with the following conditions which are adopted by the City Commission:

1) Comply with all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances, and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department to conduct a security survey, at the Department's discretion, and to make recommendations concerning security measures and systems. Further submit a report to the Department of Planning and Zoning, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the Police Department recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the Miami River SAP security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Director of Planning and Zoning why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from, the Department of Fire-Rescue indicating Applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Department of Fire-Rescue in the review of the scope of the Miami River SAP, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from, the Department of Solid Waste that the Miami River SAP has addressed all concerns of said Department prior to obtaining a building permit.

5) Comply with the Minority Participation and Employment Plan (including a Contractor/Subcontractor Participation Plan) submitted to the City as part of the Application for Development Approval, with the understanding that the Applicant must use its best efforts to follow the provisions of the City's Community Small Business Enterprises ("CSBE") and Procurement Program as a guide, as applicable.

6) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

a. Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions providing that the ownership, operation, and maintenance of all common areas and facilities will be by the property owner or a mandatory property owner association in perpetuity; and
b. Record in the Public Records a Unity of Title or a Covenant in Lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the Department of Planning and Zoning and the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition (6) above.

8) Provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a temporary construction plan that address construction phasing and includes the following elements:
a. Temporary construction parking plan, with an enforcement policy;
b. Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and
c. Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site. Said plan shall be subject to the review and approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan. Failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this Miami River SAP.
As applicable, the developer of the approved Miami River SAP shall be responsible for securing the City's approval for any change or modification to the approved temporary construction plan. Request for approval of any change or modification to the previously approved temporary construction plan shall be submitted for review and approved no later than two (2) weeks prior to the implementation of such a requested change or modification.

9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the Miami River SAP, the Applicant for the Miami River SAP shall provide the Department of Planning and Zoning for review for compliance and further approval:
a. Sufficiency Letter from the City's Office of Transportation;
b. Final determination of Public School Concurrency and Capacity Reservation;
c. Conservation Assessment Report as portions of the project are located within a High Archeological Probability Zone; and
d. Proof of compliance with conditions established by the following departments or agencies, specifically:
i. City and Miami-Dade County Public Works Departments;
ii. Miami-Dade County Water and Sewer Department;
iii. Miami-Dade County Traffic Engineering Division;
iv. Florida Department of Transportation.

10) The Miami River SAP includes a Development Review Process which address the build out of the individual Buildings as identified in the Regulating Plan. All development within the Miami River SAP shall be submitted for the review and approval by the Director of Planning prior to the issuance of any building permit consistent with the requirements of Article 3, Section 3.9.1(g) of the Miami 21 Code and the Miami River SAP.

11) Within (90) days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the Development Agreement specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

12) The Applicant shall comply with the conditions identified in the Miami 21 Code, the Miami River SAP, and all applicable local, state and federal regulations.

THE CITY OF MIAMI SHALL

Establish the operative date of the associated Development Agreement as being thirty (30) days from the date of the final adoption of the Development Agreement. The final adoption date of the Development Agreement shall constitute the commencement of the thirty (30) day period to appeal the provisions of the Development Agreement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The Miami River SAP, as approved, complies with the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Miami 21 Code.



..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten (10) days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.


J.1
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - DEFINITIONS
1.1 DEFINITIONS OF BUILDING FUNCTIONS: USES J.3
SECTION 2 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
2.1 BOUNDARIES J.4
2.2 INTENT J.4
2.3 EFFECTS OF DISTRICT DESIGNATION J.4
2.4 ADDITIONAL NOTICE AND REVIEW J.4
SECTION 3 - GENERAL TO ZONES
3.1 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS J.5
3.2 THOROUGHFARES J.6
3.3 WYNWOOD PUBLIC BENEFITS PROGRAM J.7
3.4 WYNWOOD TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS PROGRAM J.9
SECTION 4 - STANDARDS AND TABLES
TABLE 1 BUILDING FUNCTION: USES J.12
TABLE 2 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE J.13
TABLE 2 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE J.17
TABLE 2 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE J.18
TABLE 2 D - DISTRICT J.20
TABLE 3 PARKING AND LOADING J.23
SECTION 5 - SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.1 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONE (T5) J.24
5.2 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6) J.27
SECTION 6 - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
6.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE J.30
6.2 LANDSCAPE AREAS IN PARKING LOTS J.30
SECTION 7 - SIGN REGULATIONS
7.1 NRD-1 SIGN STANDARDS J.31
SECTION 8 - STREET MASTER PLAN
8.1 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN J.32
8.2 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN - MAP J.34
8.3 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN - RIGHT-OF-WAY SECTIONS J.35
J.2
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
J.3
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 1 - DEFINITIONS
1.1 DEFINITIONS OF BUILDING FUNCTIONS: USES
 Wynwood Uses
The NRD-1 shall permit the following Uses as identifed within Section 4, Table 1:
a. COMMERCIAL
Manufacturing-Enabled Retail: A facility primarily engaged in the manufacturing, processing, or assembly of goods and shall include on-premises retail sales.
Art Gallery: A place of business primarily engaged in the display and sale of art work created on or off
site, with works available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises.
b. CIVIC
Privately-owned Public Open Space: A publicly accessible area on a private Lot that exceeds minimum
Open Space requirements and shall be provided as a Civic Space Types standard within Article 4, Table
7 of this Code. This area shall be in connection with a ground floor Commercial Use.
J.4
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 2 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
2.1 BOUNDARIES
Generally described as bounded by I-95 on the west, NW 29th Street on the north including parcels
fronting NW 29th Street on the north between I-95 and NW 5th Avenue and between NW 2nd Avenue
and N Miami Avenue, and the FEC Corridor on the east. The southern boundary is comprised of NW
20th Street between N Miami Avenue and NW 1st Place, and NW 22nd Street between NW 1st Place
and I-95. Boundaries more specifically depicted on the Miami 21 Atlas.
2.2 INTENT
The intent of the Neighborhood Revitalization District (NRD-1) is to establish a protective series of land
development regulations to transition the existing Wynwood Industrial District into an active, diverse,
mixed-use Neighborhood. The NRD-1 will also preserve the unique street art and Industrial characteristics of the current Wynwood District while promoting a 24-hour environment where people work, live,
and play.
The Wynwood Neighborhood, originally operated as a manufacturing and logistic hub for the City of
Miami, is in transition and is transforming into a globally recognized destination for art, fashion, innovation, and creative enterprise. It is vital that the Wynwood Neighborhood accommodate new Uses and
Densities while creating new Public and private Open Space opportunities for its existing and future
residents.
2.3 EFFECTS OF DISTRICT DESIGNATION
The effect of these NRD-1 regulations shall be to modify to the extent indicated herein:
a. Transect regulations included within the NRD-1 boundaries.
b. Definitions under Section 1.1 of the NRD-1, which are applicable only within the NRD-1.
c. Other standards and regulations otherwise generally applicable under this Code to those properties included within the NRD-1 boundaries.
d. Where standards set forth in a SAP conflict with standards set forth in the NRD-1, the standards
in the SAP shall govern.
e. Where standards in the NRD-1 are silent, the underlying Miami 21 standards and requirements
shall govern.
2.4 ADDITIONAL NOTICE AND REVIEW
a. Projects within the NRD-1 boundaries in excess of 200,000 square feet of total Floor Area shall
be referred to the Wynwood Design Review Committee (WDRC), which shall review the application and provide its comments and recommendations to the Director, per Chapter 2 of the City
Code.
J.5
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 3 - GENERAL TO ZONES
3.1 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
Parking requirements met within the NRD-1 boundaries for T5, T6 and D1 Transect Zones may be provided on-site or off-site through a centralized Parking system in order to consolidate Parking, encourage
walking, and reduce the burden on property owners of mandated Parking requirements on-site. Parking
requirements for the NRD-1 identified within Section 4, Table 2 shall apply.
3.1.1 Parking Program
a. Applicability of Parking Relaxations.
1. Off-site parking
Parking requirements may be satisfied off-site within a Parking Structure that shall be within
1,000 feet of the nearest point on the parcel of land of the proposed Development site.
An applicant requesting Parking off-site within a Parking Structure shall provide a Parking
covenant, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, to be recorded against the proposed
Parking Structure site. The covenant shall, at a minimum, memorialize the Property location
and number of spaces of the proposed Development site for which the Parking Structure
provides such parking availability. The applicant may request the removal or modification of
a Parking covenant upon such time that the City Parking requirements are reduced or mass
transit conditions are modified in a way that may facilitate additional Parking space reductions, or the required parking being provided off-site is otherwise satisfied on-site, off-site or
through payment of fees in lieu, if applicable.
2. Nonconforming Off-street Parking; Adaptive Use
Changes to site improvements shall be subject to regulations set forth in Section 7.2.8.a of
this Code. Notwithstanding the establishment of the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund, where
existing Off-street Parking or loading is nonconforming to the requirements of this Code, as
modified by Section 4, Table 2 herein, the Use or Adaptive Use of any Building shall not require the provision of additional Parking, loading, or on-site stormwater detention or retention.
No modifications shall be permitted which increase the degree of the existing nonconformity.
Modifications to the facilities may be approved by Waiver, and the Waiver may be conditioned
on safeguards that reduce the degree of the nonconformity to the extent reasonably feasible.
3. Parking relaxations
Parking relaxations generally available in this Code and the City Code shall be available
within the NRD-1 boundaries, except to the extent explicitly modified herein.
b. Mechanical parking facilities within Parking Structures shall be allowed by Right within the NRD1 boundaries. Parking spaces within these facilities shall be calculated based on the number of
vehicles accommodated by said Parking Structure. 
J.6
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
c. Parking covenants as described in this Code and payment-in-lieu shall be processed as described
within Chapter 35 of the City Code.
d. Prior to the end of the three (3) years from the effective date of these NRD-1 Regulations, the
Director and Zoning Administrator shall review the parking standard for Dwelling Units 650 square
feet or less, based on a district-wide parking and transportation study and may make a recommendation to modify the parking standard if such a study demonstrates a different demand.
3.1.2 Loading Standards
Loading standards are set forth in Section 4, Tables 2 and 3, except as modified below:
a. On-street loading for all Transect Zones within NRD-1 may be allowed in areas designated by
signage and for limited intervals during specified hours.
 Office, Commercial, Lodging, and Residential Loading.
On-street loading areas intended to service Office, Commercial, Lodging and Residential loading berth requirements described within Article 4, Table 3 may be permitted within specifically
designated zones along Wynwood Thoroughfares within 500 feet of the Development site.
On-street loading within such designated zones shall not exceed 20 minutes. Such loading
activity shall occur only between times posted.
b. For the purpose of loading maneuverability for future Development within the NRD-1, the following criteria shall apply:
1. Turning movements associated with one (1) loading berth per Development may be made
on-street, except along Wynwood Corridors.
2. Turning movements associated with more than one (1) loading berth per Development may
be permitted on-street by Warrant, except along Wynwood Corridors.
3.2 THOROUGHFARES
3.2.1 NRD-1 Thoroughfares and Corridors
The District is demarcated, traversed, or connected by important Thoroughfares and Corridors that
provide opportunities for future Development. Wynwood Thoroughfares and Corridors have potential
to increase Development Capacity, provide ideal locations for increased Building Height, and promote
higher Commercial Use activities.
a. Improvements and new Development along Wynwood Thoroughfares and Corridors within the
NRD-1 boundaries shall conform to the following pedestrian safety and comfort standards unless
otherwise specified herein:
1. A Dominant Setback Waiver shall not be permitted in order for new Developments to establish
a uniform streetscape with sidewalk conditions that promote pedestrian activity. 
J.7
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
2. Uses to be developed on these Thoroughfares and Corridors shall promote pedestrian activity, such as General Commercial, Open Air Retail, and other ground floor retail Uses.
3. The number and dimensions of curb cuts and Driveways shall be minimized to reduce pedestrian/vehicular conflicts up to the minimum permissible by the controlling jurisdiction.
4. Right-of-Way sections for distinct categories of Thoroughfares and Corridors have been identified within the NRD-1 Street Master Plan to establish ideal sidewalk conditions, achieving
an enhanced pedestrian experience within the NRD-1.
b. NRD-1 Setbacks:
Refer to the NRD-1 Street Master Plan described within Section 8 for specific setback conditions along Thoroughfares and Corridors within the NRD-1 boundary.
3.3 WYNWOOD PUBLIC BENEFITS PROGRAM
The intent of the Wynwood Public Benefits Program established in NRD-1 is to allow bonus Building
Height in the T5-O, T6, and D1 Transect Zones in exchange for the developer’s contribution to specified programs that provide benefits to the Public within the NRD-1 boundaries. The Wynwood Public
Benefits Program shall supersede the Public Benefits Program generally applicable in the City under
Section 3.14 of this Code.
a. The proposed bonus Height shall be permitted in exchange for contributions to the NRD-1 for the
following public benefits: Affordable/Workforce Housing, Public Parks and Open Space, Civic
Space or Civil Support space, and Cross-Block Connectivity. The City shall establish a Wynwood
Public Benefits Trust Fund for the collection of cash contributions for Affordable/Workforce Housing and Public Parks and Open Space. The Wynwood BID shall annually decide the allocation of
funds from the funds collected under this section. Expenditures of these funds shall be in accordance with the Wynwood Public Benefits Trust Fund as defined in Chapter 62 of the City Code.
Definitions
1. Affordable/Workforce Housing shall mean: housing available to families which meet the
qualifications as established by Section 13-5 of the City Code.
2. Public Parks and Open Space shall mean: Open Space meeting the standards of Article 4,
Table 7 of this Code.
3. Civic Space or Civic Support Use shall mean: a Building Function defined within Article 1,
Section 1.1 f. of this Code.
4. Cross-Block Connectivity shall mean: a Paseo, cross-Block Pedestrian Passage, or vehicular
cross-Block passage that connects two (2) Thoroughfares, Corridors, or combination thereof;
and is publicly accessible 24-hours a day and enforced covenant, in a form acceptable to
the City Attorney.
b. For the purposes of the Wynwood Public Benefits Program, the following criteria shall apply:
J.8
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
1. Affordable/Workforce Housing. A Development project within the NRD-1 boundaries may
provide any of the following or combination thereof:
i. Affordable/Workforce Housing On-site: For each square foot of Affordable/Workforce
Housing (including appurtenant shared space such as Parking and circulation) provided
on site, the Development shall be allowed two (2) square feet of additional area up to the
bonus Height as described in Section 3.3 (c).
ii. Affordable/Workforce Housing Off-site: For each square foot of Affordable/Workforce
Housing (including appurtenant shared space such as Parking and circulation) provided
off site, in a location within the City approved by the City Manager, the Development shall
be allowed an equivalent square footage of additional area up to the bonus Height as
described in Section 3.3 (c). No additional allowance or credit is given for the purchase
of the site.
2. Public Parks and Open Space. A Development project within the NRD-1 boundaries may
provide any of the following or combination thereof:
i. Dedication On-site: Public Open Space, in addition to required Open Space, may be
provided on-site in a location and of a design to be approved by the Planning Director.
For each square foot of dedicated Public Park or Open Space provided, the Development
shall be allowed an equivalent amount of Development Floor Area up to the bonus Height
described in Section 3.3 (c). The project shall maintain the Frontage requirements of the
Transect Zone set forth within Section 3.2.1 (b). The Open Space may be a Courtyard,
Plaza or Pedestrian Passage or Paseo through the site connecting two (2) Thoroughfares,
such as a segment of the FEC Greenway. See Article 4, Table 7 of this Code.
ii. Dedication Off-site: For dedication of Public Park or Open Space provided off-site within
the NRD-1 boundary, the Development shall be allowed two (2) times the Development
Floor Area of provided land up to the bonus Height described in Section 3.3 (c). The Open
Space may be a Civic Space Type as more fully described in Article 4, Table 7 of this Code.
3. Civic Space Types and Civil Support Uses. For a Development project within the NRD-1
boundaries that donates a Civic Space Type or Civil Support Use on site to the City, an additional two (2) square feet of area for each square foot of donated space or use, up to the
bonus Height described in Section 3.3 (c), shall be allowed.
4. Cross-Block Connectivity. For a Development project within the NRD-1 boundaries that provides a Paseo, cross-Block Pedestrian Passage, or vehicular cross-Block passage, if it is
located further than five hundred (500) feet from any Thoroughfare intersection, connects two
(2) Thoroughfares, and is publicly accessible 24-hours a day or reduced hours by process
of Waiver, additional floor area shall be allowed as follows:
i. For portions of provided Cross-Block Connectivity that are roofed, the Development shall
be allowed an equivalent amount of Development Floor Area up to the bonus Height
described in Section 3.3 (c).
ii. For portions of provided Cross-Block Connectivity that are open to the sky, the Development shall be allowed five (5) times the Development Floor Area up to the bonus Height
described in Section 3.3 (c).
J.9
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
5. Trust Fund contribution. For a cash contribution to the Wynwood Public Benefits Trust Fund,
the Development project shall be allowed additional Floor Area up to the bonus Height described in Section 3.3 (c). The cash contribution shall be determined based on a percentage
of the market value of the per square foot price being charged for units at projects within
the market area where the proposed project seeking the bonus is located. The calculation
assumes a land value per saleable or rentable square foot within market area to equate to
between ten percent (10%) to fifteen percent (15%) of the market area’s weighted average
sales price per square foot. The cash contributions shall be adjusted on an annual basis to
reflect market conditions effective October 1 of every year.
c. Bonus Building Height shall be permitted if the proposed Development contributes toward the
specified public benefits, above that which is otherwise required by the NRD-1, in the amount
and in the manner set forth herein.
1. T5-O: five (5) Story maximum, bonus to eight (8) Stories; the first additional floor of Development Height shall only be permitted through Public Benefits for Affordable/Workforce Housing,
Public Parks and Open Space, Civic Space Type, Civil Support Use, Cross-Block Connectivity, and/or cash contributions to the Wynwood Public Benefits Trust Fund. Additional bonus
Height may be achieved through Public Benefits or through the Wynwood TDR Program.
2. T6-8: eight (8) Story maximum, bonus to twelve (12) Stories; the first half (rounded up) of
additional floors of Development Height shall only be permitted through Public Benefits for
Affordable/Workforce Housing, Public Parks and Open Space, Civic Space Type, Civil Support
Use, and/or cash contributions to the Wynwood Public Benefits Trust Fund. Additional bonus
Height may be achieved through public benefits or through the Wynwood TDR Program.
3. D1: eight (8) Story maximum, bonus to ten (10) Stories; the additional floors of Development
Height shall only be permitted through public benefits for Affordable/Workforce Housing, Public
Parks and Open Space, Civic Space Type, Civil Support Use, and/or cash contributions to
the Wynwood Public Benefit Trust Fund.
3.4 WYNWOOD TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS PROGRAM
a. It is the intent of the Wynwood Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program to encourage the
preservation of Legacy Structures and the establishment of Privately-Owned Public Open Space
by creating a process whereby the otherwise unusable Development rights of Legacy Structure
sites and Privately-Owned Public Open Space may be converted into an asset that may be sold
to an eligible receiving sites located within the NRD-1 boundaries. The Wynwood TDR Program,
permitted only within the NRD-1, will facilitate the transfer of Floor Area from Legacy Structure
sites and Privately-Owned Public Open Space sites to encourage new Development that supports the character of Wynwood. Notwithstanding Chapter 23 of the City Code, no property may
utilize any other TDR program that may be applicable under this Code or the City Code, shall
be eligible within the NRD-1 boundaries, either as a sending property or receiving site except
as allowed herein.
b. Owners of eligible properties may be issued a “certificate of eligibility” by the Director with the
recommendation of the WDRC, that the property meets the criteria established by the Wynwood
BID and defined below.
J.10
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
1. Legacy Structure shall mean: An existing Building which is maintained and re-purposed by
the property owner that contributes to the character of Wynwood. The Building must maintain
its physical integrity so that it sufficiently conveys its original character; possesses integrity
of design, setting, material, workmanship, feeling and association and meet at least one (1)
of the following criteria:
i. Is associated within a significant industry important to the City’s history;
ii. Exemplifies the Industrial past of the community; and,
iii. Provides public art that supports the character of Wynwood and is maintained in perpetuity.
2. TDR exchange system:
i. The owner of property improved with a Legacy Structure or Privately-Owned Public Open
Space may sell or receive TDRs at any time.
ii. Developments within T5-O and T6 Transect Zones may receive TDRs to obtain additional bonus Building Height. In the T5-O Transect Zone, TDRs may only be acquired
for a Building Height above the first floor of bonus Development Building Height. In a T6
Transect Zone, TDRs may only be acquired for half (rounded down) of a Development’s
bonus Building Height.
3. Legacy Structure sites selling TDRs must operate a Use permissible within the NRD-1.
Legacy Structure sites and Privately-Owned Public Open Space sites shall not be preserved
in perpetuity and may reacquire Development capacity from another Legacy Structure site or
Privately-Owned Public Open Space site if available within the NRD-1 boundaries.
J.11
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 4 - STANDARDS AND TABLES
J.12
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 1 BUILDING FUNCTION: USES
R Allowed By Right
WAllowed By Warrant: Administrative Process - CRC (Coordinated Review Committee)
E Allowed By Exception: Public Hearing - granted by PZAB (Planning, Zoning & Appeals
Board)
Boxes with no designation signify Use prohibited.
 Uses may be further modified by Supplemental Regulations, State Regulations, or other
provisions of this Code. See City Code Chapter 4 for regulations related to Alcohol
Beverage Service Estab.
T5
URBAN CENTER
T6
URBAN CORE
D
DISTRICTS
L O O D1
DENSITY (UNITS PER ACRE) 150 150 150 36
RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE R R R
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE R R R
ANCILLARY UNIT
TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE R R R
MULTI FAMILY HOUSING R R R
DORMITORY R R R
HOME OFFICE R R R
LIVE - WORK R R R
WORK - LIVE R R R
LODGING
BED & BREAKFAST R R R R
INN R R R R
HOTEL R R R
OFFICE
OFFICE R R R R
COMMERCIAL
ART GALLERY R R R R
AUTO-RELATED COMMERCIAL ESTAB. W W R
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT W R R R
ENTERTAINMENT ESTAB. - ADULT
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT R R R R
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SERVICE ESTAB. E E E E
GENERAL COMMERCIAL R R R R
MANUFACTURING-ENABLED RETAIL W R
MARINE RELATED COMMERCIAL ESTAB. W W W R
OPEN AIR RETAIL W W W R
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY R R R R
RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT R R R R
CIVIC
COMMUNITY FACILITY W W W R
PRIVATELY-OWNED PUBLIC OPEN SPACE R R R R
RECREATIONAL FACILITY R R R R
RELIGIOUS FACILITY R R R R
REGIONAL ACTIVITY COMPLEX E
CIVIL SUPPORT
COMMUNITY SUPPORT FACILITY W W W R
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES W W W W
MAJOR FACILITY E
MARINA W W W R
PUBLIC PARKING W W W R
RESCUE MISSION E
TRANSIT FACILITIES W W W R
EDUCATIONAL
CHILDCARE W W W E
COLLEGE / UNIVERSITY W W W E
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL W W W E
LEARNING CENTER R R R E
MIDDLE / HIGH SCHOOL W W W E
PRE-SCHOOL R R R E
RESEARCH FACILITY R R R R
SPECIAL TRAINING / VOCATIONAL W W W R
INDUSTRIAL
AUTO-RELATED INDUSTRIAL ESTBL. R
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING R
MARINE RELATED INDUSTRIAL ESTBL. R
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES R
STORAGE/ DISTRIBUTION FACILITY R
J.13
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL See Article 4, Table 4 Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
Dwelling Unit
• Minimum of one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per
Dwelling Unit shall be provided on-site or off-site within a
Parking Structure*; or
 • Provide one (1) space per Dwelling Unit on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu
of remaining half (½) space per Dwelling Unit of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
10 Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*.
Dwelling Unit 650 square feet or less
• Minimum of one (1) parking space per Dwelling Unit shall
be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure, or
 • Payment-in-lieu of one (1) space per Dwelling Unit
may be provided for off-street Parking into the Wynwood
Parking Trust Fund, but shall not exceed forty (40) spaces
per development project.
• Minimum of 1 additional visitor parking space for every
ten (10) Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*.
Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum one (1) space per
staff member and one (1) space per four (4) residents.
Community Residence - Minimum of one (1) parking space
per staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
Dwelling Unit
• Minimum of one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per
Dwelling Unit shall be provided on-site or off-site within a
Parking Structure*; or
 • Provide one (1) space per Dwelling Unit on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu
of remaining half (½) space per Dwelling Unit of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Dwelling Unit 650 square feet or less
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per Dwelling Unit
shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, or
 • Payment-in-lieu of one (1) space per Dwelling Unit
may be provided for off-street Parking into the Wynwood
Parking Trust Fund, but shall not exceed forty (40) spaces
per development project.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
Work-live - Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per Dwelling
Unit shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Work-live Units shall be provided on-site
or off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Work-live Unit in excess of 2,000 square feet shall be
required to provide additional parking eqivalent to the
Office requirement for the area above 2,000 square feet.
Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum one (1) space per
staff member and one (1) space per four (4) residents.
Community Residence - Minimum of one (1) parking space
per staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.14
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
LODGING See Article 4, Table 4 Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1.
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per two (2) lodging
units shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*; or
 • Provide half (½) space per two (2) lodging units onsite or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and provide
payment-in-lieu of remaining half (½) space per two
(2) lodging units of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) lodging units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standards, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Article 4, Table 3
Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1.
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per two (2) lodging
units shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*; or
 • Provide half (½) space per two (2) lodging units onsite or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and provide
payment-in-lieu of remaining half (½) space per two
(2) lodging units of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) lodging units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standards, Article 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Article 4, Table 3
OFFICE See Article 4, Table 4 Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Office Uses are limited to the first and second Story of
the Principal Building. Office and Commercial Uses shall
be less than 25% Building floor area total.
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Office Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of Office
Use on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and
provide payment-in-lieu of remaining one (1) space per
1,000 square feet of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Office Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of Office
Use on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and
provide payment-in-lieu of remaining one (1) space per
1,000 square feet of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.15
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
COMMERCIAL See Article 4, Table 4 Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Commercial Uses are limited to the first and second
Story of the Principal Building. Office and Commercial
Uses shall be less than 25% Building floor area total.
• A maximum Floor Area of 55,000 square feet per
establishment.
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Commercial Use provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*; or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Commercial Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Art Gallery - Minimum of (1) parking space for every 1,000
square feet of Art Gallery Use shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every 20
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• A maximum Floor Area of 55,000 square feet per
establishment, except for Public Storage Facilities.
• A Principal Building with 100 feet of Principal Frontage
length or more shall require Commercial Uses along a
minimum of twenty five (25%) of the ground floor facade.
Manufacturing-Enabled Retail - Limited to first Story of
Principal Building and a maximum Floor Area of 20,000
square feet per establishment.
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Commercial Use provided on-site or offsite within a Parking Structure*, except for Public Storage
Facilities, minimum one (1) parking space for every 10,000
square feet with a minimum of eight (8) parking spaces; or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Commercial Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Art Gallery - Minimum of (1) parking space for every 1,000
square feet of Art Gallery Use shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
Commercial Auto-related, Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities
- See Article 6.
CIVIC See Article 4, Table 4 Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces
for other Uses as required shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Privately-owned Public Open Space - No parking shall
be required for Privately-owned Public Open Space that
is in connection with a ground floor Commercial Use and
provided as a Civic Space Type standard within Article 4,
Table 7 of this Code.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces
for other Uses as required shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Privately-owned Public Open Space - No parking shall
be required for Privately-owned Public Open Space that
is in connection with a ground floor Commercial Use and
provided as a Civic Space Type standard within Article 4,
Table 7 of this Code.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.16
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T5 - URBAN CENTER ZONE
LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
CIVIL SUPPORT See Article 4, Table 4 Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of Civil Support Use shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or provide payment-in-lieu of
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
Adult Daycare- Minimum of one (1) space per staff member.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Article 4, Table 3
Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of Civil Support Use shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or provide payment-in-lieu of
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
• Adult Daycare-Minimum of one (1) space per staff
member.
• Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
• Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius
of TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit
Corridor by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver,
except when site is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Article 4, Table 3
EDUCATIONAL See Article 4, Table 4 Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of two (2) parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide one and one-half (1.5) spaces per 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining half
(.5) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Schools – Minimum of one (1) parking space for each
faculty or staff member, one (1) visitor parking space per
100 students, one (1) parking space per five (5) students
in grades 11 and 12 or College/University.
Childcare Facilities-Minimum of one (1) space for the
owner/operator and one (1) space for each employee, and
one (1) drop-off space for every ten (10) clients cared for.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Article 4, Table 5.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every (20)
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Article 4, Table 3
Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of two (2) parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide one and one-half (1.5) spaces per 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining half
(.5) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Schools – Minimum of one (1) parking space for each
faculty or staff member, one (1) visitor parking space per
100 students, one (1) parking space per five (5) students
in grades 11 and 12 or College/University.
Childcare Facilities-Minimum of one (1) space for the
owner/operator and one (1) space for each employee, and
one (1) drop-off space for every ten (10) clients cared for.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every (20)
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading- Refer to Article 4, Table 3
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.17
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
RESIDENTIAL See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
Dwelling Unit
• Minimum of one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per
Dwelling Unit shall be provided on-site or off-site within a
Parking Structure*; or
 • Provide one (1) space per Dwelling Unit on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure, and provide payment-in-lieu
of remaining half (½) space per Dwelling Unit of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Dwelling Unit 650 square feet or less
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per Dwelling Unit
shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure, or
 • Payment-in-lieu of one (1) space per Dwelling Unit
may be provided for off-street Parking into the Wynwood
Parking Trust Fund, but shall not exceed forty (40) spaces
per development project.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Live-work - Work component shall provide parking as
required by the non-residential use in addition to parking
required for the Dwelling Unit.
Work-live - Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per Dwelling
Unit shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*.
 • Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) Work-live Units shall be provided on-site
or off-site within a Parking Structure*.
• Work-live Unit in excess of 2,000 square feet shall be
required to provide additional parking eqivalent to the
Office requirement for the area above 2,000 square feet.
Adult Family-Care Homes - Minimum one (1) space per
staff member and one (1) space per four (4) residents.
Community Residence - Minimum of one (1) parking space
per staff member in addition to the parking required for the
principal Dwelling Unit(s).
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of 1 Bicycle Rack Space for every 20 vehicular
spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.18
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
LODGING See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1.
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per two (2) lodging
units shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*; or
• Provide half (½) space per two (2) lodging units onsite or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and provide
payment-in-lieu of remaining half (½) space per two
(2) lodging units of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) lodging unit shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
OFFICE See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1.
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Office Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of Office
Use on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and
provide payment-in-lieu of remaining one (1) space per
1,000 square feet of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
COMMERCIAL See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• A maximum Floor Area of 55,000 square feet per
establishment, except for Public Storage Facilities.
 • A Principal Building with 100 feet of Principal Frontage
length or more shall require Commercial Uses along a
minimum of twenty five (25%) of the ground floor facade.
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Commercial Use provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, except for Public Storage
Facilities, minimum one (1) parking space for every 10,000
square feet with a minimum of eight (8) parking spaces; or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Commercial Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining one
(1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Auto-related - Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - See Article 6.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.19
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 T6 - URBAN CORE ZONE
CIVIC See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces
for other Uses as required shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Privately-owned Public Open Space - No parking shall
be required for Privately-owned Public Open Space that
is in connection with a ground floor Commercial Use and
provided as a Civic Space Type standard within Article 4,
Table 7 of this Code.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
CIVIL SUPPORT See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of Civil Support Use shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or provide payment-in-lieu of
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
Adult Daycare- Minimum of one (1) space per staff member.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
EDUCATIONAL See Article 4, Table 4 See Article 4, Table 4 Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of two (2) parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide one and one-half (1.5) spaces per 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining half
(.5) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Schools – Minimum of one (1) parking space for each
faculty or staff member, one (1) visitor parking space per
100 students, one (1) parking space per five (5) students
in grades 11 and 12 or College/University.
Childcare Facilities- Minimum of one (1) space for the
owner/operator and one (1) space for each employee, and
one (1) drop-off space for every ten (10) clients cared for.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every (20)
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN
DENSITY (UPA) 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE 150 UNITS PER ACRE
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.20
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 D - DISTRICT
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
RESIDENTIAL Residential Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per Unit shall be
provided on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure*.
 • Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space
for every 10 Work-live Units shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure*.
• Work-live Unit in excess of 2,000 square feet shall be
required to provide additional parking equivalent to the
Office requirement for the area above 2,000 square feet.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every 20
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
LODGING Lodging Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces per two (2) lodging
units shall be provided on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*; or
 • Provide half (½) space per two (2) lodging units onsite or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and provide
payment-in-lieu of remaining half (½) space per two
(2) lodging units of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) additional visitor parking space for
every ten (10) lodging unit shall be provided on-site or
off-site within a Parking Structure.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
OFFICE Office Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
sf of office space provided on-site or off-site within a
Parking Structure*, or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of Office
Use on-site or off-site within a Parking Structure*, and
provide payment-in-lieu of remaining one (1) space per
1,000 square feet of required off-street parking into the
Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Section 4, Table 3.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.21
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 D - DISTRICT
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
COMMERCIAL Commercial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of three (3) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Commercial Use provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, except for Public Storage
Facilities, minimum one (1) parking space for every 10,000
square feet with a minimum of eight (8) parking spaces; or
• Provide two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Commercial Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Art Gallery - Minimum of one (1) parking space for every
1,000 square feet of Art Gallery Use shall be provided on-site
or off-site within a Parking Structure*, or provide paymentin-lieu of one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required
off-street parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared parking standard, Section 4, Table 3, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Drive-Thru or Drive-In Facilities - Refer to Article 6.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3
CIVIC Civic Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited by
compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of exhibition or recreation area, and parking spaces for
other Uses as required shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or provide payment-in-lieu of
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Privately-owned Public Open Space - No parking shall
be required for Privately-owned Public Open Space that
is in connection with a ground floor Commercial Use and
provided as a Civic Space Type standard within Article
4, Table 7 of this Code.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3.
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.22
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
TABLE 2 D - DISTIRCT
CIVIL SUPPORT Civil Support Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of Civil Support Use shall be provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or provide payment-in-lieu of
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
• Minimum of one (1) parking space for every five (5) seats
of assembly use shall be provided on-site or off-site within
a Parking Structure*.
• Adult Daycare-Minimum of one (1) space per staff
member.
• Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
• Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
• Loading - See Section 4, Table 3.
EDUCATIONAL Educational Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1,
limited by compliance with:
• Minimum of two (2) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Educational Use provided on-site or off-site
within a Parking Structure*, or
• Provide one and one-half (1.5) spaces per 1,000 square
feet of Educational Use on-site or off-site within a Parking
Structure*, and provide payment-in-lieu of remaining half
(.5) space per 1,000 square feet of required off-street
parking into the Wynwood Parking Trust Fund.
Schools – Minimum of one (1) parking space for each
faculty or staff member, one (1) visitor parking space per
100 students, one (1) parking space per five (5) students
in grades 11 and 12 or College/University.
Childcare Facilities-Minimum of one (1) space for the owner/
operator and one (1) space for each employee, and one (1)
drop-off space for every ten (10) clients cared for.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every (20)
vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3.
INDUSTRIAL Industrial Uses are permissible as listed in Table 1, limited
by compliance with:
• Please refer to Article 6 for additional specific requirements.
• Minimum of one (1) parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of Industrial Use, except for Commercial
Storage Facilities, minimum one (1) parking space
for every 10,000 square feet with a minimum of eight
(8) parking spaces.
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the
Shared Parking Standard, Section 4, Table 3, except for
Public Storage Facilities.
Minimum of one (1) Bicycle Rack Space for every twenty
(20) vehicular spaces required.
Parking ratio may be reduced within half (½) mile radius of
TOD or within quarter (¼) mile radius of a Transit Corridor
by thirty percent (30%) by process of Waiver, except when
site is within 500 feet of T3.
Loading - See Section 4, Table 3.
D1 - WORK PLACE D2 - INDUSTRIAL D3 - WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL
DENSITY (UPA) 36 UNITS PER ACRE N/A N/A
* Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 Parking Program
J.23
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
LOADING BERTH STANDARDS T5, T6 DISTRICT NOTES
The shared Parking Standards Table provides the method for calculating shared Parking for Buildings
with more than one Use type. It refers to the parking requirements that appear in Table 4.
The parking required for any two Functions on a Lot is calculated by dividing the number of spaces
required by the lesser of the two uses by the appropriate factor from this Table and adding the result to
the greater use parking requirement.
For instance a Building with a Residential Use requiring 100 spaces and a Commercial Use requiring
20 spaces, the 20 spaces divided by the sharing factor of 1.2 would reduce the total requirement to 100
plus 17 spaces. For Uses not indicated in this chart on a mixed use lot a sharing factor of 1.1 shall be
allowed. Additional sharing is allowed by Warrant.
SHARING FACTOR
Function with Function
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LODGING LODGING
OFFICE OFFICE
COMMERCIAL 1.4 COMMERCIAL
1.1
1.2 1.7
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.2
1
1
1
1
1.7
1.3
1.2
ANGLE OF
PARKING
ACCESS AISLE WIDTH
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
SINGLE LOADED
ONE WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
TWO WAY
TRAFFIC
DOUBLE LOADED
90 23 ft 23 ft 23 ft
60 12.8 ft 11.8 ft 19.3 ft
45 10.8 ft 9.5 ft 18.5 ft
Parallel 10 ft 10 ft 20 ft
Standard stall: 8.5 ft x 18 ft minimum
• Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet of paved width of a one-way drive and 20 feet for a two-way
drive for parking area providing 10 or more stalls.
• Pedestrian entrances shall be at least 3 feet from stall, driveway or access aisle.
• Allowable slopes, paving, and drainage per Florida Building Code.
• Off-street Parking facilities shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet. Where such a facility is
to be used by trucks or loading Uses, the minimum clearance shall be 12 feet Residential and 15 feet
Commercial and Industrial.
• Ingress vehicular control devices shall be located so as to provide a minimum driveway of 20 feet in
length between the Base Building Line and dispenser.
• For requirements of parking lots, refer to Article 9 and the City of Miami Off-street Parking Guides
and Standards.
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
SHARED PARKING STANDARDS
RESIDENTIAL* From 50,000 sf to 500,000 sf Berth Types
Residential*: 200 sf = 10 ft x 20 ft x 12 ft
Commercial**: 420 sf = 12 ft x 35 ft x 15 ft
Industrial***: 660 sf = 12 ft x 55 ft x 15 ft
* Residential loading berths shall be set
back a distance equal to their length.
** 1 Commercial berth may be substituted
by 2 Residential berths
*** 1 Industrial berth may be substituted by
2 Commercial berths.
A required Industrial or Commercial loading
berth may be substituted by a Commercial
or Residential loading berth, by Waiver, if
the size, character, and operation of the
Use is found to not require the dimensions
specified and the required loading berth
dimension could not otherwise be provided
according to the regulations of this Code.
For Developments requiring one (1) loading
berth, the loading berth shall be provided
on-site.
Developments requiring more than one
(1) loading berth, a maximum of one (1)
loading berth required may be provided onstreet. All other required loading berths for
a development shall be provided on-site.
Projects not required to provide Off-street
loading shall operate loading as set forth in
Section 3.1.2.
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per first 100 units
1 per each additional 100 units or
fraction of 100.
LODGING From 50,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 50,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
420 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
Berth Size
660 sf
200 sf
Loading Berths
1 per 300 rooms
1 per 100 rooms
OFFICE
COMMERCIAL**
INDUSTRIAL***
(Total combined Floor Area)
From 50,000 sf to 500,000 sf From 50,000 sf to 500,000 sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
Loading Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
Area
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Berth Size
420 sf
420 sf
420 sf
Loading Berths
1st
2nd
3rd
Area
50K sf - 100K sf
100K sf - 250K sf
250K sf - 500K sf
Greater than 500,000 sf Greater than 500,000 sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1st
Area
500K sf
Berth Size
660 sf
Loading Berths
1st
Area
500K sf
TABLE 3 PARKING AND LOADING
J.24
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 5 - SPECIFIC TO ZONES
5.1 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONE (T5)
a. Building Disposition
1. Lot Coverage by any Building shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of Lot Area. Additional
Lot Coverage may be approved up to ninety percent (90%) by Waiver if the applicant satisfies at least one (1) of the following conditions:
 Flexible Lot Coverage Program
i. Provision of a Roof Terrace in an amount of square footage equivalent to four (4) times
the gross Lot Area obtained from increased Lot Coverage or twenty percent (20%) of the
Building roof surface area, whichever amount is greater.
ii. Open Space provided off-site, within the NRD-1 boundaries, at an amount equal to the
square footage obtained from increased Lot Coverage. The Open Space shall be provided
as a Civic Space Type standard within Article 4, Table 7 of this Code.
iii. A cash contribution to the Wynwood Public Benefits Trust Fund equivalent to the Development’s Floor Area obtained by increased Lot Coverage on a square foot basis. The
value of this cash contribution will follow the provisions described in Section 3.3 (b)(5).
2. Development Waiver associated with ten percent (10%) of any particular standard pursuant
to Article 7, Section 7.1.2.5 shall not be permitted for Lot Coverage within NRD-1.
3. For sites with 250 feet Frontage length or more on a single Frontage, a cross-Block pedestrian Paseo shall be provided as follows: If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point more
than 250 feet from a Thoroughfare intersection or existing cross-Block pedestrian Paseo, the
Building shall provide a cross-Block pedestrian Paseo. A cross-Block Pedestrian Passage
is permitted by Waiver, in lieu of a required cross-Block pedestrian Paseo, with limited vehicular access for ingress/egress to a Parking Garage or passenger drop-off area, provided
the distance separation from any Thoroughfare or existing Driveway is at least sixty (60) feet
and appropriate pedestrian safety features are incorporated. A cross-Block Pedestrian Passage may be roofed for 100% of its length within the NRD-1, but roofed portions shall not be
counted toward Open Space requirements. If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point 550
feet from a Thoroughfare intersection or another vehicular cross-Block passage, a vehicular
cross-Block passage shall be provided.
b. Building Configuration
1. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall comply with Article 4, Table 2 and
be as shown in Illustration 5.1, except as to bonus Height where applicable according to
Sections 3.3 and 3.4 contained herein.
2. A one (1) Story Building may be allowed through the Warrant process provided that the ground
level Story is no less than fourteen (14) feet in Height and a Green Roof treatment no less
than fifty percent (50%) of the roof area is provided.
J.25
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
3. Mechanical equipment on a roof shall be enclosed by parapets of the minimum Height necessary to conceal it, and a maximum Height of five (5) feet. Other ornamental Building features
may extend up to ten (10) feet above the maximum Building Height. Roof decks shall be
permitted up to the maximum Height. Trellises may extend above the maximum Height up
to eight (8) feet. Extensions up to ten (10) feet above the maximum Height for stair, elevator,
mechanical enclosures or non-Habitable Rooms shall be limited to twenty (20%) of the roof
area, unless approved by Waiver.
c. Building Function & Density
Lots in T5 Transect Zones shall be permitted the maximum Density of 150 Dwelling Units
per acre.
d. Parking Standards
1. Primary Frontage. All Parking, including drop-off drives and Porte-cocheres, open Parking
areas, covered Parking, garages, Loading Spaces and service areas shall be located within
the Third Layer and shall be masked from the Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen
as illustrated in Article 4, Table 8. Parking may extend into the Second Layer above the first
Story, by Waiver, if an art, glass, or architectural treatment, of a design to be approved by
the Director, with the recommendation of the WDRC, is provided for one hundred (100%)
percent of that portion of the Façade. Surface Parking may extend into the Second Layer a
maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the length of the Primary Frontage up to a maximum of fifty (50) feet.
2. Secondary Frontage. All Parking, open Parking areas, covered Parking, garages, Loading
Spaces and service areas shall be located in the Third Layer and shall be masked from the
Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the length
of the Frontage. Above ground Parking may extend into the Second Layer beyond fifty percent
(50%) of the length of the Frontage, by Waiver, if an art, glass, or architectural treatment of
a design to be approved by the Director is provided for that portion of the Facade.
e. Architectural Standards
1. All newly constructed Principal Building ground floor Facades along Primary and Secondary
Frontages shall include art or glass treatment.
2. Art or glass treatment shall be of a design to be approved by the Director with the recommendation of the WDRC.
f. Landscape Standards
1. Open Space shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the Lot Area.
2. A Privately-owned Public Open Space area in connection with a ground floor Commercial
Use that exceeds minimum Open Space requirements, shall be provided as a Civic Space
Type standard within Article 4, Table 7 of this Code.
3. The First Layer shall be hardscaped to match the Public Frontage. Street trees shall be neatly
aligned in the Verge, and the Verge shall be permeable pavement.
J.26
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
ILLUSTRATION 5.1 URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5)
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area
 - With rear vehicular access
5,000 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
1,200 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width
 - With rear vehicular access
50 ft min.
16 ft. min.
c. Lot Coverage 80 - 90% max.*
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
g. Density 150 du/ac max.
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.***
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.***
c. Side 0 ft. min.
d. Rear 0 ft. min.
e. Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min
 Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth**min. 1st through 2nd
Story 26 ft. min. above 2nd Story
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T5 L and T5 O only)
g. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories ****
b. Max. Height 5 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 3 Stories (T5 O only) Abutting all
Transect Zones except T3
* Or as modified through Flexible Lot Coverage Program
** 10% of Lot depth for Lots more than 120’ deep
 6’ min for Lots less than 120’ deep
*** Or as modified within NRD-1 Street Master Plan
**** Or as modified within Section 5.1 (b)(2)
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT
PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
J.27
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
5.2 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6)
a. Building Disposition
1. Setbacks for Buildings shall be as shown in Illustration 1.7.2. Frontage Setbacks above
the eighth floor for Lots having Depth measuring one hundred (100) feet or less may be a
minimum of zero (0) feet by Waiver. At Property Lines Abutting a lower Transect Zone, the
Setbacks shall reflect the transition as shown in Illustration 1.7.2.
2. The Frontage Setbacks above the eighth floor shall not be required for a Frontage facing a
Right-of-Way seventy (70) feet or greater in width, as described within Section 1.13 NRD-1
Street Master Plan.
3. Above the eighth floor, minimum Building spacing is twenty (20) feet.
4. For sites with 250 feet Frontage length or more on a single Frontage, a cross-Block pedestrian Paseo shall be provided as follows: If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point more
than 250 feet from a Thoroughfare intersection or existing cross-Block pedestrian Paseo, the
Building shall provide a cross-Block pedestrian Paseo. A cross-Block Pedestrian Passage
is permitted by Waiver, in lieu of a required cross-Block pedestrian Paseo, with limited vehicular access for ingress/egress to a Parking Garage or passenger drop-off area, provided
the distance separation from any Thoroughfare or existing Driveway is at least sixty (60) feet
and appropriate pedestrian safety features are incorporated. A cross-Block Pedestrian Passage may be roofed for 100% of its length within the NRD-1, but roofed portions shall not be
counted toward Open Space requirements. If the Frontage Line of a site is at any point 550
feet from a Thoroughfare intersection or another vehicular cross-Block passage, a vehicular
cross-Block passage shall be provided.
b. Building Configuration
1. Above the eighth floor, the Building Floorplate dimensions shall be limited as follows:
i. 18,000 square feet maximum for Residential Uses.
Additional Residential Floorplate dimensions not to exceed 30,000 square feet maximum
may be obtained by Waiver from transferring an equivalent amount of Floorplate area
located between the third and eighth Story along a Building Principal Frontage.
ii. 30,000 square feet maximum for Commercial Uses and for parking
iii. 180 feet maximum length for Residential Uses
iv. 215 feet maximum length for Commercial Uses
2. Building Heights shall be measured in Stories and shall comply with Article 4, Table 2 of
this Code and be as shown in Illustration 5.2, except as to bonus Height where applicable
according to Sections 3.3 and 3.4 contained herein.
c. Building Function & Density
FLR limitations shall not apply to T6-8-O properties within the NRD-1.
J.28
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
d. Architectural Standards
1. All newly constructed Principal Building ground floor Facades along Primary and Secondary
Frontages shall include art or glass treatment.
2. Art or glass treatment shall be of a design to be approved by the Director with the recommendation of the WDRC.
e. Landscape Standards
The First Layer shall be hardscaped to match the Public Frontage. Street trees shall be neatly
aligned in the Verge, and the Verge shall be permeable pavement.
J.29
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Area 5,000 s.f. min.; 40,000 s.f. max.
b. Lot Width 50 ft min.
c. Lot Coverage
 - 1-8 Stories 80% max.
 - Above 8th Story 18,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for
Residential & Lodging****
30,000 sq. ft. max. Floorplate for Office &
Commercial
d. Floor Lot Ratio (FLR) N/A
e. Frontage at front Setback 70% min.
f. Open Space 10% Lot Area min.
g. Density 150 du/ac max.*
BUILDING SETBACK
a. Principal Front 10 ft. min.***; 15 ft. min. above 8th Story
b. Secondary Front 10 ft. min.***; 15 ft. min. above 8th Story
c. Side 0 ft. min.; 10 ft. min. above 8th Story
d. Rear 0 ft. min.; 10 ft. min. above 8th Story
e. Abutting Side or Rear T4 6 ft. min. 1st through 5th Story
26 ft. min. above 5th Story
 Abutting Side or Rear T3 10% of Lot depth** min. 1st through 2nd Story
26 ft. min. 3rd through 5th Story
46 ft. min. above 5th Story
BUILDING DISPOSITION
FRONTAGE
a. Common Lawn prohibited
b. Porch & Fence prohibited
c. Terrace or L.C. prohibited
d. Forecourt permitted
e. Stoop permitted
f. Shopfront permitted (T6-8 L and T6-8 O only)
g. Gallery permitted by Special Area Plan
h. Arcade permitted by Special Area Plan
BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Min. Height 2 Stories
b. Max. Height 8 Stories
c. Max. Benefit Height 4 Stories Abutting all Transects Zones
except T3
* Or as modified in Diagram 9
** 10% of Lot depth for Lots more than 120’ deep
 6’ min for Lots less than 120’ deep
*** Or as modified within NRD-1 Street Master Plan
**** Or as modified within Section 1.7.2 (b)(1)(i)
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
BUILDING PLACEMENT PARKING PLACEMENT
BUILDING HEIGHT
ILLUSTRATION 5.2 URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T6-8)
J.30
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 6 - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Within the NRD-1, Article 9 of this Code shall apply, except as modified below. If such requirements
conflict, NRD-1 requirements shall apply.
6.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE
Within the NRD-1, Article 9 of this Code shall apply, except as provided herein.
6.2 LANDSCAPE AREAS IN PARKING LOTS
All required or provided surface off-street Parking facilities and Parking lots shall be landscaped
in accordance with the following standards, which supersede Section 9.8 of this Code:
a. In order to maximize the distribution of shade, trees shall be planted throughout the interior
of the Parking Lot at a minimum density of one (1) tree per eighty (80) square feet of landscaped area, exclusive of Parking lot buffers.
b. For each row of parking there shall be landscaped areas with trees within the first ninety (90)
linear feet, and one (1) landscaped area provided with a tree for each additional ninety (90)
linear feet. When a minimum six (6) foot clear landscape area is provided between two (2)
rows of parking, the landscape areas with trees every ninety (90) linear feet is not required.
This six (6) foot wide landscape area shall be planted with trees no greater than thirty (30)
feet on-center.
c. For each row of parallel parking there shall be a minimum of two (2) landscape areas with
trees within the first seventy-five (75) linear feet, and one (1) landscape area with a tree for
each additional seventy-five (75) linear feet. The landscape areas shall be equally spaced
wherever possible.
d. All required trees shall be of an approved shade tree variety which shall attain a minimum
mature crown spread greater than fifteen (15) feet.
e. All parking lots adjacent to a Right-of-Way or private street shall be screened by a continuous planting or three (3) foot high wall with a five (5) foot landscaped strip incorporating said
planting or wall on private property.
f. Screening shall be provided when parking stalls, access aisles, or driveways are located
along any side or rear lot line. The screen shall be landscaped with a continuous hedge,
and with trees no greater than thirty (30) feet on center, when the landscaped area does not
abut a parking row. In certain instances, a solid and continuous wall or fence, a minimum
of five (5) feet in height, may be used in lieu of the landscape area, and shall be designed
and approved by the Director with the recommendation of the WDRC, in such a way as to
provide a decorative effect.
J.31
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 7 - SIGN REGULATIONS
7.1 NRD-1 SIGN STANDARDS
The following Sign standards shall apply within NRD-1 for T5, T6, and D1 Transect Zones.

a. Painted Wall Signs as defined within Article 1, Section 1.3 and Article 10, Table 15 shall be allowed by Right.
b. All other Building Identification and Business Identification Signs shall be subject to Article
10, Table 15 Sign Design Standards and approved by the Director with the recommendation
of the WDRC.
J.32
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
SECTION 8 - STREET MASTER PLAN
8.1 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN
The Wynwood District is transitioning from an Industrial District into an active, diverse, mixed-use
Neighborhood. The current character of the Neighborhood is demarcated, traversed, and connected
by atypical block compositions and narrow Right-of-Ways (ROWs) attributed to the Industrial past. The
Neighborhood’s predominately zoned fifty foot (50’) ROW combined with a high percentage of nonconforming parcels makes it a challenge to balance feasible Development and an adequate pedestrian
environment.
The NRD-1 Street Master Plan will create a series of ROWs, establish appropriate Setback areas and
ideal sidewalk conditions to promote pedestrian activity for the future of the Wynwood District. ROW types
have been established by the City’s Planning and Zoning Department and Public Works Department,
and applied to Wynwood’s Thoroughfare network based on ROW width and conditions, as identified
on the NRD-1 Street Master Plan Map. The NRD-1 Street Master Plan will also serve as an organizing
principle for a NRD-1 Street Tree Master Plan.
a. NRD-1 Street Hierarchy
The NRD-1 Street Master Plan acknowledges the relative importance of several significant
Corridors, known as Wynwood Corridors and NRD-1 Corridors. Due to their importance, these
Corridors are given established setback provisions that are different from that of the underlying
Transect Zone.
 Wynwood Corridors
• NW 29 Street
• NW 20 Street
 NRD-1 Corridors
• NW 2 Avenue
• NW 5 Avenue
 Wynwood Thoroughfares
• All other street ROWs within NRD-1 that are not specified as Corridors above.
b. NRD-1 Setbacks:
1. Wynwood Thoroughfares: Principal and Secondary Frontage Setback is five (5) feet.
2. Wynwood Corridors: Principal and Secondary Frontage Setback is ten (10) feet.
3. NRD-1 Corridors: Principal Frontage Setback is zero (0) feet.
c. Alternative Rights-of-Way
Alternative ROW sections have been created for thoroughfares between fifty (50) and one hundred
(100) feet in width. A woonerf has also been provided as an alternative ROW type, and applied
to several locations throughout the NRD-1. The application of these Alternative ROW conditions
can be seen in Section 8.2.
J.33
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
d. NRD-1 Street Tree Master Plan
Street Tree Contribution:
For street tree improvements along Wynwood Thoroughfares and Wynwood/NRD Corridor,
the applicant shall provide street trees pursuant to Street Tree Master Plan or provide a cash
contribution into the Wynwood Public Benefit Trust Fund for the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each street tree required along a corridor Frontage.
J.34
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
8.2 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN - MAP
* ZONED ROW DOES NOT FIT A STANDARD STREET SECTION AND WILL REMAIN AS EXISTING CONDITION.
J.35
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Public Works:
Standard 50-F
5’ Established Setback
City Public Works:
Standard 50-F Modified With a Bike Lane
5’ Established Setback
Parking
Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
8.3 NRD-1 STREET MASTER PLAN - RIGHT-OF-WAY SECTIONS
1 2 5’ Setback Public ROWPublic ROW
Affected Thoroughfares:
This is the standard thoroughfare condition for Wynwood, and is the most prevalent
section applied in the NRD-1 SMP. For specific application, please reference SMP Map.
Affected Thoroughfares:
27th ST between NE 2nd AV and the FEC corridor
26th ST between NW 5th AV and the FEC corridor
*A wider Street Tree Zone is Permissable in Curb Bulb-Outs
Parking
Sidewalk
Verge
Sidewalk
Verge
Bike
Lane
Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
5’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
*A wider Street Tree Zone is Permissable in Curb Bulb-Outs
Parking
Sidewalk
Verge
Sidewalk
Verge
5’ Setback
5’ Setback
J.36
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Capital Improvements:
One-Way With Bike Lane
5’ Established Setback
City Planning Department:
Woonerf*
5’ Established Setback
Woonerf*
* Illustration is intended to convey Woonerf concept, not actual design
3 4
Affected Thoroughfares:
NW 25th ST between NW 5th AV and NW 2nd AV
NW 24th ST between NW 5th AV and N Miami AV
NW 23th ST between NW 5th AV and NW 2nd AV
Affected Thoroughfares:
NW 3rd AV between NW 29th ST and NW 25th ST
NW 1st AV between NW 29th ST and NW 25th ST
NW 1st PL between NW 23rd ST and NW 20th ST
Parking
Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Bike
Lane
5’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
Sidewalk
Verge
Parking
Sidewalk
Verge
Setback
Setback
5’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
5’ Setback
5’ Setback
J.37
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Planning Department:
45’ ROW against I-95
5’ Established Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
Sidewalk
+
Street Trees
Sidewalk
+
Street Trees
5
Public ROW
5’ Setback
Affected Thoroughfare:
NW 6th AV between NW 22nd ST and NW 23th ST
I-95
Landscape
Buffer
(Will require coordination
with FDOT)
J.38
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
Miami Dade County Public Works:
North Miami Avenue Proposed Road Diet
5’ Established Setback
Setback
Setback
6
5’ Setback
5’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
Affected Thoroughfare:
N Miami AV between N 29th ST and N 20th ST
Design Pending
Sidewalk
Verge
Verge
Sidewalk
J.39
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Public Works:
70-F
0’ Established Setback
Travel
Lane
7
0’ Setback
Public ROW
0’ Setback
Public ROW
Affected Thoroughfare:
NW 2nd AV between NW 29th ST and NW 22th ST
Travel
Lane Parking
Sidewalk
Verge
Verge
Sidewalk
Parking
J.40
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Planning Department:
70’ With Linear Parkway
5’ Established Setback
Parking Parking
Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
8
Linear
Parkway
5’ Setback
Public ROW
5’ Setback
Public ROW
Affected Thoroughfare:
NW 28th ST between NW 6th AV and NW 3rd AV
*A wider Street Tree Zone is Permissable in Curb Bulb-Outs
Sidewalk
Verge*
Verge*
Sidewalk
J.41
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Capital Improvements:
NW 29th Approved Road Diet
10’ Established Setback
Parking Parking
Setback
Setback
Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
9
Bike
Lane
Bike
Lane
Turn
Lane
10’ Setback
10’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
Affected Wynwood Corridor:
NW 29th ST between I-95 and the FEC
Sidewalk
Verge
Verge
Sidewalk
J.42
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
City Capital Improvements:
Modified 100-D with Bike Lanes
0’ Established Setback
Parking Parking Travel
Lane
Travel
Lane
10
Bike Median
Lane
Bike
Lane
Planting
Planting
0’ Setback
0’ Setback
Public ROW
Public ROW
Affected NRD Corridor:
NW 5th AV between NW 29th ST and NW 22nd ST Sidewalk Verge
Verge
Sidewalk
J.43
OCTOBER 2016
MIAMI 21 APPENDIX J: NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.


Appendix K - MANA Wynwood

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 3 AND 7 OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA ("MIAMI 21 CODE"), AS AMENDED, APPROVING THE REZONING OF CERTAIN PARCELS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF APPROXIMATELY 23.46 ACRES (1,022,917 SQUARE FEET) FOR THE MANA WYNWOOD SPECIAL AREA PLAN ("MANA WYNWOOD SAP"), A MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT COMPRISED OF SELECTED PARCELS, BOUNDED APPROXIMATELY BY NORTHWEST 24TH STREET TO THE NORTH INCLUDING SPECIFIC PARCELS FRONTING NORTHWEST 24TH STREET TO THE NORTH, NORTHWEST 6TH AVENUE TO THE WEST, NORTHWEST 22ND STREET TO THE SOUTH, AND NORTHWEST 2ND AVENUE TO THE EAST, MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT "A", ATTACHED AND INCORPORATED; THE MANA WYNWOOD SAP CONSISTS OF A PHASED PROJECT DIVIDED INTO SIX (6) PARTS WHICH INCLUDES APPROXIMATELY 9,719,083 SQUARE FEET OF DEVELOPMENT CONSISTING OF THE FOLLOWING: A) APPROXIMATELY 3,482 RESIDENTIAL UNITS; B) APPROXIMATELY 8,483 PARKING SPACES; C) APPROXIMATELY 51,146 SQUARE FEET OF CIVIC SPACE; AND D) APPROXIMATELY 168,287 SQUARE FEET OF OPEN SPACE; THE MANA WYNWOOD SAP WILL MODIFY THE TRANSECT ZONE REGULATIONS THAT ARE APPLICABLE TO THE SUBJECT PARCELS, WHERE A SECTION IS NOT SPECIFICALLY MODIFIED, THE REGULATION AND RESTRICTION OF THE MIAMI 21 CODE SHALL APPLY; THE SQUARE FOOTAGES ABOVE ARE APPROXIMATE AND MAY INCREASE OR DECREASE AT TIME OF BUILDING PERMIT BUT SHALL NOT EXCEED 9,719,083 SQUARE FEET OF DEVELOPMENT; MAKING FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATING CONCLUSIONS OF LAW; PROVIDING FOR BINDING EFFECT; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
..Fiscal Impact
LOCATION: Approximately Northwest 24th Street to the north, Northwest 6th Avenue to the west, Northwest 22nd Street to the south and Northwest 2nd Avenue to the east [Commissioner Keon Hardemon - District 5]

APPLICANT(S): Iris Escarra, Esquire on behalf of Manningan Holdings, LLC, Marcella Realty, LLC, Megan Holdings, LLC, Melanie Holding, LLC Mizrachi Holdings, LLC, Wynwood Holdings, LLC, 2294 NW 2 Avenue Property LLC, Mapton Holdings, LLC, Malux Realty LLC, Milana Holdings LLC and Millie Realty LLC

FINDING(S):
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: Recommended approval with conditions.
PLANNING, ZONING AND APPEALS BOARD: Recommended approval with conditions on March 2, 2016, by a vote of 11-0.

PURPOSE: This will allow the area to be Master Planned to allow a greater integration of public improvements and infrastructure and greater flexibility as part of the Mana Wynwood SAP.
..Body
WHEREAS, the Mana Wynwood Special Area Plan ("Mana Wynwood SAP") consists of approximately 23.46 a acres of selected parcels, as described in Exhibit "A", attached and incorporated, qualifying as a Special Area Plan ("SAP") as per Article 3, Section 3.9 of the Miami 21 Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended ("Miami 21 Code"); and

WHEREAS, the aforementioned location for the proposed Mana Wynwood SAP currently contains underutilized buildings and vacant lots, and the entire development will consist of approximately 9,719,083 square feet of development with A) approximately 3,487 residential units; B) approximately 8,483 parking spaces; C) approximately 51,146 square feet of Civic Space; and D) approximately 168,287 square feet of open space; and

WHEREAS, the proposed Mana Wynwood SAP will facilitate the redevelopment and benefit the area by creating residential units, flex space and commercial uses as well as civic and open space for the enjoyment of the general public; and

WHEREAS, the requested Mana Wynwood SAP will integrate public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in a higher quality of specialized building and streetscape design; and

WHEREAS, projects such as this are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City of Miami ("City") in general, and specifically the Wynwood Neighborhood; and

WHEREAS, the Mana Wynwood SAP will create certain recurring and non-recurring financial benefits as well as temporary and permanent jobs; and

WHEREAS, the Miami Planning, Zoning and Appeals Board ("PZAB"), at its meeting on March 2, 2016, following an advertised public hearing, adopted Resolution No PZAB-R-16-013 by a vote of eleven to zero (11-0), item No. PZAB.1, recommending APPROVAL, with conditions, of the Mana Wynwood SAP; and

WHEREAS, the City Commission, after careful consideration of the matter, deems it advisable and in the best interest of the general welfare of the City and its citizens to amend the Miami 21 Code as hereinafter set forth;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI,
FLORIDA:

Section 1. The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this Section.

Section 2. The Mana Wynwood SAP, attached hereto, is approved subject to the conditions specified herein, and as amended in the Miami 21 Code.

Section 3. The Mana Wynwood SAP includes lower ranking SAP Permits as set forth in the Regulating Plan of the SAP, attached hereto as "Exhibit B", which shall be reviewed for approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning.

Section 4. The findings of fact set forth below are made with respect to the subject Mana Wynwood SAP:

a. The Mana Wynwood SAP is consistent with the adopted Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan, as amended ("MCNP");

b. The City Commission further finds that:
(1) The Mana Wynwood SAP will have a favorable impact on the economy of the City;
(2) The Mana Wynwood SAP will efficiently use public transportation facilities;
(3) Any potentially adverse effects of the development will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Mana Wynwood SAP;
(4) The Mana Wynwood SAP will efficiently use existing public or civic spaces;
(5) The Mana Wynwood SAP will not negatively impact the environment and natural resources of the City;
(6) The Mana Wynwood SAP will not adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood;
(7) The Mana Wynwood SAP will not adversely affect public safety;
(8) Based on the record presented and evidence presented, the public welfare will be served by the Mana Wynwood SAP; and
(9) Any potentially adverse effects arising from this development not limited to safety and security, fire protection, solid waste, heritage conservation and trees will be mitigated through compliance with the conditions of this Mana Wynwood SAP.

Section 5. The Mana Wynwood SAP, inclusive of the Regulating Plan, attached and incorporated as Exhibit "B", Concept Book, attached and incorporated as Exhibit "C", and Executive Summary, attached and incorporated as Exhibit "D", as approved, shall be binding upon the Mana Wynwood Applicant Entities ("Applicant") and any successors in interest.

Section 6. The application for Mana Wynwood SAP, which was submitted on June 17, 2015, and on file with the Hearing Boards Section of the Department of Planning and Zoning, shall be relied upon generally for administrative interpretations and is incorporated by reference.

Section 7. The City Manager is directed to instruct the Director of Planning and Zoning to transmit a copy of this Ordinance and attachments to the Applicant upon final approval.

Section 8. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are made with respect to the Mana Wynwood SAP as described herein and in documents incorporated hereto.

Section 9. The Mana Wynwood SAP is granted and approved.

Section 10. In the event that any portion or section of this Ordinance or the Mana Wynwood SAP is determined to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance or Mana Wynwood SAP which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 11. The provisions for this Mana Wynwood SAP, as approved, shall commence and become operative thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the Ordinance. {1}

CONDITIONS:

Based on analysis and findings, the Department of Planning and Zoning recommends approval of the Mana Wynwood SAP with the following conditions which are adopted and approved by the City Commission:

1) Comply with all applicable building codes, land development regulations, ordinances, and other laws and pay all applicable fees due prior to the issuance of any building permit.

2) Allow the Miami Police Department ("MPD") to conduct a security survey, at MPD's discretion, and make recommendations concerning security measures and systems; and to submit a report to the Department of Planning and Zoning, prior to commencement of construction, demonstrating how the MPD recommendations, if any, have been incorporated into the Mana Wynwood SAP security and construction plans, or demonstrate to the Director of Planning and Zoning why such recommendations are impractical.

3) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter from, the Fire-Rescue Department indicating Applicant's coordination with members of the Fire Plan Review Section at the Fire-Rescue Department in the review of the scope of the Mana Wynwood SAP, owner responsibility, building development process and review procedures, as well as specific requirements for fire protection and life safety systems, exiting, vehicular access and water supply.

4) Obtain approval from, or provide a letter of assurance from, the Solid Waste Department ("Solid Waste") that the Mana Wynwood SAP has addressed all the concerns of Solid Waste prior to obtaining a building permit.

5) Comply with the Minority Participation and Employment Plan (including a Contractor/Subcontractor Participation Plan) submitted to the City as part of the Application for Development Approval, with the understanding that the Applicant must use its best efforts to follow the provisions of the City's Minority/Women Business Affairs and Procurement Program as a guide, as applicable.

6) Record the following in the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, prior to the issuance of any building permit:
a. Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney's Office, providing that the ownership, operation, and maintenance of all common areas and facilities will be by the property owner or a mandatory property owner association in perpetuity; and
b. A Unity of Title or a Covenant in Lieu of a Unity of Title, if applicable, subject to the review and approval of the Department of Planning and Zoning and the City Attorney's Office.

7) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a recorded copy of the documents mentioned in condition (6) above.

8) Provide the Department of Planning and Zoning with a temporary construction plan that addresses construction phasing and includes the following elements:
a. Temporary construction parking plan with an enforcement policy;
b. Construction noise management plan with an enforcement policy; and
c. Maintenance plan for the temporary construction site which shall be subject to the review and approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the issuance of any building permits and shall be enforced during construction activity. All construction activity shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of the submitted construction plan. Failure to comply may lead to a suspension or revocation of this Mana Wynwood SAP.

As applicable, the Applicant shall be responsible for securing the City's approval for any change or modification to the approved temporary construction plan. Request for approval of any change or modification to the previously approved temporary construction plan shall be submitted for review and approval no later than two (2) weeks prior to the implementation of such a requested change or modification.

(9) Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the Mana Wynwood SAP, the Applicant shall provide the Department of Planning and Zoning for review for compliance and further approval:
a. Sufficiency Letter from the City's Office of Transportation;
b. Final determination of Public School Concurrency and Capacity Reservation;
c. Conservation Assessment Report as portions of the project are located within a High Archeological Probability Zone; and
d. Proof of compliance with conditions established by the following departments or agencies, specifically:
i. City Public Works Departments;
ii. Miami-Dade County Water and Sewer Department;
iii. Miami-Dade County Traffic Engineering Division;
iv. Miami-Dade County Transportation and Public Works Department; and
v. Florida Department of Transportation.

10) The Mana Wynwood SAP includes a Development Review Process which addresses the build out of the individual buildings as identified in the Regulating Plan. All development within the Mana Wynwood SAP shall be submitted for the review and approval by the Director of Planning and Zoning prior to the issuance of any building permit consistent with the requirements of Article 3, Section 3.9.1(g) of the Miami 21 Code and the Mana Wynwood SAP.

11) Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this Ordinance, record a certified copy of the Development Agreement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, specifying that the Development Agreement runs with the land and is binding on the Applicant, its successors, and assigns, jointly or severally.

12) The Applicant shall comply with the conditions identified in the Miami 21 Code, the Mana Wynwood SAP and all applicable local, state, and federal regulations.

THE CITY OF MIAMI SHALL:

Establish the operative date of the associated Development Agreement as being thirty (30) days from the date of its final adoption of the Development Agreement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Mana Wynwood SAP, as approved, complies with the MCNP as amended, is consistent with the orderly development and goals of the City, and complies with local land development regulations pursuant to the Miami 21 Code.


..Footnote
{1} This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten (10) days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.


Appendix L - Miami Jewish Health

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MIAMI CITY COMMISSION, WITH ATTACHMENT(S), APPROVING A DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 163, FLORIDA STATUTES, WITH THE MIAMI JEWISH HEALTH SYSTEMS, INC. RELATING TO THE REZONING OF CERTAIN PARCELS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF 20.98 ± ACRES FOR THE MIAMI JEWISH HEALTH SYSTEMS SPECIAL AREA PLAN ("MJHSSAP") COMPRISED OF SELECTED PARCELS LOCATED AT APPROXIMATELY 5060, 5200, AND 5246 NORTHEAST 2 AVENUE; 5201 AND 5265 NORTH MIAMI AVENUE; 95, 145, AND 155 NORTHEAST 50 TERRACE; 71 AND 75 NORTHEAST 51 STREET; 36 AND 44 NORTHEAST 52 TERRACE; 10, 20, 32, 42, AND 58 NORTHEAST 53 STREET; AND 11, 17, 25, 35, 43, 57, AND 61 NORTHEAST 52 TERRACE, MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED IN EXHIBIT “A”, ATTACHED AND INCORPORATED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF REDEVELOPMENT OF SUCH LAND FOR AN ENCLOSED HOSPITAL CAMPUS WITH A RESEARCH INSTITUTE, HOTEL, AND MEMORY CARE FACILITY; AUTHORIZING THE FOLLOWING USES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, LODGING, CIVIC, EDUCATIONAL AND CIVIL SUPPORT, PARKING GARAGE, AND ANY OTHER USES AUTHORIZED BY THE MJHSSAP AND PERMITTED BY THE MIAMI COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN – FUTURE LAND USE MAP DESIGNATION AND ORDINANCE NO. 13114, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA, AS AMENDED; AUTHORIZING A DENSITY OF APPROXIMATELY SIXTY-FIVE (65) DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE IN SOME AREAS AND ONE HUNDRED FIFTY (150) DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE IN SOME AREAS; AUTHORIZING A BUILDING HEIGHT BETWEEN FIVE (5) AND TWELVE (12) STORIES BASED ON THE TRANSECT ZONE INCLUSIVE OF AVAILABLE BONUSES; AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER TO EXECUTE THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT, IN SUBSTANTIALLY THE ATTACHED FORM, FOR SAID PURPOSE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
Information
Department:	Department of Planning	Sponsors:	
Category:	Planning and Zoning
Attachments
Agenda Summary and Legislation
2844 - Development Agreement SUB
2884 - Development Agreement Exhibit A
2844-Submittal-Iris Escarra-Development Agreement
Body/Legislation
WHEREAS, the Miami Jewish Health Systems Special Area Plan (“MJHSSAP”) consists of 20.98 ± acres of selected parcels located at approximately 5060, 5200, and 5246 Northeast 2 Avenue; 5201 and 5265 North Miami Avenue; 95, 145, and 155 Northeast 50 Terrace; 71 and 75 Northeast 51 Street; 36 and 44 Northeast 52 Terrace; 10, 20, 32, 42, and 58 Northeast 53 Street; and 11, 17, 25, 35, 43, 57, and 61 Northeast 52 Terrace, Miami, Florida, as more particularly described in Exhibit “A,” attached and incorporated (“Selected Parcels”), qualifying as a Special Area Plan (“SAP”) pursuant to Article 3, Section 3.9 of Ordinance No. 13114, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Miami, Florida, as amended (“Miami 21 Code”); and

 

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 3.9.1.f. of the Miami 21 Code, development within an SAP shall be pursuant to a recorded development agreement; and

 

WHEREAS, the Selected Parcels for the proposed MJHSSAP currently contain an existing, self-contained hospital complex and a large surface parking lot; and

 

WHEREAS, the proposed MJHSSAP will enable enhancements to existing facilities and phased redevelopment of the site to serve more individuals; and

 

WHEREAS, the proposed MJHSSAP will provide a benefit to the area by increasing the size of an existing medical campus as well as providing civic and open space for the enjoyment of the general public; and

 

WHEREAS, the proposed MJHSSAP will integrate public improvements and infrastructure while providing greater flexibility resulting in a higher quality or specialized building and streetscape design; and

 

WHEREAS, projects such as the proposed MJHSSAP are critically important to the economic revitalization and enhancement of the City of Miami (“City”); and

 

WHEREAS, the proposed MJHSSAP will create certain recurring and non-recurring financial benefits as well as temporary and permanent jobs;

 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIAMI, FLORIDA:

 

Section 1.  The recitals and findings contained in the Preamble to this Resolution are adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set forth in this Section.

 

Section 2.  The Development Agreement, pursuant to Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, between Miami Jewish Health Systems, Inc. (“Applicant”) and the City, relating to development of the 20.98 ± acres, is hereby approved.

 

Section 3.  The Development Agreement is applicable only to the Selected Parcels for the purpose of redevelopment of such land for an enclosed hospital campus with a research institute, hotel, and memory care facility, subject to the development parameters set forth therein that authorize the following uses, including but not limited to, residential, commercial, lodging, civic, educational and civil support, parking garage, and any other uses authorized by the MJHSSAP and permitted by the Miami Comprehensive Neighborhood Plan – Future Land Use Map Designation and the Miami 21 Code, authorizes a density of approximately sixty-five (65) dwelling units per acre in some areas and one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units per acre in some areas, and authorizes a building height between five (5) and twelve (12) stories based on the Transect Zone inclusive of available bonuses.

 

Section 4.  The City Manager is authorized[1] to execute the Development Agreement, in substantially the attached form, for said purpose.

 

Section 5.  If any section, part of a section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or word of this Ordinance is declared invalid, the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected.

 

Section 6.  This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption and signature of the Mayor.[2]

[1] The herein authorization is further subject to compliance with all requirements that may be imposed by the City Attorney, including but not limited to, those prescribed by applicable City Charter and City Code provisions.

[2] This Ordinance shall become effective as specified herein unless vetoed by the Mayor within ten (10) days from the date it was passed and adopted. If the Mayor vetoes this Ordinance, it shall become effective immediately upon override of the veto by the City Commission or upon the effective date stated herein, whichever is later.
