CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Village Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 9, 1997 
Effective: December 9, 1997 
Republished: September, 2001 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
PINECREST, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Evelyn Langlieb Greer 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert Hingston 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Cindie Blanck 
Barry Blaxberg 
Leslie Bowe 
Village Council 
____________ 
Peter G. Lombardi 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Eckert Seamans Cherin & Mellott 
Village Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
PINECREST, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Evelyn Langlieb Greer 
Mayor 
____________ 
Cindie Blanck 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Barry Blaxberg, Seat 1 
Leslie Bowe, Seat 3 
Robert Hingston, Seat 4 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Peter G. Lombardi 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Cynthia A. Everett, P.A. 
Village Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
PINECREST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Joseph M. Corradino 
Mayor 
____________ 
Cheri Ball 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Anna Hochkammer 
Doug Kraft 
James E. McDonald 
Village Council 
____________ 
Yocelyn Galiano Gomez, ICMA-CM 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Mitchell Bierman 
Village Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the village council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
    This Code has been republished in two volumes at the direction of the village. Volume I contains the original Code, which constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the village, except the land development regulations of the village. Volume II contains only the land development regulations, and the comparative table, state law reference table, and index pertaining only to the land development regulations. This republication was under the direct supervision of Brian C. Taylor, Senior Editor, and Aline L. True, Accuracy Management Director, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS LDR:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLE LDRCT:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE LDRSLT:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS INDEX LDRi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Linda G. Davis, Senior Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., Village Clerk, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village of Pinecrest readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 97-20 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE VILLAGE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA, AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation is adopted. 
    Section 2. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Village Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 3. Ordinances adopted after March 4, 1997 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 4. This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption on second reading. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED on first reading this 12th day of November, 1997. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED on second reading this 9th day of December, 1997. 
/s/   
      Evelyn Langlieb Greer, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC, Village Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGAL SUFFICIENCY: 
/s/   
      D. J. Doody, Village Attorney   
VOLUME I 
PART I - VILLAGE OF PINECREST CHARTER[1] 
VILLAGE OF PINECREST 
Municipal Charter 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the Village of Pinecrest, as adopted by referendum on March 12, 1996. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Historical note- On November 21, 1995, pursuant to Ordinance 95-207, the Board of County Commissioners of Metropolitan Dade County appointed the Pinecrest Charter Commission to draft the Village Charter for the newly incorporated Village of Pinecrest. Roger Carlton, Lynn M. Dannheisser, Sandra Diaz (Vice Chairperson), Gary Matzner (Chairperson), and Merrett R. Stierheim served as the members of the Charter Commission. The Charter Commission delivered a municipal charter to the Mayor and Board of County Commissioners of Metropolitan Dade County on December 13, 1995. The Village Charter was adopted by the electors of the Village of Pinecrest on March 12, 1996. 
On December 5, 2000, pursuant to Section 7.4 of the Village Charter, the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest appointed the Charter Revision Commission to draft such amendments to the Village Charter as it deemed appropriate and to submit such proposed amendments to the Village Council. Harry A. Hamburger, M.D. (Vice Chairperson), Dennis Jamison, Gary Matzner (Chairperson), Richard Schinoff, and Kenneth H. Thomas, Ph.D. served as the members of the Charter Revision Commission. Village Manager Peter G. Lombardi, Village Clerk Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC and Village Attorney Cynthia A. Everett provided staff support to the Charter Revision Commission. The Charter Revision Commission delivered its recommendations for amendments to the Village Charter to the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest on March 9, 2001. Six of the eight proposed charter amendments were adopted by the electors of the Village of Pinecrest on May 1, 2001. 
On March 14, 2006, pursuant to Section 6.1(c) of the Village Charter, the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest appointed a Charter Revision Commission to draft such amendments to the Village Charter as it deemed appropriate and to submit such proposed amendments to the Village Council. Cindie Blanck (Non-voting Member), Courtney Cunningham, Ernesto J. de la Fe, Michael R. Jones, Alan Rosenthal (Chairperson), and Joseph A. Ruiz, Jr. (Vice Chairperson) served as the members of the Charter Revision Commission. Village Clerk Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC and Village Attorney Cynthia A. Everett provided staff support to the Charter Revision Commission. The Charter Revision Commission submitted a final report on June 13, 2006 and recommended no amendments. 
On November 8, 2006, the electors of the Village of Pinecrest approved two of three amendments proposed by the Village Council. 
On March 20, 2012, pursuant to Section 6.1(c) of the Village Charter, the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest appointed a Charter Revision Commission to draft such amendments to the Village Charter as it deemed appropriate and to submit such proposed amendments to the Village Council. Leslie Bowe (Vice Chairperson), Paul Sasso, Gail D. Serota (Chairperson), William Tuttle, and Kenneth Young served as the members of the Charter Revision Commission. Village Clerk Guido H. Inguanzo, Jr., CMC and Village Attorney Cynthia A. Everett provided staff support to the Charter Revision Commission. The Charter Revision Commission delivered its recommendations for amendments to the Village Charter to the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest on June 12, 2012. All three proposed charter amendments were adopted by the electors of the Village of Pinecrest on November 6, 2012. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the Village of Pinecrest, in order to secure for ourselves the benefits and responsibilities of home rule, in order to provide a municipal government to serve our present and future needs, do hereby adopt this Charter. 
CITIZENS' BILL OF RIGHTS 
A.  This government has been created to protect the governed, not the governing. In order to provide the public with full and accurate information, to promote efficient administration management, to make government more accountable, and to insure to all persons fair and equitable treatment, the following rights are guaranteed: 
1.  Convenient Access. Every person has the right to transact Village business with a minimum of personal inconvenience. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, the Village Council and the Village Manager to provide, within budget limitations, reasonably convenient times and places for registration and voting, for required inspections, and for transacting business with the Village. 
2.  Truth in Government. No municipal official or employee shall knowingly furnish false information on any public matter, nor knowingly omit significant facts when giving requested information to members of the public. 
3.  Public Records. All audits, reports, minutes, documents and other public records of the Village and its boards, agencies, departments and authorities shall be open for inspection at reasonable times and places convenient to the public. 
4.  Minutes and Ordinance Register. The Village Clerk shall maintain and make available for public inspection an ordinance register separate from the minutes showing the votes of each member on all ordinances and resolutions listed by descriptive title. Written minutes of all meetings and the ordinance register shall be available for public inspection not later than 30 days after the conclusion of the meeting. 
5.  Right to be Heard. So far as the orderly conduct of public business permits, any interested person has the right to appear before the Village Council or Village agency, board or department for the presentation, adjustment or determination of an issue, request, or controversy within the jurisdiction of the Village. Matters shall be scheduled for the convenience of the public. The Village Council shall adopt agenda procedure and schedule hearings in a manner that will enhance the opportunity for public participation. Nothing herein shall prohibit any governmental entity or agency from imposing reasonable time limits and procedures for the presentation of a matter. 
6.  Right to Notice. Persons entitled to notice of a Village hearing shall be timely informed as to the time, place and nature of the hearing and the legal authority pursuant to which the hearing is to be held. Failure by an individual to receive such notice shall not constitute mandatory grounds for cancelling the hearing or rendering invalid any determination made at such hearing. Copies of proposed ordinances or resolutions shall be made available at a reasonable time prior to the hearing, unless the matter involves an emergency ordinance or resolution. 
7.  No Unreasonable Postponements. No matter, once having been placed on a formal agenda by the Village, shall be postponed to another day except for good cause shown in the opinion of the Mayor, Village Council, board or agency conducting such meeting, and then only on condition that the affected person shall, upon written request, receive mailed notice of the new date of any postponed meeting. Failure by an individual to receive such notice shall not constitute mandatory grounds for cancelling the hearing or rendering invalid any determination made at such hearing. 
8.  Right to Public Hearing. Upon a timely written request from any interested party, and after presentation of the facts to and approval by the Council, a public hearing shall be held by any Village agency, board, department or authority upon any significant policy decision to be issued by it which is not subject to subsequent administrative or legislative review and hearing. This provision shall not apply to the Law Department of the Village nor to any body whose duties and responsibilities are solely advisory. 
At any zoning or other hearing in which review is exclusively by certiorari, a party or his/her counsel shall be entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. The decision of such agency, board, department or authority must be based upon the facts in the record. Procedural rules establishing reasonable time and other limitations may be promulgated and amended from time to time. 
9.  Notice of Action and Reasons. Prompt notice shall be given of the denial in whole or in part of a request of an interested person made in connection with any Village administrative decision or proceeding when the decision is reserved at the conclusion of the hearing. The notice shall be accompanied by a statement of the grounds for denial. 
10.  Managers' and Attorneys' Reports. The Village Manager and Village Attorney shall periodically make a public status report on all major matters pending or concluded within their respective areas of concern. 
11.  Budgeting. In addition to any budget required by state statute, the Village Manager at the direction of the Mayor shall prepare a budget showing the cost of each department for each budget year. Prior to the Village Council's first public hearing on the proposed budget required by state law, the Village Manager shall make public a budget summary setting forth the proposed cost of each individual department and reflecting the personnel for each department, the purposes therefor, the estimated millage cost of each department and the amount of any contingency and carryover funds for each department. 
12.  Budget Report. The Village Manager shall make public a monthly budget report, submitted at the regular monthly meeting of the Council, showing the actual expenditures during the month just ended against the proposed annual expenditures set forth in the budget. Such report shall also reflect the same cumulative information for whatever portion of the fiscal year that has elapsed. 
13.  Representation of Public. The Mayor shall endeavor to designate one or more individuals to represent the Village at all proceedings before County, State and Federal regulatory bodies, significantly affecting the Village and its residents. 
B.  The foregoing enumeration of citizens' rights vests large and pervasive powers in the citizenry of the Village of Pinecrest. Such power necessarily carries with it responsibility of equal magnitude for the successful operation of government in the Village. The orderly, efficient and fair operation of government requires the intelligent participation of individual citizens exercising their rights with dignity and restraint so as to avoid any sweeping acceleration in the cost of government because of the exercise of individual prerogatives, and for individual citizens to grant respect for the dignity of public office. 
C.  Remedies for Violations. In any suit by a citizen alleging a violation of this bill of rights filed in Miami-Dade County Circuit Court pursuant to its general equity jurisdiction, the plaintiff, if successful, shall be entitled to recover costs as fixed by the Court. Any public official or employee who is found by the Court to have willfully violated this Article shall forthwith forfeit his/her office or employment. 
D.  Construction. All provisions of this Bill of Rights shall be construed to be supplementary to and not in conflict with the general laws of Florida. If any part of this Bill of Rights shall be declared invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Referendum of 11-6-12) 
ARTICLE 1. - CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY AND POWERS 

Section 1.1 - Corporate Existence. 
    A municipal corporation known as Village of Pinecrest (the "Village") is hereby created pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Florida (the "State") and the Home Rule Charter of Miami-Dade County (the "County"). The corporate existence of the Village shall commence upon the adoption of this Charter. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 1.2 - Form of Government. 
    The Village shall have a "Mayor-Council-Manager" form of government. 
Section 1.3 - Corporate Boundary. 
    The corporate boundary of the Village shall be as follows: 
BEGIN at the intersection of the North line of Section 6, Township 55 South, Range 41 East (being the centerline of N. Kendal Drive), with the East right-of-way line of S.W. 57 Avenue (Red Road); thence run South, along said East right-of-way line of Red Road, to its intersection with the South line of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 7, Township 55 South, Range 41 East; thence run East, along said South line to its intersection with the centerline of said Snapper Creek Canal; thence run Southeasterly, along the centerline of Snapper Creek Canal to its intersection with a line lying 35.00 feet Westerly of and parallel with the centerline of Old Cutler Road (Ingram Highway), being also the city limit line of the City of Coral Gables; thence run Southwesterly to Westerly along said line to its intersection with the East line of the SE 1/4 of Section 12, Township 55 South, Range 40 East; thence run North along said East line of the SE 1/4 of Section 12 to its intersection with the Easterly extension of the North line of Block 1 of PINE BAY ESTATES SECTION NO. 1, according to the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 82 at Page 24 of the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida; thence Westerly, along said North line of said Block 1, and its Easterly and Westerly extensions, to its intersection with the centerline of S.W. 60th Avenue; thence Southerly, along the centerline of said S.W. 60th Avenue, to its intersection with the Westerly extension of the South line of Block 4 of said PINE BAY ESTATES SECTION NO. 1; thence Easterly, along the South line of said Block 4 and its Westerly extension, to the Northwest corner of Lot 3 in Block 4 of PINE BAY ESTATES SECTION NO. 2, according to the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 87 at Page 83 of the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida; thence South, along the West line of said Lot 3, to the Southwest corner thereof; thence Easterly, along the South line of said Lot 3, to the Northwest corner of Lot 4 in said Block 4; thence Southerly, along the West line of said Lot 4 and its Southerly extension, to its intersection with the South line of the aforementioned Section 12; thence Easterly, along the South line of said Section 12, and along the centerline of S.W. 120th Street, to its intersection with the West line of the East 35.00 feet of said SE 1/4 of Section 12; thence run Southerly, along the West line of the East 35.00 feet of the NE 1/4 of Section 13, Township 55 South, Range 40 East (being the Westerly city limit of the City of Coral Gables) and along the Westerly right-of-way line of said Old Cutler Road, to its intersection with the centerline of S.W. 128th Street (Lugo Road); thence run Easterly along the centerline of said S.W. 128th Street and along the city limit line of the City of Coral Gables, to the East line of Section 13, Township 55 South, Range 40 East; thence run Southerly, along the East line of the SE 1/4 of said Section 13 and along the city limit line of the City of Coral Gables, (also being the centerline of Red Road) to its intersection with the South line of said Section 13, (also being the centerline of S.W. 136th Street); thence run Westerly, along the South line of said Section 13 and continuing Westerly along the centerline of S.W. 136th Street (Howard Drive) to its intersection with the centerline of State Road No. 5 (U.S. 1); thence run Northeasterly along the centerline of said State Road No. 5 to the point of intersection with the centerline of Snapper Creek Canal (Canal No. C-2); thence run Easterly, along the centerline of said Snapper Creek Canal, to its intersection with the East line of the SW 1/4 of Section 36, Township 54 South, Range 40 East; thence run Southerly, along the East line of the SW 1/4 of said Section 36 to the point of intersection with the North line of Section 1, Township 55 South, Range 40 East; then run Easterly along said North line of Section 1 to the Northeast corner of said Section 1 (said last two (2) courses being along the city limit line of the City of South Miami); thence continue Easterly along the North line of aforesaid Section 6, Township 55 South, Range 41 East to the POINT OF BEGINNING; all lying and being in Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 1.4 - Powers. 
(a)  The Village shall have all available governmental, corporate and proprietary powers. Through the adoption of this Charter, it is the intent of the electors of the Village to grant to the municipal government established herein the broadest exercise of home rule powers permitted under the Constitution and laws of the State, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
(b)  The only limitation concerning alienability of Village owned property is that there shall be no sale, exchange or lease in excess of five (5) years of any park or recreational property while it is being used for public purpose unless such sale, exchange or lease is approved by a majority vote of the voters of the Village. This provision shall not apply to any valid written contractual obligations entered into prior to the effective incorporation date of this Village nor shall it apply to any Village owned educational facility, library property or parking facility not located in a park or any utility or access easements or rights-of-way. This provision shall also not apply to any lease agreement for food service in Cypress Hall at Pinecrest Gardens in excess of five (5) years if approved by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of the Council. This provision is intended to restrict sales, exchanges or leases and shall not be applicable to any operating, management or other agreements. 
(Referendum of 11-6-12) 
Section 1.5 - Construction. 
    This Charter and the powers of the Village shall be construed liberally in favor of the Village. 
ARTICLE 2. - VILLAGE COUNCIL; MAYOR 

Section 2.1 - Village Council. 
    There shall be a Village Council (the "Council") vested with all legislative powers of the Village, consisting of four (4) members ("Councilmembers") and the Mayor. Councilmembers shall occupy seats numbered 1 through 4. References in this Charter to the Council and/or Councilmembers shall include the Mayor unless the context dictates otherwise. 
Section 2.2 - Mayor and Vice-Mayor. 
(a)  Powers of the Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, be a voting member of the Council, and may create and appoint subcommittees of the Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of Village government for all ceremonial purposes and for purposes of military law, for service of process, execution of duly authorized contracts, deeds and other documents, and as the Village official designated to represent the Village in all dealings with other governmental entities. In addition, the Mayor shall have the following specific responsibilities: 
i)  The Mayor shall recommend the appointment of a Village Manager in accordance with the terms of Section 3.1 hereinbelow. 
ii)  The Mayor shall appoint the Councilmembers of all standing committees and the chairperson and vice chairperson of each committee. There shall be as many standing and special committees as deemed necessary by the Mayor. 
iii)  The Mayor shall prepare and deliver annually between November 1 and January 31 a report on the state of the Village and annually between July 1 and September 30 a budgetary address to the people of the Village. 
(b)  Vice-Mayor. During the absence or incapacity of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall have all the powers, authority, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor. At the first Council meeting after each regular Village election, or in any calendar year in which there is no regular Village election, at the first Council meeting in the month of November of such year, the Council shall select one of its members as Vice-Mayor in accordance with a procedure adopted by ordinance. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 2.3 - Election and Term of Office. 
(a)  Election, Term of Office and Staggered Terms. Each Councilmember and the Mayor shall be elected at-large for four year terms by the electors of the Village in the manner provided in Article 5 of this Charter. The Councilmember elected from Seat 2 in 2022 shall serve a two year term and the Mayor elected in 2020 shall serve a six year term to establish the staggering of terms so that the Councilmembers from the Residential Areas shall be elected in the election cycle beginning in 2024 and every four years thereafter, and the At-Large Councilmember and Mayor shall be elected in the election cycle beginning in 2026 and every four years thereafter. Notwithstanding Section 2.3(c), the terms of the Councilmember from Seat 2 elected in 2022 and the Mayor elected in 2020 under this provision shall not be counted in the calculation of term limits or years of service under Section 2.3(c). 
(b)  Residential Areas. The Village shall be divided into three (3) residence areas depicted on Appendix "A" and more particularly described as follows: the northern area consisting of portions of the Village beginning at the intersection of South Dixie Highway (U.S. 1) and the Snapper Creek Canal, thence southeasterly along Snapper Creek Canal to S.W. 62nd Avenue, thence South on S.W. 62nd Avenue to North Kendall Drive (S.W. 88th Street), thence easterly and southeasterly along North Kendall Drive to Red Road (S.W. 57th Avenue), thence north along Red Road to Kendall Drive (S.W. 88th Street), thence east along Kendall Drive to Old Cutler Road, thence southeasterly along Old Cutler Road to Red Road, thence north along Red Road to Killian Drive (S.W. 112th Street), thence westerly, southwesterly and westerly along Killian Drive to Ludlam Road (S.W. 67th Avenue), thence north along Ludlam Road to S.W. 104th Street, thence west along S.W. 104th Street to South Dixie Highway, and thence northeasterly along South Dixie Highway to the point of beginning (hereinafter referred to as the "Northern Area"); the central area consisting of those portions of the Village beginning at the intersection of South Dixie Highway (U.S. 1) and S.W. 104th Street, thence east along S.W. 104th St. to Ludlam Road (S.W. 67th Avenue), thence south along Ludlam Road to Killian Drive (S.W. 112th Street), thence easterly, northeasterly and easterly along Killian Drive to Red Road (S.W. 57th Avenue), thence south along Red Road to Montgomery Drive (S.W. 120th Street), thence east along Montgomery Drive to S.W. 60th Court, thence South along S.W. 60th Court to Moss Ranch Road, thence east along Moss Ranch Road to S.W. 62nd Avenue, thence south along S.W. 62nd Avenue to Chapman Field Drive (a portion of which is known as S.W. 124th Street), thence northeasterly and westerly along Chapman Field Drive to South Dixie Highway, and thence northeasterly along South Dixie Highway to the point of beginning (hereinafter referred to as the "Central Area"); and the southern area consisting of those portions of the Village beginning at the intersection of South Dixie Highway (U.S. 1) and Chapman Field Drive (a portion of which is known as S.W. 124th Street), thence easterly and southeasterly along Chapman Field Drive to S.W. 62nd Avenue; thence north along S.W. 62nd Avenue to Moss Ranch Road, thence east along Moss Ranch Road to S.W. 60th Court, thence north along S.W. 60th Court to S.W. 120nd Street, thence east along S.W. 120th Street to Red Road (S.W. 57th Avenue), thence South along Red Road until it forks at Old Cutler Road, thence southeasterly along Old Cutler Road to S.W. 128th Street, thence east along S.W. 128th St. to Red Road, thence south along Red Road to S.W. 136th Street, thence west along S.W. 136th Street to South Dixie Highway, and thence northeasterly along South Dixie Highway to the point of beginning (hereinafter referred to as the "Southern Area"). Collectively the Northern Area, the Central Area, and the Southern Area are referred to as "Residential Areas"; individually, each as a "Residential Area." One Councilmember shall reside in the Northern Area (Seat 1), one Councilmember shall reside in the Central Area (Seat 2); one Councilmember shall reside in the Southern Area (Seat 3); and one Councilmember shall be elected without regard to residence in any particular Residential Area (At-Large Seat). Persons running from a particular Residential Area must be a resident of the Residential Area which s/he proposes to represent on the Council at the time of qualifying, at the time of his/her election and must continue to reside in such Residential Areas during his/her term of office. The Councilmembers from Residential Areas 1, 2, and 3 are referred to collectively as the "Residential Area Councilmembers." 
(c)  Limitations on Lengths of Service. No person shall serve as Mayor for more than two consecutive elected terms. No person may serve on the Council for more than two consecutive terms. No person may serve as a combination of Mayor and Councilmember for more than eight consecutive years. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Referendum of 11-6-18) 
Section 2.4 - Qualifications. 
(a)  Candidates for Councilmember or Mayor shall qualify for election by the filing of a written notice of candidacy with the Clerk of the Village at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance and payment to the Village Clerk of the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a qualifying fee. A person may not be a candidate for Council and Mayor in the same election. Only electors of the Village who have resided continuously in the Village for at least one year preceding the date of such filing (and in the respective Residential Area from which the candidate may seek to qualify for election) shall be eligible to hold the Office of Councilmember, including Mayor. 
(b)  A vacancy in a candidacy for the office of Councilmember shall occur upon the death, withdrawal or removal of a candidate. If any qualified candidate dies, withdraws or is removed from the ballot following the end of the qualifying period, and in the event such action leaves fewer than two (2) candidates for that office, then the qualifying period for that particular office shall commence at noon on the day following the day that the vacancy in candidacy occurred, and additional qualification papers shall be available for that particular office in the office of the Village Clerk until noon, fourteen (14) days subsequent to the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of the original candidate. A candidate who was a qualifying candidate at the beginning of the supplemental qualified period shall not be required to re-qualify during such period. The Village Council shall hold a special meeting within seven (7) days of such additional qualifying period for the purpose of announcing a vacancy in the candidacy, announcing the additional qualifying period, and taking any action that may be necessary to reschedule the election for that particular office. If the closing date of the additional qualifying period is less than twenty (20) days before the date of the scheduled election, the Village Council shall schedule a special election for that particular office, which election shall be held at least twenty (20) days, but no more than thirty-five (35) days subsequent to the last day of the additional qualifying period. This procedure shall apply only in the event of the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of any candidate who qualified during the original qualifying period for such office and any subsequent deaths, withdrawals or removal from the ballot of a candidate's name, which provides for fewer than two (2) candidates for an office, shall result in the remaining candidate being duly elected pursuant to Section 5.1(h). 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 2.5 - Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a Councilmember shall become vacant upon his/her death, resignation, disability, suspension or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or by forfeiture of his/her office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. 
i)  Forfeiture by disqualification. A Councilmember shall forfeit his/her office if at any time during his/her term s/he (1) ceases to maintain his/her permanent residence in the Village, (2) in the case of a Residential Area Councilmember, upon his/her ceasing to reside in his/her respective Residential Area, or (3) otherwise ceases, to be a qualified elector of the Village. 
ii)  Forfeiture by absence. A Councilmember shall be subject to forfeiture of his/her office, in the discretion of the remaining Councilmembers, if s/he is absent with good cause from any six (6) regular meetings of the Council during any calendar year, or if s/he is absent without good cause from any four (4), or three (3) as to the Mayor, consecutive regular meetings of the Council, whether or not during the same calendar year. 
iii)  Procedures. The Council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications of its members and shall hear all questions relating to forfeiture of a Councilmember's office, including whether or not good cause for absence has been or may be established. The burden of establishing good cause shall be on the Councilmember in question; provided, however, that any Councilmember may at any time during any duly held meeting move to establish good cause for the absence of him/herself or the absence of any other Councilmember, from any past, present or future meeting(s), which motion, if carried, shall be conclusive. A Councilmember whose qualifications are in question, or, who is otherwise subject to forfeiture of his/her office, shall not vote on any such matters. The Councilmember in question shall be entitled to a public hearing(s) on request regarding an alleged forfeiture of office. If a public hearing is requested, notice thereof shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the Village at least one week in advance of the hearing. Any final determination by the Council that a Councilmember has forfeited his/her office shall be made by resolution. All votes and other acts of the Councilmember in question prior to the effective date of such resolution shall be valid regardless of the grounds of forfeiture. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy on the Council shall be filled as follows: 
i)  If less than six (6) months remain in the unexpired term, the vacancy shall be filled by a nominee of the Mayor, within thirty (30) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, subject to confirmation by the Council. 
ii)  If six (6) months or more remain in the unexpired term, the vacancy shall be filled by a nominee of the Mayor within thirty (30) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, subject to confirmation by the Council. The nominee shall fill the vacancy until the next regularly scheduled election in Miami-Dade County, unless the Council is unable to confirm a nominee, in which case a special election to fill that vacancy shall be held no later than ninety (90) days following the occurrence of the vacancy. 
iii)  If the Mayor's position becomes vacant, the Vice-Mayor shall complete the term of Mayor if less than six (6) months remain in the unexpired term. The vacancy thus created on the Council shall be filled in the manner that the vacancy of a Councilmember is generally filled under this Charter. The Council shall then appoint a new Vice-Mayor. If the elected Mayor shall be returned to office, s/he shall automatically resume the duties of the office for the balance of the term for which elected and the appointment to the office, filled in accordance with this section shall be rescinded, and the Vice-Mayor shall be returned to complete the balance of his/her term. Nevertheless, if six (6) months or more remain in the unexpired term, a special election shall be held for the election of a new Mayor within ninety (90) days following the occurrence of the vacancy. 
iv)  A vacancy in any Residential Area seat shall be filled by a qualified person residing in the respective Residential Area. A vacancy in the At-Large Seat shall be filled by any qualified elector of the Village. 
v)  Persons filling vacancies shall meet the qualifications specified in this Article 2. 
vi)  If no candidate for a vacancy meets the qualifications under this Article for that vacancy, the Council shall appoint a person qualified under this Article to fill the vacancy, who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled election for the balance of the original term, but only after a public hearing and in addition to regular notice requirements, if such vacancy applies to a specific Residential Area, after five (5) day mailed notice is given to all electors of that particular Residential Area. 
vii)  Notwithstanding any quorum requirements established herein, if at any time the full membership of the Council is reduced to less than a quorum, the remaining members may, by majority vote, appoint additional members to the extent otherwise permitted or required under this subsection (c). 
viii)  In the event that all members of the Council are removed by death, disability, recall, forfeiture of office and/or resignation, the Governor shall appoint interim Councilmembers who shall call a special election within not less than 30 days or more than 60 days after such appointment. Such election shall be held in the same manner as the first elections under this Charter; provided, however, that if there are less than six months remaining in any of the unexpired terms, such interim Council appointee(s) by the Governor shall serve out the unexpired terms. Appointees must meet all requirements for candidates provided for in Article 2. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Referendum of 11-6-18) 
Section 2.6 - Compensation; Reimbursement for Expenses. 
    Councilmembers (including the Mayor) shall serve without compensation but shall receive reimbursement in accordance with applicable law, or as may be otherwise provided by ordinance, for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
Section 2.7 - Recall. 
    The electors of the Village shall have the power to recall and to remove from office any elected official of the Village to the extent permitted by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Florida. The minimum number of electors of the Village which shall be required to initiate a recall petition shall be ten (10%) percent of the total number of electors of the Village as of the preceding Village election and shall be accomplished in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 5.2. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE 

Section 3.1 - Village Manager. 
    There shall be a Village Manager (the "Manager") who shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed at the next Council meeting by a majority of the Council, including the Mayor. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Village and shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her education, experience, executive and administrative qualifications. The Manager shall be responsible to the Mayor and the Village Council for the administration of all Village affairs. The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of all departments, divisions and agencies of the Village government and for carrying out policies adopted by the Village Council. The salary of the Village Manager shall be set by the Village Council. 
(a)  No Councilmember shall be eligible for appointment as Village Manager during the term for which s/he has been elected and until two (2) years after its expiration. The Village Administrator need not be a resident of the Village. 
(b)  Removal. During the first six (6) months of service, the Manager may be removed by the Mayor, as confirmed by a majority of the Council, upon at least thirty (30) days prior written notice. If removed after serving six (6) months, the Manager may demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the Council prior to the date on which such removal is to take effect. Pending that hearing, the Council may suspend the Manager but without loss of pay. The action of the Mayor in removing the Manager shall be final, as of the date set forth in the notice of removal, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council, including the Mayor. In either event, subject to the timeframes and procedures set forth herein, the Council may elect to remove the Manager without the approval of the Mayor, provided that three (3) out of the four (4) Councilmembers, excluding the Mayor, vote for recommendation of removal and the subsequent removal, if a hearing is necessary. 
Section 3.2 - Powers and Duties of the Village Manager. 
    The Manager shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the appointment, supervision and removal of all Village employees; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and offices but not Village boards or agencies, unless so directed by the Council from time to time; 
(3)  Attend all Council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion but not the right to vote; 
(4)  Insure that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement and/or administration by him/her or by officers subject to his/her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the Council a proposed annual budget and capital program; 
(6)  Submit to the Council and make available to the public an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the Village as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Prepare such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of Village departments, offices, boards and agencies; 
(8)  Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the Village and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the Village as s/he deems to be in the best interests of the Village; 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the Council. 
Section 3.3 - Acting Village Manager. 
    To perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence or disability, the Manager may designate by letter filed with the Council, a qualified Village administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of Manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the Village to serve until the Manager shall return or his/her disability shall cease. If the Manager is terminated, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint an acting Manager until a permanent appointment is made pursuant to Section 3.1. 
(Referendum of 11-8-06) 
Section 3.4 - Bond of Village Manager. 
    The Village Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the Council, and in such amount as the Council may fix, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his/her duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village. 
Section 3.5 - Village Clerk. 
    The Mayor shall nominate, and the Council, including the Mayor, by majority shall confirm, a Village Clerk (the "Clerk"). The Clerk shall give notice of Council meetings to its members and the public, shall keep the journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record and shall perform such other duties, not in conflict with the administrative duties of the Village Manager, and as the Council may prescribe from time to time. The Clerk shall report to the Council and shall be removed by the Council utilizing the same procedure for the Clerk as set forth for the Manager on Section 3.1(b). The compensation and benefits provided to the Clerk shall be set by the Council. 
Section 3.6 - Village Attorney. 
    The Mayor may nominate, and the Council, including the Mayor, by majority shall confirm an individual attorney to act as the Village Attorney under such terms and conditions as may be established by the Council, from time to time, consistent with this Charter. The Village attorney shall report to the Council and may be removed by the Council at any time. 
Section 3.7 - Village Code of Administrative Regulations. 
    The Manager shall maintain a Village Code of administrative regulations. The Council shall, by ordinance, establish appropriate procedures for reasonable notice and public comment on proposed administrative regulations prior to taking final action on the same. 
Section 3.8 - Expenditure of Village Funds. 
    No funds of the Village shall be expended except pursuant to duly approved appropriations. 
Section 3.9 - Village Boards and Agencies. 
    The Council shall establish or terminate such boards and agencies as it may deem advisable from time to time. The boards and agencies shall report to the Council. 
Section 3.10 - Competitive Bid Requirement/Purchasing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, contracts for public improvements and purchases of supplies, materials or services shall be awarded or made on the basis of clearly drawn specifications and competitive bids, except in cases where the Council, based on the written recommendation of the Village Manager, specifically determines by affirmative vote of four Councilmembers that it is impracticable or not advantageous to the Village to do so. The Village Council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. 
(b)  The Village Manager, by ordinance, may be granted purchasing power without competitive bidding. 
(c)  No contract or order shall be issued to any vendor unless or until the director of finance or the Village Manager certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered budget appropriation to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
ARTICLE 4. - LEGISLATIVE 

Section 4.1 - Council Meeting Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The Council shall hold at least eleven (11) regular monthly meetings in each calendar year, at such times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor or of a majority of the Councilmembers and upon no less than forty-eight (48) hours' notice to each member and the public, or such shorter time as a majority of the Council shall deem necessary in case of an emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace. 
(b)  Rules and Journal. The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business and shall keep a journal open for public inspection. 
(c)  Quorum and Voting. A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the Council. Voting on ordinances shall be by roll call on final reading and shall be recorded in the journal. All other matters shall be by voice vote unless a Councilmember or the Village Clerk requests otherwise. No action of the Council, except as otherwise provided in the Charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) Councilmembers. 
(d)  Meeting Time Limits. No meeting of the Council shall extend later than midnight except upon the affirmative vote of a majority of members present at the meeting. 
Section 4.2 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointment and Removals. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any Village administrative officers or employees whom the Manager or any of his/her subordinates are empowered to appoint. 
(b)  Interference With Administration. 
i)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations made in good faith and in accordance with a resolution adopted by the Council, the Council and any of its individual members shall deal with Village officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. It is the express intent of this Charter that recommendations for improvement in Village government operations by individual Councilmembers be made solely to and through the Manager. No individual Councilmembers shall give orders to the Manager. 
ii)  Any willful violation of this Section by the Mayor or any Councilmember shall be grounds for his/her removal from office by an action brought in the Circuit Court by the State Attorney of Miami-Dade County. 
(c)  Holding Other Office. No elected Village official shall hold any appointive Village office or Village employment while in office. No former elected Village official shall hold any compensated appointive Village office or Village employment until one (1) year after the expiration of his/her term. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 4.3 - Ordinances. 
(a)  Actions Requiring an Ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this Charter to be effected or authorized by ordinance, those acts of the Village Council shall be by ordinance which: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative regulation or establish, alter or abolish any Village office, department, board or agency; 
(2)  Establish a rule or regulation the violation of which carries a penalty; 
(3)  Levy taxes or appropriate funds; 
(4)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Set service or user charges for municipal services or grant administrative authority to set such charges; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey or lease or authorize by administrative action the conveyance or lease of any lands of the Village; or 
(8)  Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(b)  Procedure. The Village Council shall adopt procedures with respect to the passage of ordinances in accordance with applicable law. 
Section 4.4 - Emergency Ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may adopt, in the manner provided in this Section, one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not: levy taxes, grant, renew or extend any municipal franchise; set service or user charges for any municipal services; or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided under the emergency appropriations provisions of this Charter if applicable. 
(a)  Form. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated in a preamble as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. 
(b)  Procedure. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced and shall be enacted by no less than a 3/5 majority of the membership of the Council. After its adoption, the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other ordinances. 
(c)  Effective Date. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the ordinance. 
(d)  Repeal. Every emergency ordinance except emergency appropriation ordinances shall automatically be repealed as of the sixty-first (61st) day following its effective date, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance under regular procedures, or if the emergency still exists, in the manner specified in this Section. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(e)  Emergency Appropriations. The Council may make emergency appropriations in the manner provided in this Section. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency ordinance (subject to Section 4.10) authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes, including renewals thereof, shall be payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the fiscal year in which the emergency appropriation ordinance was originally adopted. 
Section 4.5 - Annual Budget Adoption. 
(a)  Balanced Budget. Each annual budget adopted by the Council shall be a balanced budget. 
(b)  Budget Adoption. The Council shall by ordinance adopt the annual budget on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of September of each year. If it fails to adopt the annual budget by this date, the Council may by resolution direct that the amounts appropriated for current operations for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year for a period of fifteen (15) days and renewed by resolution each fifteen (15) days, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts an annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year. An ordinance adopting an annual budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts specified therein. 
(c)  Specific Appropriation. The budget shall be specific as to the nature of each category of appropriations therein. Reasonable appropriations may be made for contingencies, but only within defined spending categories. 
Section 4.6 - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the Village government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of the following calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the annual budget and accounting year. 
Section 4.7 - Appropriation Amendments During the Fiscal Year. 
(a)  Supplemental Appropriations. If, during any fiscal year, revenues in excess of those estimated in the annual budget are available for appropriation, the Council may by ordinance make supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  Reduction of Appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he/she shall report in writing to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, and his/her recommendations as to the remedial action to be taken. The Council shall then take such action as it deems appropriate to prevent any deficit spending. 
Section 4.8 - Authentication, Recording and Disposition of Ordinances; Resolutions and Charter Amendments. 
(a)  Authentication. The Mayor and the Clerk shall authenticate by their signature all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. In addition, when Charter amendments have been approved by the electors, the Mayor and the Clerk shall authenticate by their signatures the Charter amendment, such authentication to reflect the approval of the Charter amendment by the electorate. 
(b)  Recording. The Clerk shall keep properly indexed books in which shall be recorded, in full, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. Ordinances shall, at the direction of the Council, be periodically codified. The Clerk shall also maintain the Village Charter in current form and shall enter all Charter amendments. 
(c)  Record Availability. The Council shall, by ordinance, establish procedures for making all resolutions, ordinances, technical Codes adopted by reference, and this Charter available to the people of the Village for public inspection and available for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 4.9 - Annual Tax Levy. 
    The Village shall have the right to levy, assess and collect all such taxes as are permitted by law, including without limitation ad valorem, excise, franchise or privilege taxes and taxes on services and utilities. 
Section 4.10 - Independent Audit. 
    The Village Council shall provide for an annual independent audit of all Village accounts and may provide more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Those audits shall be made in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest in the fiscal affairs of the Village governed or by its officers. (Residency, per se, shall not constitute a direct or indirect interest.) A summary of the results, including any deficiencies found, shall be made public. In making such audit, proprietary functions shall be audited separately and adequate depreciation on proprietary facilities shall be accrued so the public may determine the amount of any direct or any indirect subsidy. 
ARTICLE 5. - ELECTIONS 

Section 5.1 - Elections. 
(a)  Electors. Any person who is a resident of the Village, has qualified as an elector of the State and registers to vote in the manner prescribed by law shall be an elector of the Village. 
(b)  Nonpartisan Elections. All elections for the Village Council and Mayor shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and no ballot shall show the party designation of any candidate. 
(c)  Election Dates. A general election shall be held in November of each even-numbered year, on the day U.S. Congressional elections are held, or if none is held in any such year, on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November. A runoff election, if necessary, shall be held on the third Tuesday in November. 
(d)  General Election. The ballot for the general election shall contain the names of all qualified candidates for Mayor, if the Mayor's term is expiring, and for each of the two (2) Council positions which are to be filled as a result of two (2) members' terms expiring, and shall instruct electors to cast one (1) vote for Mayor, if applicable, and one vote for each Council seat, with a maximum of one (1) vote per candidate. If any candidate for Mayor receives a number of votes greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of ballots cast, such candidate shall be the duly elected mayor. If any candidate(s) for Council receive(s) a number of votes greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of ballots cast, such candidate(s) shall be duly elected to the Council. 
(e)  Runoff Election. The ballot for the runoff election shall contain the names of the two (2) candidates for Mayor, if applicable, and the names of the two candidates for each Council seat who received the most votes in the general election. The ballot shall instruct electors to cast one vote for Mayor and to cast one vote for each Council seat, with a maximum of one (1) vote per candidate. The candidate for Mayor receiving the most votes shall be duly elected Mayor. The candidates for each Council seat receiving the most votes shall be duly elected to that Council seat. 
(f)  Ties. In the event that there is a tie in the regular election and it is necessary to break the tie in order to determine the two (2) names to be placed on the ballot at the runoff election, or in the event that there is a tie in the runoff election, then the winner or winners shall be determined by the drawing of straws, with the person or persons drawing the longest straw or straws being declared the winner. 
(g)  Special Elections. Special elections, when required, shall be scheduled by the Council at such times and in such manner as shall be consistent with this Charter. 
(h)  Single Candidates. No election for Mayor or any Council seat shall be required in any election if there is only one duly qualified candidate for Mayor or for any Council seat. That candidate shall be considered elected automatically. 
(i)  Absentee Votes. Absentee voting will be permitted as provided by the laws of the State and under such conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance from time to time; provided, however, that no ordinance shall limit the right to vote by absentee ballot available under State law. 
(j)  Commencement of Terms. The term of office of an elected official shall commence on the seventh (7) calendar day following the certification by the Village Clerk of the election at which the person is elected, at 12 o'clock noon unless that day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or Federal holiday, in which case it shall be the following business day. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2001-03,  1, 7-10-01; Referendum of 11-6-12) 
Section 5.2 - Initiative and Referendum. 
(a)  Power to Initiate and Reconsider Ordinances. 
i)  Initiative. The electors of the Village shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a Village election, provided that such power shall not extend to the annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money, levying taxes or setting salaries of Village officers or employees, pursuant to such annual budget. 
ii)  Referendum. 
The electors of the Village shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a Village election, provided that such power shall not extend to the annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money, levying taxes or setting salaries of Village officers or employees, pursuant to such annual budget. 
(b)  Commencement of Proceedings. Any ten (10) electors may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the Clerk or other official designated by the Council an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the Clerk or other official designated by the Council shall at the committee's request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee at the committee's expense. Petitioners' proposed ordinance shall be approved as to legal sufficiency by the Village Attorney prior to circulation. 
(c)  Petitions. 
i)  Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by electors of the Village equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of electors registered to vote at the last regular Village election. 
ii)  Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be assembled as one instrument of filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
iii)  Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that s/he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his/her presence that s/he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer has an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
iv)  Filing Deadline. All initiative and referendum petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days of the date on which proceedings with respect to such initiative or referendum are commenced. 
(d)  Procedure for Filing. 
i)  Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within twenty (20) days after initiative petition is filed or within five (5) days after a referendum petition is filed, the Clerk or other official designated by the Council shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency ("the Certificate") specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the Certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in subsection (c) of this Section. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk or other official designated by the Council within two (2) business days after receiving the copy of the Certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such Certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of subsection (c) of this Section, and within five (5) days after it is filed the Clerk or other official designated by the Council, shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mall as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Council review under paragraph (ii) of this subsection (d) within the time required, the Clerk or other official designated by the Council shall promptly present his/her certificate to the Council and within sixty (60) days the Certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
ii)  Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate as its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(e)  Action on Petitions. 
i)  Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal, all in the manner provided in Article 4. If the Council falls to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within forty-five (45) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the electors of the Village. If the Council fails to act on a proposed initiative ordinance or a referred ordinance within the time period contained in paragraph (i) of subsection (e) of this Section, the Council shall be deemed to have failed to adopt the proposed initiative ordinance or failed to repeal the referred ordinance on the last day that the Council was authorized to act on such matter. 
ii)  Submission to Electors. The vote of the Village on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) or more than sixty (60) days from the date the Council acted or was deemed to have acted pursuant to paragraph (i) of this subsection (e) that the petition was determined sufficient. If no regular election is to be held within the period described in this paragraph, the Council shall provide for a special election, except that the Council may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an earlier date within the described period. Copies of the proposed or refereed ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
iii)  Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15th) day preceding the day scheduled for a vote by the Village by filing with the Clerk or other official designated by the Council a request for withdrawal signed by at least eight/tenths ( 8/10 ) of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(f)  Results of Election. 
i)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. If the proposed initiative ordinance fails, it or any ordinance that is substantially similar, may not be submitted in accordance with this Article for at least a period of one (1) year from the election. 
ii)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Referendum of 11-6-18) 
Section 5.3 - Form of Ballots. 
    A Charter amendment, ordinance or other ballot issue to be voted on by the electors shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described [amendment/ordinance/proposal] be adopted?" Immediately below such question shall appear, in the following order, the word "YES" and also the word "NO". 
ARTICLE 6. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS 

Section 6.1 - Procedure to Amend. 
    The Charter may be amended in accordance with these provisions: 
(a)  Initiation by Ordinance. The Council may, by ordinance, propose amendments to this Charter and upon passage of the initiating ordinance shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held within the Village or at a special election called for such purpose. 
(b)  Initiation by Petition. The electors of the Village may propose amendments to this Charter by petition. Each petition proposing amendments to this Charter shall be commenced, in the form, filed, certified as to its sufficiency and/or withdrawn in the same manner as an ordinance proposed by initiative pursuant to Section 5.2. Upon certification of the sufficiency of the petition, the Council shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election if such election is scheduled to be held not less than sixty (60) days or more than one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date on which the petition was certified or at a special election called for that purpose. A special election, if necessary, shall be held not less than sixty (60) days or more than one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date on which the petition was certified. 
(c)  Charter revision commission. Every six (6) years, commencing March 2006, at its first regular meeting in March, the Council shall appoint a Charter revision commission ("Commission") consisting of five (5) persons including three (3) from the Residential Areas from which the Councilmembers were elected, except in the case of the At-Large Councilmember in which case the Commission member may reside anywhere in the Village. In addition, the Mayor may appoint one (1) person to the Commission who is a member of the Council but who shall be a nonvoting Commission member. The Mayor shall not be eligible for appointment to the revision commission. The revision Commission shall commence its proceedings within forty-five (45) days after appointment by Council. If the Commission determines that a revision is needed, including but not limited to a change in the boundaries or number of Residential Areas, it shall draft such amendments to this Charter as it deems appropriate and submit the same to the Village Council no later than the ninetieth (90th) day after their appointment by the Council. The Council shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held within the Village or at a special election called for such purpose in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.1 except that the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of such Section shall not apply. 
(d)  Results of Election. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed amendment vote for its adoption, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting amendments are adopted at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01; Referendum of 11-8-06) 
Section 6.2 - Form of Ballot. 
    Any Charter amendment ballot issue to be voted on by the electors shall be presented on the ballot in the form required by Section 5.3 of this Charter. 
ARTICLE 7. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.1 - Severability. 
    If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter or the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Section 7.2 - Conflicts of Interest; Ethical Standards. 
    All Councilmembers, officials and employees of the Village shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by law. In addition, the Council may, by ordinance, establish a Code of ethics for Councilmembers, officials and employees of the Village which may be supplemental to law, but in no case may such an ordinance diminish the provisions of this Section or of general law. 
    Without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing, no Councilmembers shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock or other equity ownership in any corporation or entity, in any contract or in the sale to the Village or to a contractor supplying the Village of any land or rights or interests in any land, material supplies, or services unless, after full disclosure to the Village Council of the nature and extent of such interest, the same is authorized by the Council before the event or accepted and ratified by the Council after the event. No member of the Village Council who possesses such a financial interest shall vote on, or participate in the Council deliberations concerning, any such contract or sale. Any violation of this Section with the knowledge of the person or entity contracting with the Village shall render the contract voidable by the Council. 
Section 7.3 - Village Personnel System. 
    All new employments, appointments and promotions of Village officers and employees shall be made pursuant to personnel procedures to be established by the Manager from time to time. 
Section 7.4 - Variation of Pronouns. 
    All pronouns and any variation thereof used in this Charter shall be deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neutral, singular or plural as the identity of the person or persons shall require and are not intended to describe, interpret, define or limit the scope, extent, or intent of this Charter. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 7.5 - No Discrimination. 
    The Village shall not adopt any ordinance that discriminates against any person due to race, religion, color, national origin, physical or mental disability, creed, age, sexual preference or sex. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 7.6 - Conflicting Provisions. 
    In case of a conflict between the provisions of this Charter and the provisions of the Code to be adopted pursuant thereto and/or the Citizen's Bill of Rights, the Charter terms shall control. Moreover, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to alter, abolish, affect or amend the general laws of this State, now in force, or which hereinafter may be enacted relative to or affecting this Village, except where such laws are in direct conflict in which case the provisions of this Charter or Code adopted pursuant thereto shall supersede and be in full force and effect. 
Section 7.7 - Effect of Current County and State Laws. 
    All Miami-Dade County ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or the Code adopted pursuant thereto. To the extent the Constitution and the laws of the State of Florida permit, all laws relating to or affecting this municipality which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are superseded to the extent they are inconsistent or interfere with the operation of this Charter or the Code adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Referendum of 5-1-01) 
Section 7.8. - Violation of Charter. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the council may censure, reprimand or levy fines as a sanction against any councilmember or charter officials who have been determined by the council to have intentionally violated any provision of this charter or any explicit directive of the council. The council shall establish by ordinance a fine schedule and administrative procedure which shall include an option for the appointment of a special magistrate to deliberate on such matters. 
(Referendum of 11-6-18) 
APPENDIX A. - RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

Residential Areas Map 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter  3-12-96 arts. 1-8 Arts. 1-8  5- 1-01 Bill of Rights, 1.1, 1.3, 2.2-2.5, 2.7, 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 7.4-7.7       Rpld 8.1, 8.3-8.5, 8.10, App. B 11- 8-06 3.3, 6.1(c)       Added Title(Historical note) 11- 6-12 Historical note Citizen's bill of rights 1.4(b), 5.1(j) 11- 6-18 1 2.3(c) 2 2.3(a), (b) 2.5(c)(iv) 3       Added 7.8 4 5.2  
  
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2001-03  7-10-01 1 5.1(c)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the village, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the village council: 
    And, or . The term "and" may read "or" and the term "or" may read "and," if the sense requires it. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Village of Pinecrest as printed in part I of this volume. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida," as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed shall be less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Council, village council. Whenever the term "council" or "village council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the village council of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition of the Florida Statutes, as amended. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. Terms purporting to give joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of such officers or persons. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things, as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall include the term "affirm." 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions and other agencies. References to any officer, department, board, commission or any other agency, unless otherwise indicated, shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of the Village of Pinecrest." Such references shall indicate any authorized representative or designee. 
    Person. The term "person" includes individuals, children, firms, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes handwriting, printing, typewriting and all other methods and means of forming letters and characters upon paper, stone, wood or other materials. 
    Village. The term "village" shall mean the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
Sec. 1-3. - Headings and catchlines of sections. 
    The chapter, article and division headings and the catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed at the head of each section, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the chapter, article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be a title of such chapter, article, division or section or as any part of the chapter, article, division or section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapter, article, division or section, including the headings or catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history note appearing in parentheses after each section, which indicates the source of the section, shall not have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
    The various editor's notes and references appearing throughout the Code are merely for the convenience of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances saved from repeal. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the village. 
(2)  Any ordinance levying taxes or fees or charges or any appropriation or budget. 
(3)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance on any person or corporation. 
(4)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(5)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the village officers or employees or any personnel regulations. 
(7)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the village. 
(8)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, widening, relocating, repairing, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the village or establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the village. 
(9)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning, rezoning or land use regulations. 
(10)  Any ordinance pertaining to traffic or parking regulations applying to specific streets. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village. 
(13)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(14)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances shall remain in full force and effect as if set out at length in this Code and are on file in the village clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of Code on prior acts or rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code, nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect any section or subsection of this Code shall be numbered consecutively, but shall refer specifically to the section or subsection affected, and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or as omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the village council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following manner: "Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a new section to be numbered section ____________ , which section shall read as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number in the following language: "Section (chapter, article or division) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinecrest, Florida, is hereby repealed." 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the village council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the village council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during that period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since such would have been enacted by the village council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 97-20, adopted December 9, 1997, amended the Code by removing the general penalty, which was codified as  1-12. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the village officers or employees or any personnel regulations saved from repeal,  1-6(6); planning, ch. 20; planning and zoning board,  20-26 et seq.; local planning agency,  20-61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE SEAL 

Sec. 2-26. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the official seal of the village shall mean the following identifying symbol: 

Village Seal 
(Ord. No. 96-11,  1(1), 11-19-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-27. - Execution and acknowledgement of written instruments. 
    Whenever it shall be necessary for the village, under the authority of its village council, its Charter or its Code and the general laws of the state, to execute contracts, deeds or other documents on behalf of the village, the official seal of the village shall be affixed to such contract, deed or other document. 
(Ord. No. 96-11,  1(2), 11-19-96) 
Sec. 2-28. - Prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to print for the purpose of sale or distribution or circulate, manufacture, publish, use, display or offer for sale any letters, papers, documents or items of merchandise which simulate the official seal of the village or the stationery of a real or fictitious agency, department or instrumentality of the village without the expressed written authority of the village council or its designee. The unauthorized use shall be punishable as provided in F.S.  775.082 and 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 96-11,  1(3), 11-19-96) 
Sec. 2-29. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not be applicable to the village, its agencies, departments, instrumentalities, quasi-judicial and advisory bodies, acting within the scope of their official capacities. 
(Ord. No. 96-11,  1(4), 11-19-96) 
Secs. 2-30-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VILLAGE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Elections,  2-231 et seq. 

Sec. 2-56. - Appointment of vice mayor; removal. 
(a)  Beginning in November 2001, a councilmember shall serve as vice mayor, pursuant to the provisions of section 2.2(b) of the Village Charter, with the office of vice mayor rotating on a yearly basis amongst each councilmember in the following seat number order: 
  Seat 4 
  Seat 1 
  Seat 3 
  Seat 2 
(b)  In the event the duly designated councilmember declines to serve as vice mayor or a vacancy in the office of the vice mayor is created because the councilmember serving as vice mayor vacates the office of councilmember subject to the provisions of section 2.5(a) of the Village Charter, the council shall then elect a vice mayor from amongst the other councilmembers for the remaining term. 
(c)  The vice mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed at any time by a 4/5 vote of the council. If a vacancy in the office of vice mayor is created by the council's removal of the vice mayor, the council shall then elect a vice mayor from amongst the other councilmembers for the remaining term. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 2-57. - Advisory committees. 
    The village council, by resolution, may establish advisory committees subject to the standards set forth in this section. Committees may advise in certain service areas or on specific matters, as outlined in the committee's enabling resolution, and may issue recommendations for the village council's consideration. Committees shall be advisory in nature and not have oversight authority which conflicts with the administration of village affairs. 
(1)  Membership. 
a.  Applicants. The village clerk shall publish a notice advising the public of vacancies on a committee. The notice shall include a provision soliciting applicants interested in serving on a committee. 
b.  Appointments and terms. The membership of each committee shall include at least one appointment from each member of the village council. All appointments shall be residents of the village. All appointments shall be for a one-year term. Additional members may be specified in the enabling resolution establishing the committee. The village clerk shall notify the village council of all appointments by submission of a committee roster on an annual basis. 
c.  Vacancies. The village clerk shall notify the village council of all vacancies on a committee. Vacancies resulting from an individual councilmembers' failure to make a requisite appointment, within 60 days after the village clerk's notification, may be filled by the village council. 
d.  Attendance. Committee members that are absent three or more times during their term shall be subject to removal by the village council. 
e.  Compensation. Committee members shall serve without compensation and shall not be reimbursed for travel. mileage or per diem expenses. 
f.  Term limits. Committee members may only serve for up to four consecutive one-year terms on a committee. 
(2)  Leadership. 
a.  Chair and vice chair. During the organizational meeting of the committee each year, the membership shall elect a committee member to serve as chair. The committee may also elect a vice chair to preside in the absence of the chair. 
(3)  Standard procedures. 
a.  Staff liaison. The village manager shall designate a staff member to serve as a liaison to each committee. The liaison shall attend committee meetings and provide staff support. 
b.  Committee action form. The liaison shall prepare and submit to the village clerk a completed committee action form after each meeting. The committee action form shall serve as the record of the meeting and shall include the date of any future meetings. The village clerk shall submit to the village council a copy of the committee action form from each committee meeting at a subsequent regular village council meeting. 
c.  Notice of meetings. The village clerk shall be responsible for providing public notice of all committee meetings. 
d.  Agenda. The village clerk, in consultation with the chairperson and liaison of each committee. shall prepare an agenda for each committee meeting. 
(4)  Sunset provision. A committee shall remain in existence for three years after the effective date of the enabling resolution. unless a shorter period is specified in the enabling resolution. at which time the committee shall cease to exist unless the village council adopts a new enabling resolution. 
(5)  Applicability. 
a.  Boards and agencies: Special committees. The foregoing standards shall only apply to advisory committees and shall not apply to boards or agencies established by the village council pursuant to section 3.9 of the Village Charter or other special committees that may be constituted from time to time. 
b.  This section shall supersede any resolutions previously adopted by the village council relating to advisory committees. However, all current appointments at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall remain in effect until the conclusion of the appointee's term. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7,  1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 2-58. - Committee of the whole. 
    The council may meet as the committee of the whole (COW) subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  At a regular meeting of the council, members of the council may move to "commit" an item for a COW meeting agenda. 
(2)  COW meetings shall be held, on an as needed basis. 
(3)  The COW shall submit a recommendation to the council on consensus items (non-consensus items may be added to a future agenda for further discussion). 
(4)  COW recommendations shall appear as a consent agenda item on a regular meeting agenda of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-6,  1, 10-14-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-6,  1, adopted October 14, 2014, amended the Code by adding new provisions to be designated  2-57 and 2-58. In order to prevent the duplication of section numbers, the new provisions have been designated as  2-58 and 2-59 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-59. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  Agenda items. The village clerk, with concurrence by the village manager, may place items on the consent agenda for each regular meeting of the council. Consent agenda items include matters that usually do not require discussion or explanation, are non-controversial, have already been discussed and do not require further explanation such as matters from the committee of the whole, or are accompanied by a staff analysis or memorandum. Consent agenda items may include ministerial tasks such as, but not limited to, approval of minutes, resolutions and reports. 
(b)  Public comments. Pursuant to F.S.  286.0114, members of the public may comment on consent agenda items prior to the council's consideration of the consent agenda. 
(c)  Removal from consent agenda. Items may be removed from the consent agenda by a member of the council. An item removed from the consent agenda will then be discussed and acted on separately immediately following the consideration of the consent agenda. 
(d)  Approval. Consent agenda items shall be approved en masse by a roll call vote of the council with each item separately recorded in the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-6,  1, 10-14-14) 
Note- See editor's note,  2-58. 
Secs. 2-60-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-91. - Building and planning department. 
    The building and planning department is established. 
(Ord. No. 97-1,  1(1-1), 1-7-97; Ord. No. 98-10,  1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2000-4,  1, 9-12-00) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; planning, ch. 20. 
Sec. 2-92. - Finance department. 
    The finance department is established. 
(Ord. No. 97-1,  1(1-2), 1-7-97; Ord. No. 98-10,  1, 10-13-98) 
Cross reference- Finance generally,  2-261 et seq.; taxation, ch. 28. 
Sec. 2-93. - Parks and recreation department. 
    The parks and recreation department is established. 
(Ord. No. 2000-4,  1, 9-12-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-4,  1, adopted September 12, 2000, amended the Code by adding a new  2-93 and renumbering former  2-93 and 2-94 as new  2-94 and 2-95. 
Sec. 2-94. - Police department. 
(a)  Established. The police department is established. 
(b)  Commission, powers, authority to make arrests. All village police officers, upon being duly sworn and commissioned and certified by the state, shall be peace officers and as such shall be conservators of the peace and shall have power to restrain and detain citizens; to issue warnings and citations; to make arrests and engage in all activities as authorized under the Constitution and laws of the United States, the constitution and laws of the state, the ordinances of the county, and the ordinances of the village; and to execute lawful warrants and civil process directed to village officers. 
(Ord. No. 97-1,  1(1-3), 1-7-97; Ord. No. 98-10,  1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2000-4,  1, 9-12-00) 
Note- See editor's note,  2-93. 
Sec. 2-95. - Public works department. 
    The public works department is established. 
(Ord. No. 98-10,  1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2000-4,  1, 9-12-00) 
Note- See editor's note,  2-94. 
Sec. 2-96. - Pinecrest Gardens. 
    Pinecrest Gardens is established. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4,  1, 11-10-09) 
Secs. 2-97-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE COMPLIANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1,  2, adopted January 12, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former Art. V,  2-131-2-147, and adding a new Art. V,  2-131, 2-132, 2-141-2-149, and 2-161-2-175. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 96-14, adopted December 11, 1996; and Ord. No. 97-9, adopted July 1, 1997. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, adopted April 8, 2014, amended the title of Art. V. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-131. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the village council to create its own independent code enforcement system, separate and apart from Florida Statutes, Chapter 162, in order to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village, and to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing codes, ordinances, approved site plans, subdivision plats, and development orders in force in the village where a pending or repeat violation exists or continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-132. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning as defined. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future, words in the plural number include the singular number and vice versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Abandoned real property means any property that is vacant and is subject to a mortgage under a current notice of default and/or notice of mortgagee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or vacant properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
    Citation or civil violation notice shall mean a notice of violation with a civil penalty and fine, as provided for in the Code. 
    Clerk shall mean an employee of the building, planning and zoning department who is responsible for coordinating the administrative, processing and case management services for the code compliance and enforcement functions. 
    Code means collectively the Village of Pinecrest Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, any applicable sections of the Code of Miami-Dade County as made applicable to the village pursuant to article 8, section 8.3 and section 8.10 of the Village Charter, or the applicable building code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Code compliance officer means any sworn authorized agent or employee of the village whose duty it is to assure compliance with the Code. Training and qualifications of employees and agents as code compliance officers shall be established by the village. 
    Code compliance reminder shall mean a written warning issued to a violator(s) and may serve as the first notice that a violation is alleged in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. It shall be issued in accordance with the notice requirements contained in the definition for "notice" hereinbelow. 
    Continuing violation shall mean a violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time period for correction contained in either the code compliance reminder, citation, the order of the special magistrate, or order of the hearing officer. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to. overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of abandoned real property, as defined herein, statements by neighbors, passers-by. delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at public sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults. 
    Hearing officer is an individual, appointed pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, who is authorized to conduct hearings on appeals of civil violation notices. A hearing officer enters findings of fact, conclusions of law, and may adjust fines imposed pursuant to civil violation notices depending on evidence and testimony entered at the hearing. 
    Notice shall be provided to alleged violator(s) or property owner(s) by certified mail, return receipt requested, by hand-delivery or posting, or as provided in this article and F.S. ch. 162. 
    Notice of violation means any written notice issued to a violator in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances and F.S. ch. 162. 
    Probable cause shall mean that a reasonable belief exists that a code provision has been violated and that the violator committed, or is the person responsible for maintaining, the violation. 
    Property management company means a property manager, property maintenance company or similar entity or individual responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property. 
    Repeat violation means a code violation by a person or entity to whom a civil penalty or order has been imposed by a special magistrate, hearing officer, or civil court judge on the same provision of the Code within five years prior to the violation or finding. For purposes of the Code of Ordinances, a repeat violation shall be deemed to be a violation which reoccurs only after correction of the previous violation. A violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time prescribed for correction in the civil violation notice shall be treated as a continuing violation. 
    Special magistrate is an individual appointed pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, authorized to hold hearings, enter findings of fact, conclusions of law and to impose fines, liens and other noncriminal penalties. The special magistrate shall have the same jurisdiction and power as the code enforcement board as provided in F. S. ch. 162. 
    Uncorrectable violation means a violation which is determined by the special magistrate to be irreparable or irreversible in nature and which cannot be remedied after the violation has been committed because the violation constitutes a single prohibited act rather than an ongoing condition or circumstance. 
    Vacant means any building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
    Violator shall be defined as any individual or legal entity that has committed or is alleged to have committed a code violation or is legally responsible for a code violation including, but not limited to, a property owner or his agent, tenant, entity on the premises or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2011-12,  2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Secs. 2-133-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL MAGISTRATE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-141. - Procedure; qualifications, appointment and removal, compensation of special magistrates. 
(a)  The special magistrate process is designed as an enforcement process pertaining to homeowners and businesses of building, structural, zoning, licensing, and life safety type cases for which corrective action has not been taken. It is an expeditious and inexpensive method to resolve violations which have not been corrected after notice has been provided by the village. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, appointments of special magistrate shall be made by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the village council, as needed on the basis of experience or interest in code compliance. Appointments shall, whenever possible, include persons with zoning or construction experience. Such appointments shall be submitted to the village council for ratification. 
(c)  Special magistrates shall be licensed attorneys who are not residents of the village and shall possess outstanding reputations for civic pride, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability. 
(d)  Appointments shall be made for a term of one year. Special magistrates may be reappointed or removed at the discretion of the mayor, subject to ratification by the village council. 
(e)  Special magistrates shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by the village council for time spent at hearings only. 
(f)  If a special magistrates is removed from a case, the case may be assigned to another special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-142. - Powers of special magistrate. 
    Under this article, special magistrates shall have the power to: 
(1)  Apply the rules for the conduct of hearings adopted by the village council. 
(2)  Subpoena violators and witnesses for hearings. Subpoenas shall be served by the village police department or by the village staff, or as provided by ordinance. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Assess and order the payment or reduction of fines as provided according to ordinance and statute. 
(6)  Enter findings of fact, conclusions of law, and issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 2-143. - Village attorney to serve as counsel. 
    The village attorney shall represent the village at special magistrate hearings. If an appeal is taken pursuant to section 2-147 of this article, the village attorney shall represent the village at such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-144. - Authority to initiate enforcement proceedings. 
    Code compliance officers shall have the authority to initiate code enforcement proceedings. Enforcement proceedings shall be initiated via complaint from the public or as a result of an observed violation by a code compliance officer. Special magistrates shall not have authority to initiate such enforcement procedures. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 2-145. - Enforcement procedures; contents and service of notice; transfer of ownership obligations. 
(a)  A code compliance officer who finds a violation of the Code, a development order, an approved site plan, an approved subdivision plat, or any related conditions of approval shall issue a code compliance reminder stating that the violator has committed a violation of the Code and shall specify a reasonable time period within which the violator must correct the violation. This determination shall be based on consideration of fairness, practicality, ease of correction, ability to correct, severity of violation, or nature, extent, and probability of danger or damage to the public, degree of nuisance to neighbors and neighborhood, and other relevant factors relating to the reasonableness of the time period prescribed. Should the code compliance officer determine that the violation has not been corrected within the time specified, a hearing before the special magistrate shall be scheduled. Written notice of the violation, noting the nature of the violation, the required corrective action, and the time and place of the hearing shall be provided to the violator as required under the "notice" requirements in this article. 
(b)  A code compliance reminder and a notice of violation issued pursuant to this article shall include the following: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance (code compliance reminder). 
(2)  The name of the code compliance officer issuing the notice. 
(3)  The name and address of the violator. 
(4)  The section of the Code that has been violated (notice of violation). 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the violation, including the location and date the violation was observed. 
(6)  The amount of the fine for which the violator may be liable. 
(7)  The method for correction and the time within which the violation must be corrected. 
(8)  A statement that each day of continued violation after a finding by the special magistrate shall be deemed a continuing violation, subject to an additional penalty in the same amount without the need for additional notices of violation. 
(9)  A statement that failure to appear may result in a finding of guilt by the special magistrate and imposition of a fine in absentia. 
(10)  A statement that the violator may be liable for the reasonable administrative hearing costs if the violator is found guilty. 
(11)  Time, date, and place of hearing, if applicable. 
(c)  Should a code compliance officer have reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare or if the violation is one that may be irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code compliance officer may proceed directly to a hearing upon approval of the department head of building, planning and zoning, without notifying the alleged violator; provided, however, where possible, the code compliance officer shall use his/her best efforts to ensure that reasonable notice shall be given to the alleged violator. If the violation is corrected and then recurs, the case shall be presented to the special magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(d)  If a repeat violation is determined to exist by the code compliance officer, then he/she shall make a reasonable effort to notify the named violator and may immediately request the scheduling of a hearing. The case may be presented to the special magistrate even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(e)  All notices required by the Code shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; overnight courier; by hand delivery by a law enforcement officer of the village, code compliance officer, or other person designated by the village; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with someone residing at the residence above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice and may include posting at site of violation. 
(f)  Such notice may be posted for at least ten days in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the primary municipal government office. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. Notice by posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (e). 
(g)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (e), together with proof of posting as provided in subsection (f), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of the Code have been satisfied, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(h)  If the owner of property that is subject to an enforcement proceeding before an enforcement board, special magistrate, or court transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
(i)  A failure to make the disclosures described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-146. - Scheduling and conduct of special magistrate hearing. 
(a)  A hearing date shall not be considered postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received in writing and approved by the special magistrate at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(b)  All hearings of the special magistrate shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Upon a finding that proper notice was given, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(c)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded electronically or by a court stenographer and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(d)  Village staff shall provide clerical services as may be reasonably required by each special magistrate for the proper performance of his duties. 
(e)  Each case before a special magistrate shall be presented by the village staff. The village staff shall have the authority to retain counsel pursuant to parameters adopted by the village council. 
(f)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the formal rules relating to evidence and witnesses, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the special magistrate finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. Hearsay evidence may be accepted for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but such hearsay evidence shall not in and of itself be considered sufficient to support a finding or decision unless the evidence would be admissible over objections in a civil action. 
(g)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues, even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witnesses regardless of which party first called that witness to testify; and to offer rebuttal of the evidence. 
(h)  The special magistrate shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law based on evidence of record. In order to make a finding upholding the code compliance officer's decision, the special magistrate must find that a preponderance of the evidence indicates that the named violator was responsible for the violation of the relevant section of the Code. The initial burden of proof shall be with the village to show by the greater weight of evidence that a code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed, or was responsible for maintaining or permitting the violation to continue. Once this burden has been met, it shall be the responsibility of the violator to rebut the evidence submitted by the village. 
(i)  The time for correction given by the code compliance officer to the named violator and contained in the notice of violation is rebuttably presumed to have been a reasonable time for correction. Upon presentation of relevant evidence by the named violator that the time for correction was not reasonable, however, the special magistrate may make a redetermination as to the time period being insufficient. If the special magistrate determines that the time given for correction was insufficient, the penalty for a continuing violation shall be calculated from the date determined by the special magistrate to be a reasonable date for correction. 
(j)  If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, the violator may be held liable for the reasonable cost of the administrative hearing, at the discretion of the special magistrate. 
(k)  After all evidence has been submitted and all testimony heard, the special magistrate shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law orally, at the hearing, which shall then be incorporated in a written order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted in this chapter. Such order may command a violator to take whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance by the date announced at the meeting and subsequently placed in the order. The order shall be announced orally at the meeting and, within five working days subsequent to the hearing, shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the violator. The violator may enter a stipulation admitting the existence of a violation, establish a date for compliance and a fine, which shall be announced at the meeting and an order shall be entered incorporating the stipulation. 
(l)  The order of the special magistrate may require the violator to pay a fine of $5,000.00 for a violation that is irreparable, or a fine up to $250.00 per day for each day the violation continues past the date set forth in the order for compliance ($500.00 per day for repeat violations) for each day the violation continues past the date set in the order for compliance or in the case of repeat violations, for each time the violation has been repeated up to $500.00 per day for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code compliance officer. A hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order for the repeat violation. 
(m)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation. 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(n)  The special magistrate may reduce or eliminate a fine posed by him/her pursuant to this section, provided the request to reduce or eliminate the fine shall be made within 60 days of the correction of the violation for which the fine was assessed, provided that the fine has not been paid and provided good cause shall be shown for such reduction as provided below in sec. 2-150(d). Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the village from enforcing this Code by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined in this article are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-147. - Appeals of order. 
(a)  An aggrieved party, including the village, may appeal an order of the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days of the issuance of the order sought to be overturned. Failure to make such appeal within the prescribed 30-day period shall render the findings of the special magistrate conclusive, binding and final. 
(b)  Unless the findings of the special magistrate are overturned in a proceeding held pursuant to this article, findings of the special magistrate shall be admissible in any proceeding to collect unpaid fines. 
(c)  No aggrieved party other than the village may apply to the court for relief unless such party has first exhausted the remedies provided for in this article and has taken all available steps provided in this article. It is the intention of the village that all steps provided by this article shall be taken before any application is made to the court for relief; and no application shall be made by any aggrieved party other than the village to a court for relief except from an order issued by a special magistrate pursuant to this chapter. It is the intention of the village that, notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the village shall retain all rights and remedies otherwise available to it to secure compliance with or prevent violations of the Code. For purposes of an appeal, the village clerk shall make available, for public inspection and copying, the record upon which each final order of a special magistrate is based. The village clerk shall make a reasonable charge commensurate with the cost for the preparation of the official record on appeal and transmittal thereof to the circuit court for making certified copies of any record or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-148. - Prohibition of the issuance of permits, licenses, certificates of use and occupancy, or zoning approvals to violators with uncured violations and unpaid civil penalties or liens. 
    No operating permit, license, building permit, certificate of use and occupancy, business tax receipt, platting action, or zoning action shall be approved, granted or issued to any named violator with (i) uncured violations as cited in the Village Code; (ii) unpaid civil penalties; (iii) unpaid administrative costs of hearing; (iv) unpaid village investigative, enforcement, testing, or monitoring costs; or (v) unpaid liens, any or all of which are owed to the village pursuant to the provisions of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-149. - Recovery of unpaid fines; unpaid fines to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
(a)  The village may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of fines imposed under this article. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine shall be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the property on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this article shall continue to accrue until the violation is corrected or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose a lien filed pursuant to this article, whichever occurs first. After three months from the date of filing of any such lien that remains unpaid, the village may foreclose or otherwise execute the lien. 
(c)  No lien provided under this article shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on a lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action for foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party may recover interest and all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, incurred in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-150. - Civil penalty reduction. 
(a)  Property in compliance with the village code: A request for reduction of a lien for civil penalties which are in excess of $100,000.00 must be made to the village council. The terms "civil penalty" and "civil penalties" include, but are not limited to, fines, administrative fees and costs, remediation costs and attorney's fees and costs imposed or incurred pursuant to village prosecution of code enforcement violations. 
(b)  The violator, or the violator's successors or assigns (the "applicant"), who has an ownership interest in the property encumbered by a lien for civil penalties of not more than $ 100,000.00, may file a request for a reduction of the civil penalty before the special magistrate only after a compliance inspection is completed during which a code compliance officer finds that all violations were corrected. Upon receipt of a written request for a reduction of a civil penalty, and the filing of an affidavit of partial compliance by the code compliance officer which sets forth that all outstanding violations of the special magistrate's order have been corrected, except for payment of any outstanding civil penalties, the village manager or the village manager's designee, shall set the matter for penalty reduction hearing by the special magistrate. However, if a court action has been commenced to obtain compliance with the order of the special magistrate, no hearing shall be held for a reduction of the civil penalty. 
(c)  At the hearing, the fact-finding determination of the special magistrate shall be limited to evidence establishing: 
(1)  Good cause for a reduction of the civil penalty, 
(2)  The amount of the reduction, and 
(3)  Any equitable considerations raised by the applicant or the village relating to the amount of the reduction. 
Said hearing shall not be an opportunity to appeal any finding of fact or conclusions of law set forth in any prior order of the special magistrate or any administrative determination of the village. 
(d)  The special magistrate may reduce a civil penalty once the applicant has otherwise complied with an order of the special magistrate based on a showing of good cause, but in no event shall the civil penalty be reduced below the costs incurred by the village in its prosecution of violations, including but not limited to, any attorney's fees and staff time. In no event, however, shall any administrative fees previously ordered by the special magistrate be waived or reduced, and the applicant may be held liable for the reasonable cost of any additional hearing at the discretion of the special magistrate. 
(e)  In determining good cause, and the amount of the reduction, if any, the hearing officer shall consider: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator or the applicant to correct the violation. 
(3)  Any previous, or other outstanding violations whether committed by the applicant, or pertaining to the property to which the lien attaches, unless an order finding a violation is under appeal at the time of the determination. 
(4)  Whether the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature. 
(5)  Whether the applicant's failure to timely comply with the code compliance officer or the hearing officer is due to an inability to comply based on factors beyond the control of the applicant. 
(f)  Upon a finding of good cause, the special magistrate has the sole discretion to grant or to deny the request for a reduction of the civil penalty, provided the reduction is to an amount that is not less than the costs incurred by the village: 
(g)  Property not in compliance: The violator, or the violator's successors or assigns (the "applicant"), who has an ownership interest in the property encumbered by a lien for civil penalties of not more than $100,000.00, may file a request for a reduction of the civil penalty before the special magistrate when the property is not in compliance with the village code. Upon receipt of a written request for a reduction of a civil penalty, the village manager or the village manager's designee, shall set the matter for a penalty reduction hearing by the special magistrate. However, if a court action has been commenced to obtain compliance with the order of the hearing officer, no hearing shall be held for a reduction of the civil penalty. In considering whether to reduce the civil penalty, the hearing officer shall determine whether a reduction will substantially increase the likelihood of obtaining compliance on the property. In such a case, the special magistrate may mitigate the civil penalty conditioned upon the achieving of compliance within a time certain and the payment of the reduced amount within a reasonable time after such compliance is achieved. The failure to achieve compliance or to timely make payment of the reduced civil penalty shall result in the original civil penalty order being automatically reinstated as provided in subsection 2-150(h). 
(h)  If a civil penalty is reduced, the order of the special magistrate shall provide that, if compliance is not timely achieved or the reduced civil penalty is not paid by the date ordered by the special magistrate, then the original amount of the civil penalty shall be automatically reinstated. The special magistrate may impose conditions on the granting of a request for reduction of the civil penalty and may allow additional hearings upon request if necessary to establish compliance with said conditions before an order reducing the civil penalty is entered. The applicant may be held liable for the reasonable cost of any additional hearing at the discretion of the special magistrate. 
(i)  The order reducing the civil penalty shall not be recorded in the public records unless the terms of the order reducing the civil penalty are fully complied with and the order shall so provide. 
(j)  Upon compliance with the terms of the order, including receipt of timely payment in full of the amount of the reduced civil penalty, and the recording costs, the village manager, or the village manager's designee, shall record a copy of the order reducing the fine, a notice of compliance if applicable and a release of the lien. 
(k)  A reduction of a civil penalty may only be granted once as to any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Secs. 2-151-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIL CITATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-161. - Civil offenses/penalties; intent and purpose. 
    The violation of any provision of any of the ordinances, development orders, approved site plans, subdivision plats, or related conditions of approval of the village, Miami-Dade County or the applicable building code, shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty as provided herein. The civil citation process is intended to supplement the special magistrate process by providing an additional enforcement process that will expedite the correction of certain types of code violations. These types of violations include itinerant types of sign violations which may be quickly rectified (banners, balloons, sidewalk signs), unlicensed contractors, contractor licensing requirements, overflowing dumpsters, trash piles, hatracking of trees, failure to secure job sites during hurricane warnings, operating vendor type businesses without license, and similar type violations. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-162. - Qualifications, appointment and removal, compensation of hearing officers. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, appointments of hearing officers shall be made by the mayor as needed, subject to confirmation by the village council, on the basis of experience or interest in code enforcement. Appointments shall, whenever possible, include persons with zoning or construction experience. Such appointments shall be submitted to the council for ratification. 
(b)  Hearing officers shall be attorneys who are not residents of the village and who shall possess outstanding reputations for civic pride, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability. 
(c)  Appointments shall be made for a term of one year. Hearing officers may be reappointed or removed at the discretion of the mayor, subject to ratification by the council. 
(d)  Hearing officers shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by the village council for time spent at hearings only. 
(e)  If a hearing officer is removed from a case, the case may be assigned to another hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-163. - Powers of hearing officer. 
    Under this article, hearing officers shall have the power to: 
(1)  Apply the rules for the conduct of hearings adopted by the village council. 
(2)  Subpoena violators and witnesses for hearings. Subpoenas shall be served by the village police department or by the village staff, or as provided by ordinance. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Assess and order the payment or reduction of fines as provided according to ordinance and statute. 
(6)  Enter findings of fact, conclusions of law, and issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 2-164. - Village attorney to serve as counsel. 
    The village attorney shall represent the village at civil citation hearings. If an appeal is taken pursuant to section 2-171 of this article, the village attorney shall represent the village at such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-165. - Authority to initiate enforcement proceedings. 
    Enforcement proceedings shall be initiated via complaint from the public or as a result of an observed violation by a code compliance officer. Hearing officers shall not have authority to initiate such enforcement procedures. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-166. - Enforcement procedures; contents and service of notices/civil violations. 
(a)  A code compliance officer who finds a violation of the Code shall issue a code compliance reminder stating that the violator has committed a violation of the Code and shall specify a reasonable time period within which the violator must correct the violation. This determination shall be based on consideration of fairness, practicality, ease of correction, ability to correct, severity of violation, or nature, extent, and probability of danger or damage to the public, degree of nuisance to neighbors and neighborhood, and other relevant factors relating to the reasonableness of the time period prescribed. 
(b)  A code compliance officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon his/her personal investigation, the inspector has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted section of the village's code of ordinances, the applicable Miami-Dade County Code of Ordinances, and the applicable building code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  If, upon his/her personal investigation, a code compliance officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code compliance officer shall issue a citation to the person or legal entity who has committed the violation. A code compliance officer does not have to provide the violator with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat violation is found or if the code compliance officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. Unlicensed contractors, working under a stop work order, performing work without permits, tree abuse, illegal dumping and similar situations do not require prior notice and may result in an immediate citation. 
(d)  A citation issued by a code compliance officer shall be in a form prescribed by the village and shall contain: 
1.  The date and time of issuance. 
2.  The name and address of the person or entity to whom the citation is issued. 
3.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
4.  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
5.  The number or section of the Code of Ordinances violated. 
6.  The name of the code compliance officer. 
7.  The procedure for the person or entity to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
8.  The applicable civil penalty if the person or entity elects to contest the citation, and that the violator may be liable for costs associated with conducting the administrative hearing. 
9.  The applicable civil penalty if the person or entity elects not to contest the citation. 
10.  A conspicuous statement that if the person or entity fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to file an appeal to contest the violation within 14 days of service of notice with the village's hearing officer, he/she shall be deemed to have waived their right to contest the citation and that, in such case, a finding may be rendered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(e)  After issuing a citation, the code compliance officer shall deposit the original with the clerk of the code compliance division. 
(f)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code compliance officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree punishable as provided in F.S.  775.082, as amended, or F.S.  775.083, as amended. 
(g)  All notices required by the Code shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; overnight courier; by hand delivery by a law enforcement officer of the village, code compliance officer, or other person designated by the village; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with someone residing at the residence above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; and may include posting at site of violation. 
(h)  Such notice may be posted for at least ten days in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other which shall be at the primary municipal government office. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. Notice by posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (g). 
(i)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (g), together with proof of posting as provided in subsection (h), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of the code have been satisfied, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-167. - Civil penalties; appeals; failure to pay/correct. 
(a)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the village on or before the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an administrative hearing before a hearing officer or in any event no later than 14 days after the issuance of the notice, or if proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally decided adversely to the named violator. The civil penalty shall be an accruing fine amount which will be assessed daily for continuing violations which have not been corrected. 
(b)  A violator who has been served with a civil infraction notice shall elect either to: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the infraction notice, and correct the violation within the time specified on the notice; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to appeal the determination of the code compliance officer, which resulted in the issuance of the civil infraction notice. 
(c)  An appeal for administrative hearing shall be accomplished by filing a request in writing to set the hearing for review and mailed to the code compliance clerk or his/her designee or to the address indicated on the notice, with a postmark indicating that it was marked not later than 14 days after the service of the citation notice. 
(d)  If the named violator, after notice, fails to pay the civil penalty and correct the violation (within the time specified), or to timely request an administrative hearing before a hearing officer, such failure shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing before a hearing officer. A waiver of the right to an administrative hearing shall be treated as an admission of the violation and penalties may be assessed accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-168. - Scheduling and conduct of appeal hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing, the code compliance clerk or his/her designee shall set the matter down for hearing on the next available regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon thereafter as possible. 
(b)  Village staff shall send a notice of hearing by certified and regular mail to the violator at the last known address or the address contained on the appeal. The notice of hearing shall include the place, date and time of the hearing, as well as a copy of the civil violation notice. 
(c)  An informational statement shall include: 
(1)  Right of violator to be represented by an attorney. 
(2)  Right of violator to present witnesses and evidence. 
(3)  Notice that failure of violator to attend hearing may result in civil penalty being assessed in absence of the violator. 
(4)  Notice that requests for continuances will not be considered if not received in writing by the code compliance officer at lease five calendar days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(5)  Right to have a court reporter present at the violator's own expense. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall conduct hearings on a regularly scheduled monthly basis, depending on the number of appeals, or more frequently upon request of the village manager or his/her designee. No hearing shall be set sooner than 20 days from the date of service of the notice of infraction. 
(e)  A hearing date shall not be considered postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received in writing by the hearing officer at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. A decision shall be made at least two working days before the meeting. 
(f)  All hearings of the hearing officer shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Upon a finding that proper notice was given, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(g)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded electronically or by a court stenographer and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(h)  Village staff shall provide clerical services as may be reasonably required by each hearing officer for the proper performance of their duties. 
(i)  Each case before a hearing officer shall be presented by the village attorney. 
(j)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the formal rules relating to evidence and witnesses, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the hearing officer finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. Hearsay evidence may be accepted for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but such hearsay evidence shall not in and of itself be considered sufficient to support a finding or decision unless the evidence would be admissible over objections in a civil action. 
(k)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called that witness to testify, and to offer rebuttal of the evidence. 
(l)  The hearing officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law based on the evidence of record. In order to make a finding upholding the code compliance officer's decision, the hearing officer must find that the preponderance of the evidence indicates that the named violator was responsible for the violation of the relevant section of the code. The initial burden of proof shall be with the village to show by the greater weight of evidence that a code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed, or was responsible for maintaining or permitting the violation to continue. Once this burden has been met, it shall be the responsibility of the violator to rebut the evidence submitted by the village. 
(m)  The time for correction given by the code compliance officer to the named violator and contained in the notice of violation is rebuttably presumed to have been a reasonable time for correction. Upon presentation of relevant evidence by the named violator that the time for correction was not reasonable, however, the hearing officer may make a redetermination as to the time period being insufficient. If the hearing officer determines that the time given for correction was insufficient, the penalty for a continuing violation shall be calculated from the date determined by the hearing officer to be a reasonable time for correction. 
(n)  If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, he/she may be held liable for the reasonable cost of the administrative hearing, at the discretion of the hearing officer. 
(o)  After all evidence has been submitted and all testimony heard, the hearing officer shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law orally, at the hearing, which shall then be incorporated in a written order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted in this chapter. Such order may command a violator to take whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance by the date announced at the meeting and subsequently placed in the order. The order shall be announced orally at the meeting and within five working days subsequent to the hearing shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the violator. 
(p)  The order of the hearing officer may require the violator to pay a fine according to the civil violation schedule, including administrative charges. Fines for repeat violations may be doubled. 
(q)  In determining any reduction of the fine, the hearing officer may consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation. 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(r)  The hearing officer may reduce or eliminate a fine provided that the fine has not been paid and good cause is shown for such reduction as provided below in subsection 2-170(h). 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-169. - Civil penalties and related terms construed. 
(a)  Penalties for violations of the provisions to be enforced through this article shall be in the amounts prescribed in the schedule of civil penalties contained in section 2-174 of this article. 
(b)  For each day of a continued violation, an additional penalty in the same amount as that prescribed for in the original violation shall be added. 
(c)  For the first repeat violation, the amount of the civil penalty shall be double the amount of the penalty prescribed for the original violation in section 2-174 of this article. The amount of civil penalty due for each subsequent repeat violation shall be double the amount of penalty due for the first day of the immediately preceding violation. 
(d)  A repeat violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time prescribed for correction in the citation shall be treated as a continuing violation, and the additional penalty for each day of continued violation shall be double the amount due for the first day of the repeat violation, except as noted in (c) above. 
(e)  Continuing violation penalties shall accrue from the date of the time prescribed for correction given in the citation until the correction is made or until a request for administrative hearing is filed, whichever comes first. If the named violator requests an administrative hearing and loses the appeal, the hearing officer shall determine a reasonable time period within which correction of the violation must be made, based on the considerations set forth in subsection 2-168(q) of this article. If correction is not made within the period set by the hearing officer, continuing violation penalties shall begin to accrue again after the time for correction has run. 
(f)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter are due and payable to the village on the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an appeal from the hearing officer's decision, or, if a proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally decided adversely to the named violator. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-170. - Recovery of unpaid civil penalties; unpaid penalty to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
(a)  The village may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty shall be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the property on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator; upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this article shall continue to accrue until the violator complies or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose a lien filed pursuant to this chapter, whichever occurs first. After three months from the date of filings of any such lien which remains unpaid, the village may foreclose or otherwise execute the lien. 
(c)  No lien provided under this article shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on a lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party may recover interest and all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, incurred in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(d)  Property in compliance with the Code: A request for reduction of a lien for civil penalties which are in excess of $100,000.00 must be made to the village council. The terms "civil penalty" and "civil penalties" include, but are not limited to, fines, administrative fees and costs, remediation costs and attorney's fees and costs imposed or incurred pursuant to village prosecution of code enforcement violations. 
(e)  The violator, or the violator's successors or assigns (the "applicant"), who has an ownership interest in the property encumbered by a lien for civil penalties of not more than $100,000.00, may file a request for a reduction of the civil penalty before the hearing officer only after a compliance inspection is completed during which a code compliance officer finds that all violations were corrected. Upon receipt of a written request for a reduction of a civil penalty, and the filing of an affidavit of partial compliance by the code compliance officer which sets forth that all outstanding violations of the hearing officer's order have been corrected, except for payment of any outstanding civil penalties, the village manager or the village manager's designee, shall set the matter for penalty reduction hearing by the hearing officer. However, if a court action has been commenced to obtain compliance with the order of the hearing officer, no hearing shall be held for a reduction of the civil penalty. 
(f)  At the hearing, the fact-finding determination of the hearing officer shall be limited to evidence establishing: 
(1)  Good cause for a reduction of the civil penalty, 
(2)  The amount of the reduction, and 
(3)  Any equitable considerations raised by the applicant or the village relating to the amount of the reduction. 
Said hearing shall not be an opportunity to appeal any finding of fact or conclusions of law set forth in any prior order of the hearing officer or any administrative determination of the village. 
(g)  The hearing officer may reduce a civil penalty once the applicant has otherwise complied with an order of the hearing officer based on a showing of good cause, but in no event shall the civil penalty be reduced below the costs incurred by the village in its prosecution of violations, including but not limited to, any attorney's fees and staff time. In no event, however, shall any administrative fees previously ordered by the hearing officer be waived or reduced, and the applicant may be held liable for the reasonable cost of any additional hearing at the discretion of the hearing officer. 
(h)  In determining good cause, and the amount of the reduction, if any, the hearing officer shall consider: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator or the applicant to correct the violation. 
(3)  Any previous, or other outstanding violations whether committed by the violator, or pertaining to the property to which the lien attaches, unless an order finding a violation is under appeal at the time of the determination. 
(4)  Whether the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature. 
(5)  Whether the violator's failure to timely comply with the code compliance officer or the hearing officer is due to an inability to comply based on factors beyond the control of the violator. 
(i)  Upon a finding of good cause, the hearing officer has the sole discretion to grant or to deny the request for a reduction of the civil penalty, provided the reduction is to an amount that is not less than the costs incurred by the village. The failure to timely make payment of the reduced civil penalty shall result in the original civil penalty being automatically reinstated as provided in subsection 2-170(j). 
(j)  Property not in compliance: The violator, or the violator's successors or assigns (the "applicant"), who has an ownership interest in the property encumbered by a lien for civil penalties of not more than $100,000.00 may file a request for a reduction of the civil penalty before the hearing officer when the property is not in compliance with the village code. Upon receipt of a written request for a reduction of a civil penalty, the village manager or the village manager's designee, shall set the matter for penalty reduction hearing by the hearing officer. However, if a court action has been commenced to obtain compliance with the order of the hearing officer, no hearing shall be held for a reduction of the civil penalty. In considering whether to reduce the civil penalty, the hearing officer shall determine whether a reduction will substantially increase the likelihood of obtaining compliance on the property. In such a case, the hearing officer may mitigate the civil penalty conditioned upon the achieving of compliance within a time certain and the payment of the reduced amount within a reasonable time after such compliance is achieved. The failure to achieve compliance or to timely make payment of the reduced civil penalty shall result in the conditional reduction order being automatically reinstated as provided in subsection 2-170(k). 
(k)  If a civil penalty is reduced, the order of the hearing officer shall provide that, if the reduced civil penalty is not paid by the date ordered by the hearing officer, then the original amount of the civil penalty shall be automatically reinstated. The hearing officer may impose conditions on the granting of a request for reduction of the civil penalty and may allow additional hearings upon request if necessary to establish compliance with said conditions before an order reducing the civil penalty is entered. The applicant may be held liable for the reasonable cost of any additional hearing at the discretion of the hearing officer. 
(l)  A copy of the order reducing the civil penalty shall not be recorded in the public records unless the terms of the order reducing the civil penalty are fully complied with and the order shall so provide. 
(m)  Upon receipt of timely payment in full of the amount of the reduced civil penalty, and the recording costs, the village manager, or the village manager's designee, shall record a copy of the order reducing the civil penalty, a notice of compliance if applicable and a release of the lien. 
(n)  A reduction of a civil penalty may only be granted once as to any violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2012-7,  1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 2012-19,  1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-171. - Appeals of order. 
(a)  An aggrieved party, including the village, may appeal an order of a hearing officer to the county court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the hearing officer. An appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days of the issuance of the order sought to be overturned. Failure to make such appeal within the prescribed 30-day period shall render the findings of the hearing officer conclusive, binding and final. 
(b)  Unless the findings of the hearing officer are overturned in a proceeding held pursuant to this article, findings of the hearing officer shall be admissible in any proceeding to collect unpaid penalties. 
(c)  No aggrieved party other than the village may apply to the court for relief unless such party has first exhausted the remedies provided for in this article and has taken all available steps provided in this article. It is the intention of the village that all steps provided by this article shall be taken before any application is made to the court for relief; and no application shall be made by any aggrieved party other than the village to a court for relief except from an order issued by a hearing officer pursuant to this chapter. It is the intention of the village that, notwithstanding anything to this article to the contrary, the village shall retain all rights and remedies otherwise available to it to secure compliance with or prevent violations of the code. For purposes of an appeal, the village clerk shall make available, for public inspection and copying, the record upon which each final order of a hearing officer is based. The village clerk shall make a reasonable charge commensurate with the cost for the preparation of the official record on appeal and transmittal thereof to the circuit court for making certified copies of any record or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-172. - Provisions contained herein are supplemental. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the village from enforcing its code by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
Sec. 2-173. - Prohibition of the issuance of permits, licenses, certificates of use and occupancy, or zoning approvals to violators with uncured violations and unpaid civil penalties or liens. 
    No operating permit, license, building permit, certificate of use and occupancy, business tax receipt, platting action, or zoning action shall be approved, granted or issued to any named violator with (i) uncured violations as cited in the Village Code; (ii) unpaid civil penalties; (iii) unpaid administrative costs of hearing; (iv) unpaid village investigative, enforcement, testing, or monitoring costs; or (v) unpaid liens, any or all of which are owed to the village pursuant to the provisions of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 2-174. - Schedule of civil penalties. 
(a)  The schedule of civil penalties shall be adopted by a resolution of the village council and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the village council. 
(b)  For violations of any section of the code of ordinances for which a specific penalty is not prescribed in the schedule of civil penalties adopted by resolution of the village council, a penalty shall be imposed which shall not be less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 per day for a repeat violation. For the purposes of continuing violations, each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-1,  2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2003-1,  1, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 2007-3,  1, 5-8-07) 
DIVISION 4. - ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-175. - Abandoned real property. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the village to establish a process for the registration of any property for which a lis pendens has been recorded in the public records of Miami-Dade County and for the maintenance and regulation of any abandoned real property located within the village. It is the village's further intent to specifically establish an abandoned residential property program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from any negative impacts through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(b)  Applicability. This division shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to the village above and beyond any other state, county and/or local provisions for same. 
(c)  Penalties; schedule of civil penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to the provisions and procedures of article V of the Village of Pinecrest Code of Ordinances, code enforcement, and assessed a penalty as provided in section 2-174, schedule of civil penalties. 
(d)  Public nuisance. All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the village. 
(e)  Registration. Upon the filing of a lis pendens or an action to foreclose upon a mortgage or other instrument of debt which debt is secured by the real property of a single-family dwelling unit, whether a house, townhouse, condominium or duplex, the holder or owner of said mortgage or other debt instrument, or the party bringing the foreclosure action, shall immediately register the dwelling unit with the village. The registration shall be on forms as designated by the village manager and shall be accompanied by the approved registration fee. An annual registration and non-refundable fee of $150.00 is required for each property. Registration pursuant to this division shall contain the name of the mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, a direct contact name and telephone number of the mortgagee, a facsimile number and e-mail address for the mortgagee, and the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. This division shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. Properties subject to this division shall remain under the registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this division as long as they remain in default. Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this Division must report any change of information contained in the registration in writing within ten days of the change to the village manager or his or her designee. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. Properties subject to this division shall be kept free of weeds over 12 inches in height, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state, or local law), abandoned vehicles, portable storage devices, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained in accordance with the Village's Code of Ordinances. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscaping shall not include weeds over 12 inches in height, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required ground cover and/or landscape and removal of all trimmings. Pools and spas shall be maintained so that the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with all requirements of the Village Code of Ordinances and Florida Building Code, as amended from time to time. Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the Village Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a village code compliance officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the village's special magistrate, the village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this division. 
(g)  Security requirements. Properties subject to this division shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window. If the property is owned by a corporation and/or mortgagee that is unable or unwilling to perform maintenance and inspections itself, a property management company shall be contracted to perform bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this division, and any other applicable laws. The mortgagee shall inspect or have inspected the property on a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this division. Upon the request of the village manager or his or her designee, the mortgagee shall provide a copy of required inspection reports. Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly secure the property may result in a violation of the Village Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a village code compliance officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the village's special magistrate, the village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this division. 
(h)  Immunity of code compliance officer. Any code compliance officer or any person authorized by the village manager or his or her designee shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this division. 
(i)  Additional authority. The village manager, or his or her designee, shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this division, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all door, window or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to prevent a decline of the property. 
(j)  Adoption of rules; expenditure of funds; declaration of village purpose. The village manager is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations and expend village funds as may be reasonably necessary and available to carry out the terms of this division, the expenditure of such funds being declared a proper village purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12,  2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
ARTICLE VI. - QUASI-JUDICIAL MATTERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Communications with local public officials. 
(a)  Communications with local public officials, as defined in F.S.  286.0115(1)(b), regarding quasi-judicial matters shall be governed by the procedure in this section. 
(b)  If any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, a section of the Charter or any ordinance discusses with any local public official representing the village the merits of any matter on which action may be taken by any board, council or commission on which the local public official is a member, such communication shall not raise any presumption of prejudice, provided that the following process of disclosure occurs: 
(1)  The subject and substance of any ex parte communication with a local public official representing the village which relates to quasi-judicial action pending before the official, as well as the identity of the person, group or entity with whom the communication took place, is disclosed and made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. 
(2)  A local public official representing the village may read a written communication from any person; however, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before such official shall be made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. 
(3)  A local public official representing the village may conduct investigations, make site visits and receive expert opinions regarding a quasi-judicial action pending before him, provided that such activities and the existence of such investigations, site visits or expert opinions are made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. 
(4)  Disclosure made pursuant to subsections (b)(1), (2) and (3) of this section must be made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on such matter, so that persons who have opinions contrary to those expressed in the ex parte communication are given a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond to the communication. 
(Ord. No. 96-7,  1, 9-10-96) 
Secs. 2-177-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEARING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means an individual, corporation or other authorized legal entity filing an application or an appeal which initiates a quasi-judicial proceeding, including village staff and the village council. 
    Application means an application for a site-specific rezoning, variance, special exception, conditional use permit or other request for a quasi-judicial proceeding or appeal as authorized by the village's zoning ordinance. 
    Chair means the mayor, unless otherwise provided, or the mayor's appointee to any planning and zoning board. 
    Member means a village councilmember or an appointee of a councilmember to any planning and zoning board. 
    Planning and zoning board means the seven-member appointed planning and zoning board. 
    Village staff means an employee or agent of the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-7,  2, 9-10-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-202. - Scope of division. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law or by resolution of the village council pertaining to a specific matter, quasi-judicial hearing procedures shall be substantially as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-7,  2, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-203. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to provide a fair, open and impartial procedure for the consideration by members of the village council or such other planning and zoning board as may be appointed by the village council of quasi-judicial matters in the course of quasi-judicial proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 96-7,  2, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-204. - Proceedings. 
(a)  Legal representation. Legal representation for a quasi-judicial hearing is permitted as follows: 
(1)  Applicants may be represented by legal counsel. 
(2)  The village council and the planning board may be advised by the village attorney. 
(b)  Participants at hearings. All who testify on any application must be sworn by the clerk. All persons testifying subject themselves to cross examination. Each person who addresses the village council or planning board, other than members of village staff, shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Address; and 
(3)  Whether he speaks for himself, a group of persons or a third party. If the person says that he represents an organization, he shall also indicate whether the view expressed by the speaker represents an established policy of the organization approved by the board or governing body. 
(c)  Conduct of hearing. All quasi-judicial hearings shall be recorded. A court reporter may be retained and paid for by any interested person to transcribe the proceedings. Any person may order and pay for a transcript of the proceedings. Any such retained court reporter shall identify himself to the village attorney before the hearing. The order of hearing shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chair shall read a preliminary statement once at the beginning of the quasi-judicial public hearing agenda, announce the particular agenda item, and open the public hearing. The chair shall conduct the meeting, and all questions shall be through the chair. 
(2)  The applicant, witnesses, village staff and all participants asking to speak shall be sworn. Attorneys shall be excluded, unless an attorney intends to testify. 
(3)  The chair shall decide any parliamentary objections and objections to evidentiary matters with the advice of the village attorney or special counsel. 
(4)  The applicant shall present his case. 
(5)  The village staff shall present its report, offer it into evidence, and have it made part of the record. 
(6)  Participants in support of the application shall present their testimony and any evidence. 
(7)  Opposition shall have the right to cross examine individual speakers. 
(8)  Members may ask questions of any speaker through the chair. 
(9)  Participants in opposition to the application shall present their testimony and evidence. 
(10)  The applicant shall have the right to cross examine individual speakers. 
(11)  Members may ask questions of any speaker through the chair. 
(12)  The applicant shall be given time for rebuttal, if requested. 
(13)  Any other member of the public may testify and present evidence and is subject to cross examination. 
(14)  Village staff shall be given time for rebuttal, if requested. Village staff shall have the right to cross examine the applicant and others presenting testimony and evidence and shall be subject to cross examination. 
(15)  The chair closes the public hearing. Members shall discuss the matter in public session and render a decision. No further presentations or testimony shall be permitted unless directed by the village council or planning board. 
(d)  Record of the hearing. Following the final disposition of the application, all evidence admitted at the hearing, the application file, all village staff reports, and the adopted order promulgating the decision of the village council or planning board shall be maintained in a separate file constituting the record of the application. The record shall be kept in the custody of the appropriate village staff at all times during the pendency of the application. The record will be made available to the public for inspection upon request at any time during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 96-7,  2, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2005-2,  1, 3-15-05) 
Secs. 2-205-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance calling an election saved from repeal,  1-6(13); village council,  2-56 et seq. 

Sec. 2-231. - Qualifying period. 
    Candidates for municipal office shall qualify with the village clerk during a qualifying period which shall coincide with the qualifying period for election to a county office as specified in F.S.  99.061(2). Only the qualifying provision specified in the statutes, any time after noon on the 71st day prior to the state's primary election, but not later than noon on the 67th day prior to the state's primary election, shall be applicable. The village's election dates shall be in accordance with Section 5.1 of the Village Charter. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2001-07,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2007-10,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2018-11,  1, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 2-232. - Canvassing of election returns; canvassing board; certificates of election. 
(a)  All municipal elections shall be canvassed by the appropriate canvassing board. Any election held in conjunction with a county, state or federal election or any mail-ballot election shall be canvassed by the Miami-Dade County canvassing board. Any special election of the village, or any election not otherwise held in conjunction with a county, state or federal election, shall be canvassed by the villlage canvassing board. The canvassing of election results shall be conducted under the applicable provisions of the Florida Statutes. 
(b)  The village canvassing board shall be a panel composed of the village clerk, the village manager and the village attorney. 
(c)  The village clerk shall present a certification of election results to the village council at the first meeting of the village council following the election. 
(Ord. No. 97-3,  1, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2001-07,  1, 9-5-01) 
Secs. 2-233-2-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the village, or any evidence of the village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the village saved from repeal,  1-6(1); any ordinance levying taxes or fees or charges, or any appropriation or budget ordinance saved from repeal,  1-6(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements in assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal,  1-6(11); finance department,  2-92; taxation, ch. 28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-261-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-286. - Purchasing agent. 
    The village council shall be the chief purchasing agent of the village. Subsequent to his employment, the village manager shall be the chief purchasing agent of the village. The purchasing agent shall contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the village. The purchasing agent shall establish and enforce specifications; shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries; and shall have full and complete charge of and shall be responsible for all supplies, materials and equipment purchased for or belonging to the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  1, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-287. - Governmental contracts. 
    The village manager is authorized to enter into bids or contracts entered into by other governmental authorities, provided that the governmental authority has followed a competitive bidding procedure leading to the award of the bid or contract in question, which is substantially similar to the competitive bidding procedure outlined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  6, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-288. - Waiver of competitive bidding procedures. 
    The village council may, by majority vote, waive the competitive bidding procedures outlined in this division if the village council determines that it is practical to do so. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  5, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-289. - Exemptions from competitive bidding. 
    The following shall be exempt from the competitive bidding procedures outlined in this division: 
(1)  Transactions described in subsection 2-290(a). 
(2)  Contracts for professional services. 
(3)  Other contracts as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  7, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-290. - Purchasing limitations; competitive bidding. 
(a)  Purchases less than $10,000.00. Purchases of or contracts for materials, supplies, equipment, improvements or services for which funds are provided in the budget, where the total amount to be expended is not in excess of $10,000.00, may be made or entered into by the village manager without submittal to the village council and without competitive bidding. Single purchases or contracts in excess of $10,000.00 shall not be broken down to amounts less than $10,000.00 to avoid the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Purchases more than $10,000.00 but less than $50,000.00. Purchases of or contracts for materials, supplies, equipment, improvements or services for which funds are provided in the budget, where the total amount to be expended is in excess of $10,000.00 but which does not exceed $50,000.00, may be made or entered into by the village manager without submittal to the village council and without competitive bidding, but shall require that the village manager obtain quotes from at least three different vendors. Single purchases or contracts in excess of $50,000.00 shall not be broken down to amounts less than $50,000.00 to avoid the requirements of this subsection. 
(c)  Purchases in excess of $50,000.00. The village council shall approve all purchases of or contracts for materials, supplies, equipment, public improvements or services where the total amount to be expended is more than $50,000.00. Purchases in excess of $50,000.00 shall be in compliance with the competitive bidding requirements set forth in section 2-291. 
(d)  Exceeding budget appropriation. The village manager may not purchase or contract for any item or service which exceeds any budget appropriation until such a time as the village council amends the budget to increase the appropriation to the applicable level. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  2, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-2,  1, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 2006-6,  1, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 2-291. - Competitive bidding procedure. 
(a)  Whenever competitive bidding is required by this division, the village manager shall direct that bid proposals, which provide specifications for the purchase or contract, be prepared. 
(b)  The village manager shall solicit sealed bids from at least three persons engaged in the business of furnishing such materials, supplies, equipment and public improvements or engaged in rendering such services. 
(c)  The village manager may publish a public invitation to bid. 
(d)  Bids shall be awarded to the lowest, most responsive, responsible bidder, as determined by the village council or the village manager, as the case may be, subject to the right of the village to reject any and all bids, to waive any irregularity in the bids or bidding procedures and subject also to the right of the village to award bids and contracts to bidders other than the low bidder. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  3, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 2-292. - Bid opening procedure; awarding of bids. 
(a)  Sealed bids made pursuant to this division shall be opened by the village manager and shall be recorded by the village manager on the date and time specified in the bid proposal. 
(b)  Whenever required by the bid proposal, all bid bonds, cash, insurance, checks or other security accompanying the bid shall be received and maintained for safekeeping by the village manager. The village manager shall be responsible for the return of the bid bonds, cash, insurance, checks or other security of unsuccessful bidders. 
(c)  Upon completion of the bid opening and reading, all bids received will be deposited with the village manager for tabulation and recommendation to the village council. 
(d)  Upon submission of the bid tabulation and recommendation to the village manager or village council, as the case may be, the village manager or the village council shall either accept, reject or refer for additional review the bid tabulation and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 96-9,  4, 9-10-96) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building, zoning and planning department,  2-91; planning, ch. 20. 

Sec. 8-1. - Fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees. The village council hereby enacts a schedule of fees for the issuance of building permits, provision of inspections, issuance of certificates of occupancy, and related services of the building and planning department which are attached to Ord. No. 97-10 as Schedule "A". Section 8-1(a) may only be amended by future ordinance; however, the fees set forth in Schedule "A" may be amended from time to time by resolution of the village council following a public hearing. 
(b)  Impact fees; periodic update of fee schedule. The village manager shall annually adjust the village impact fee schedules by indexing the schedule to inflation as defined by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) - All Urban Consumers for the United States, published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The first indexing calculation adjustment shall occur during the 2011-2012 budget year using the difference in Consumer Price Index figures for calendar years 2011 and 2012. Unless otherwise directed by the village council, any adjustments to the impact fee, made pursuant to this section, shall be effective the first of October each calendar year. The village manager shall periodically adjust the impact fee schedule provided by providing credit in the impact fee formula for any outstanding debt from general obligation bonds issued to finance capital projects which meet needs generated by population growth and development. 
(1)  Parks and recreation impact fees. 
a.  Short title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Parks and Recreation Impact Fees Ordinance." 
b.  Legislative findings. The village council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  The Florida Legislature, through enactment of F.S. ch. 163, has sought to encourage the village to enact impact fees. 
2.  All residential development is deemed to create an impact and therefore an increased demand for public facilities including public open space, park and recreation facilities. As such, the cost of new facilities should be borne by new users to the extent that new use requires new facilities. 
3.  As such, the village council wishes to adopt fees which it has determined to be consistent with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict funding of the public parks and recreational facilities and capital improvements from additional revenue sources to enhance park services in the village. 
c.  Definitions. In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, term, phrase or part hereof where the context will permit, the following definitions will apply: 
Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat. 
Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by wall in which there are not communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the village's building and planning department authorizing the construction or change of use of any building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as mobile homes, that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
Comprehensive development master plan (CDMP) means the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
Credit means the present value of past provisions made by new developments for the cost of existing or future capital improvements. 
Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the building code or any applicable village ordinance. 
Encumbered means monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligated the village to expend the funded amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services or the conveyance of real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of this subsection and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this subsection. Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this subsection. 
Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this subsection, or a person who has paid an impact fee, or provided a letter of credit pursuant to this subsection. 
Impact fee means the proportionate fair share charge required to be paid in accordance with this subsection. 
Improvement means any physical improvement related to property, construction costs or other facility, or acquisition of capital equipment with respect to the impact of development. 
Person, for the purposes of this subsection, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by the law of the state to own and develop real property. 
Unit or unit of development means a residential structure which is a quantifiable increment of development activity, e.g., a single-family home, or a residential module, e.g., each condominium or apartment unit within a condominium complex or building. 
Village manager shall mean the village manager of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida or designee. 
d.  Impact fees in general. 
1.  Any application for building permit for residential development activity within the corporate limits of the village shall be subject to the assessment of a parks and recreation impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this subsection. No such building permit shall be issued by the village until the applicant has paid the assessed impact fee as calculated pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Notwithstanding payment of the impact fees pursuant to this subsection, other state, county and village development regulations may limit the issuance of building permits for development activity. 
3.  In the event impact fees are paid prior to, or, concurrently with, the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
4.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use on a site which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the most intense previous use. 
5.  If a building permit is canceled without development commencing, then the impact feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid except that the village shall retain an administrative charge of 71/2 percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The impact feepayer shall submit an application for such a refund to the village manager or his designee within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the order or permit, or thereafter shall be deemed to waive any right to a refund. 
6.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date of collection of fee shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner, without interest, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the village manager or designee within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. Any claim not so timely made shall be deemed waived. 
7.  Funds shall be deemed expended for the purposes of this subsection when a contract or agreement encumbering all or a portion of the payment of said funds shall be approved by final village action. 
e.  Impact fee schedule. Any person requesting a building permit for residential development activity shall pay the impact fee as follows: 
IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 1 
Single Family Detached Single Family Attached Multi-Family Park Open Space Fee/Unit Park Improvement Fee/Unit Park Open Space Fee/ 
Unit Park Improvement Fee/Unit Park Open Space Fee/Unit Park Improvement Fee/Unit $565.00 $1,042.00 $447.00 $867.00 $303.00 $652.00  
In addition to the open space fee and local park improvement fee as set forth above, each feepayer shall pay to the village a nonrefundable general administrative charge in the amount of 71/2 percent for the processing of all materials relating to improvements at a local park. 
Note: 
1 For a more detailed explanation of the computation of this impact fee schedule, see section 33H of the Code of Ordinances of Miami-Dade County Code. 
f.  Exemptions. 
1.  Alteration, expansion or replacement of existing dwelling units where no additional dwelling units are created. 
2.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not create additional dwelling units. 
3.  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact fee has previously been paid. 
4.  All development activity permitted by an existing development of regional impact order adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, and approved prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be exempt. 
5.  An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer prior to paying the impact fee. Any exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the application for building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed to have been waived by the feepayer. 
g.  Expenditures. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee, including any accrued interest, shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Planning, design, and construction plan preparation; 
B.  Permitting and fees; 
C.  Land and materials acquisition, including costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
D.  Financing of park acquisition, expansion or improvements; 
E.  Design and construction of new drainage facilities required; 
F.  Landscaping and site preparation, including demucking, filling to flood criteria and compaction; 
G.  Construction management and inspection; 
H.  Surveying, soils and materials testing and removal of hazardous and solid waste materials; 
I.  Acquisition of capital equipment for parks; 
J.  Repayment of any monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, which were used to fund any of the growth-necessitated improvements as herein provided. Any funds that are borrowed shall be spent only to mitigate the impact of new development; 
K.  Purchase of land for additional parks and recreational facilities. 
2.  The 71/2 percent general administrative cost portion of the impact fee shall be deposited into the general fund and shall be used to offset the costs of administering the impact fee. 
h.  Establishment of fund. Impact fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be accounted for in a capital outlay impact fee fund to be established by the village. 
i.  Appeals of administrative decision. A decision of the village manager may be appealed by the feepayer to the village council. If a feepayer wishes to appeal, that feepayer shall first file a notice of appeal within 30 days after the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision by the village manager; or 
2.  Acceptance of payment by the director of the village's building and planning department of the parks impact fee. 
The feepayer shall, when filing an appeal, submit a letter which provides a full explanation of the request, the reasons for the appeal, and all supporting documentation. 
(2)  Police services impact fees. 
a.  Short title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Police Services Impact Fee Ordinance." 
b.  Legislative findings. The village council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  The Florida Legislature, through enactment of F.S. ch. 163, has sought to encourage the village to enact impact fees. 
2.  The provision of adequate police protection is essential for the safety of the public. 
3.  As such, the village council wishes to adopt impact fees which it has determined to be consistent with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of its adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Continued building development in the village will directly and adversely impact existing police services. In order to maintain adequate police protection for the existing population and to accommodate projected population due to new development, additional capital resources are required and these fees will mitigate the impacts of such new development. 
5.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict funding of law enforcement related land, facilities and capital improvements from additional revenue sources to enhance police services. 
c.  Definitions. In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, term, phrase or part hereof where the context will permit, the following definitions will apply: 
Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat. 
Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by wall in which there are not communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the village's building and planning department authorizing the construction or change of use of any building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as mobile homes, that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
Comprehensive development master plan (CDMP) means the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
Credit means the present value of past provisions made by new developments for the cost of existing or future capital improvements. 
Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the building code or any applicable village ordinance. 
Development of regional impact means any development which because of its character, magnitude or location would have a substantial impact on the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of more than one county. 
Encumbered means monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligated the village to expend the funded amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services or the conveyance of real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of this subsection and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this subsection. Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this subsection. 
Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this subsection, or a person who has paid an impact fee, or provided a letter of credit pursuant to this subsection. 
Impact fee means the proportionate fair share charge required to be paid in accordance with this subsection. 
Improvement means any physical improvement related to property, construction costs or other facility, or acquisition of capital equipment with respect to the impact of development. 
Nonresidential development means development not providing for any residential units. 
Person, for the purposes of this subsection, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by the law of Florida to own and develop real property. 
Residential development means any building or buildings designed to be used as dwelling units. 
Unit or unit of development means a residential structure which is a quantifiable increment of development activity, e.g., a single-family home, or a residential module, e.g., each condominium or apartment unit within a condominium complex or building. 
Village manager shall mean the village manager of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida or designee. 
d.  Impact fees; in general. 
1.  Any application for building permit for development activity within the corporate limits of the village shall be subject to the assessment of a police services impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this subsection. No building permit shall be issued by the village until the applicant has paid the assessed impact fees as calculated pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Notwithstanding payment of the impact fees pursuant to this subsection, other state, county and village development regulations may limit the issuance of building permits for development activity. 
3.  In the event impact fees are paid prior to or concurrently with the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
4.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use on a site which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the most intense previous use. 
5.  If a building permit is canceled without development commencing, then the impact feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid except that the village shall retain five percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The impact feepayer shall submit an application for such a refund to the village manager or his designee within 30 days of the expiration of the order or permit, or thereafter shall be deemed to waive any right to a refund. 
6.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date of this subsection shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner, without interest, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the village manager or designee within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. However, this section shall not apply to development of regional impact with phased or a long term build-out schedule. Any claim not so timely made shall be deemed waived. 
7.  Funds shall be deemed expended for the purposes of this subsection when a contract or agreement encumbering all or a portion of the payment of said funds shall be approved by final village action. 
e.  Impact fee computation formula. 
1.  The feepayer shall pay a police services impact fee amount based on the formula set forth below. The fee shall be collected by the building and planning department for all structures for which a building permit is issued. Such fee will be based on the capital costs required to serve the increased demand for police services resulting from the proposed new development activities, together with impact fee administrative costs. The formula used to calculate the police services impact fee shall be established as follows for each property type: 
The Village shall employ the following schedule to compute the amount of fee to be paid: 
Land Use/Occupancy Type Cost per Unit of per Square Foot Residential $136.00 per Unit Non-residential $0.20 per Square Foot  
2.  The fee per residential unit or fee per nonresidential square foot shall be multiplied by the feepayer's total number of units for residential property or total number of square feet for nonresidential property. The total will then be multiplied by 1.05 to accommodate the general administrative charge of five percent. The resulting total is the police services impact fee and administrative charge which shall be paid by the feepayer. 
3.  In the case of development activity involving a change of use or magnitude of use in which a building permit is required, the proposed development shall be required to pay an impact fee only for the increase in the development activity. The impact fee shall be the difference between the computed impact fee for the proposed development activity and the computed impact fee for the existing development activity. Any building permit which expires or is revoked after the effective date of this subsection and for which a fee has not previously been paid under this subsection shall be required to comply with the provisions herein. No refunds will be given for proposed development activity resulting in a negative fee calculation. 
4.  If the type of activity within a proposed or current development is not specified, the village manager or his designee shall use the activity most nearly comparable in computing the fee. 
5.  In determining existing development activity and the units or square feet of proposed or existing development, the building and planning department shall use the building permit and the certificate of use information contained in the building or zoning records of Miami-Dade County or the village. 
f.  Exemptions. 
1.  Alteration, expansion or replacement of an existing building or unit where the use is not changed and the number of units or square footage is not increased shall not be subject to the impact fees. The burden of demonstrating the previous existence of a use or structure or previous payment of impact fees shall be upon the feepayer. In cases where there is an existing use, any additional fees shall be based upon the alteration to the existing use or structure. 
2.  Governmental or public facilities are exempt from the impact fee, including those parcels, grounds, building or structures owned by federal, state, county, village, the Miami-Dade County School Board, or the South Florida Water Management District, and related to the operation of those entities and used for governmental purposes including, but not limited to, governmental offices, police and fire stations, airports, seaports, parking facilities, equipment yards, sanitation facilities, water control structures, schools, parks, and similar facilities in or through which general government operations are conducted. It is provided, however, that the following shall not be considered governmental or public facilities and shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection: 
A.  Privately owned properties or facilities leased for governmental operations or activities; and 
B.  Public properties or facilities used for private residential, commercial or industrial activities. 
3.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures where the use is not changed, such that an additional impact does not result and the number of units or square footage is not materially increased, is exempt. 
4.  Parking garages are exempt from impact fees when the structure is accessory to a primary use structure. 
5.  An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer prior to paying the impact fee. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed to have been waived by feepayer. 
g.  Expenditures. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Planning, design and construction plan preparation; 
B.  Permitting and fees; 
C.  Land and materials acquisition, including any costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
D.  Relocation of utilities required by the construction of improvements and additions to police facilities; 
E.  Design and construction of new drainage facilities required by the construction of improvements and additions to police facilities; 
F.  Landscaping and site preparation, including demucking, filling to flood criteria and compaction; 
G.  Construction management and inspection; 
H.  Surveying, soils and materials testing and removal of hazardous and solid waste materials; 
I.  Acquisition of capital equipment for police services; 
J.  Repayment of any monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, which were used to fund any of the growth-necessitated improvements as herein provided. Any funds that are borrowed shall be spent only to mitigate the impact of new development; 
K.  Purchase of land for additional police stations and support facilities needed to accommodate new growth; 
L.  Design and construction of additional police stations and other facilities or design and improvement of existing police stations and other facilities needed to accommodate new growth; 
M.  Purchase of other capital equipment for stations affected by new growth. 
2.  The five percent general administrative cost portion of the impact fee shall be deposited into the general fund and shall be used to offset the costs of administering the impact fee. 
h.  Establishment of fund. Impact fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be accounted for in a capital outlay impact fee fund to be established by the village. 
(3)  Municipal facilities impact fees. 
a.  Short title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Facilities Impact Fees Ordinance." 
b.  Legislative findings. The village council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  The Florida Legislature, through enactment of F.S. ch. 163, has sought to encourage the village to enact impact fees. 
2.  All residential and commercial development is deemed to create an impact and therefore an increased demand for municipal facilities including land, buildings, and equipment. As such, the cost of new facilities should be borne by new users to the extent that new use requires new facilities. 
3.  As such, the village council wishes to adopt fees which it has determined to be consistent with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict funding of the municipal facilities and capital improvements from additional revenue sources to enhance municipal facilities in the village. 
c.  Definitions. In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, term, phrase or part hereof where the context will permit the following definitions will apply: 
Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat. 
Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by wall in which there are not communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the village's building and planning department authorizing the construction or change of use of any building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
Comprehensive development master plan (CDMP) means the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
Credit means the present value of past provisions made by new developments for the cost of existing or future capital improvements. 
Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the building code or any applicable village ordinance. 
Encumbered means monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligated the village to expend the funded amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services or the conveyance of real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of this subsection and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this subsection. Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this subsection. 
Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this subsection, or a person who has paid an impact fee, or provided a letter of credit pursuant to this subsection. 
Impact fee means the proportionate fair share charge required to be paid in accordance with this subsection. 
Improvement means any physical improvement related to property, construction costs or other facility, or acquisition of capital equipment with respect to the impact of development. 
Person, for the purposes of this subsection, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by the law of the state to own and develop real property. 
Unit or unit of development means a residential structure which is a quantifiable increment of development activity, e.g., a single-family home, or a residential module, e.g., each condominium or apartment unit within a condominium complex or building. 
Village manager shall mean the village manager of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
d.  Impact fees in general. 
1.  Any application for building permit for residential or non-residential development activity within the corporate limits of the village shall be subject to the assessment of a municipal facilities impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this subsection. No such building permit shall be issued by the village until the applicant has paid the assessed impact fee as calculated pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Notwithstanding payment of the impact fees pursuant to this subsection, other state, county and village development regulations may limit the issuance of building permits for development 
3.  In the event impact fees are paid prior to. or. concurrently with, the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
4.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment or expansion or modification of an existing use on a site which requires the issuance of a building permit the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the most intense previous use. 
5.  If a building permit is canceled without development commencing, then the impact feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest of the impact fee paid except that the village shall retain an administrative charge of 71/2 percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The impact feepayer shall submit an application for such a refund to the village manager or his designee within 30 days of the expiration of the order or permit or thereafter shall be deemed to waive any right to a refund. 
6.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date of collection of fee shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner, without interest provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the village manager or designee within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. Any claim not so timely made shall be deemed waived. 
7.  Funds shall be deemed expended for the purposes of this subsection when a contract or agreement encumbering all or a portion of the payment of said funds shall be approved by final village action. 
e.  Impact fee schedule. Any person requesting a building permit for residential development activity shall pay the impact fee as follows: 
IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
Residential Per 
Housing 
Unit $821.68  
Nonresidential Per Gross 
Square Foot Commercial shopping center 25,000 GSF or less $0.393 Commercial shopping center 25,000-50,000 GSF $0.337 Commercial shopping center 50,001-100,000 GSF $0.295 Commercial shopping center 101,000-200,000 GSF $0.262 Commercial shopping center - over 200,000 GSF $0.236 Office/institutional 10,000 GSF or less $0.528 Office/institutional 10,001-25,000 GSF $0.488 Office/institutional 25,001-50,000 GSF $0.461 Medical dental office $0.478 Hospital $0.399 Business park $0.373 Light industrial $0.041 Manufacturing $0.212 Warehousing $0.151 Mini-warehouse $0.0047 Other nonresidential lodging (per room) $51.95 Elementary school (per student) $9.44 Secondary school (per student) $10.63 Day care (per student) $18.89  
In addition to the municipal facilities fee as set forth above, each feepayer shall pay to the village a nonrefundable general administrative charge in the amount of 714 percent for the processing of all materials relating to improvements of municipal facilities. 
Note: For a more detailed explanation of the computation of this impact fee schedule, see Village of Pinecrest "Municipal Facilities Impact Fees. Fee methodology and Computation" report dated October 17. 2011. 
f.  Exemptions. 
1.  Alteration, expansion or replacement of existing dwelling units where no additional dwelling units are created. 
2.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not create additional dwelling units. 
3.  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact fee has previously been paid. 
4.  All development activity permitted by an existing development of regional impact order adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, and approved prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be exempt. 
5.  An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer prior to paying the impact fee. Any exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the application for building permit Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed to have been waived by the feepayer. 
g.  Expenditures. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee, including any accrued interest shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Planning, design, and construction plan preparation; 
B.  Permitting and fees; 
C.  Land and materials acquisition, including costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
D.  Financing of municipal building acquisition, construction, expansion or improvements; 
E.  Design and construction of new drainage facilities required; 
F.  Landscaping and site preparation, including demucking, filling to flood criteria and compaction; 
G.  Construction management and inspection; 
H.  Surveying, soils and materials testing and removal of hazardous and solid waste materials; 
I.  Acquisition of capital equipment for municipal offices excluding police and parks and recreation offices; 
J.  Repayment of any monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, which were used to fund any of the growth-necessitated improvements as herein provided. Any funds that are borrowed shall be spent only to mitigate the impact of new development; 
K.  Purchase of land for additional municipal offices excluding police and parks and recreation offices. 
2.  The 71/2 percent general administrative cost portion of the impact fee shall be deposited into the general fund and shall be used to offset the costs of administering the impact fee. 
h.  Establishment of fund. Impact fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be accounted for in a capital outlay impact fee fund to be established by the village. 
i.  Appeals of administrative decision. A decision of the village manager may be appealed by the feepayer to the village council. If a feepayer wishes to appeal, that feepayer shall first file a notice of appeal within 30 days after the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision by the village manager; or 
2.  Acceptance of payment by the director of the village's building and planning department of the municipal facilities impact fee. 
The feepayer shall, when filing an appeal, submit a letter which provides a full explanation of the request the reasons for the appeal, and all supporting documentation. 
(4)  Stormwater drainage impact fees. 
a.  Short title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Stormwater Drainage Impact Fees Ordinance." 
b.  Legislative findings. The village council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  The Florida Legislature, through enactment of F.S. ch. 163, has sought to encourage the village to enact impact fees. 
2.  All residential and commercial development is deemed to create an impact and therefore an increased demand for stormwater drainage facilities including land and related improvements. As such, the cost of new facilities should be borne by new users to the extent that new use requires new facilities. 
3.  As such, the village council wishes to adopt fees which it has determined to be consistent with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict funding of the stormwater drainage facilities and capital improvements from additional revenue sources to enhance stormwater drainage facilities in the village. 
c.  Definitions. In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, term, phrase or part hereof where the context will permit, the following definitions will apply: 
    Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat 
    Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by wall in which there are not communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
    Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the village's building and planning department authorizing the construction or change of use of any building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
    Comprehensive development master plan (CDMP) means the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
    Credit means the present value of past provisions made by new developments for the cost of existing or future capital improvements. 
    Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the building code or any applicable village ordinance. 
    Encumbered means monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligated the village to expend the funded amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services or the conveyance of real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
    Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of this subsection and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this subsection. Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this subsection. 
    Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this subsection, or a person who has paid an impact fee, or provided a letter of credit pursuant to this subsection. 
    Impact fee means the proportionate fair share charge required to be paid in accordance with this subsection. 
    Improvement means any physical improvement related to property, construction costs or other facility, or acquisition of capital equipment with respect to the impact of development. 
    Person, for the purposes of this subsection, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by the law of the state to own and develop real property. 
    Unit or unit of development means a residential structure which is a quantifiable increment of development activity, e.g., a single-family home, or a residential module, e.g., each condominium or apartment unit within a condominium complex or building. 
    Village manager shall mean the village manager of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
d.  Impact fees in general. 
1.  Any application for building permit for residential or non-residential development activity within the corporate limits of the village shall be subject to the assessment of a stormwater drainage impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this subsection. No such building permit shall be issued by the village until the applicant has paid the assessed impact fee as calculated pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Notwithstanding payment of the impact fees pursuant to this subsection, other state, county and village development regulations may limit the issuance of building permits for development activity. 
3.  In the event impact fees are paid prior to, or, concurrently with, the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
4.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use on a site which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the most intense previous use. 
5.  If a building permit is canceled without development commencing, then the impact feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid except that the village shall retain an administrative charge of 71/2 percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The impact feepayer shall submit an application for such a refund to the village manager or his designee within 30 days of the expiration of the order or permit, or thereafter shall be deemed to waive any right to a refund. 
6.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date of collection of fee shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner, without interest, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the village manager or designee within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. Any claim not so timely made shall be deemed waived. 
7.  Funds shall be deemed expended for the purposes of this subsection when a contract or agreement encumbering all or a portion of the payment of said funds shall be approved by final village action. 
e.  Impact fee schedule. Any person requesting a building permit for residential or non-residential development activity shall pay the impact fee as follows: 
IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
Impervious Coverage Per Square Foot or Portion Thereof $0.1218  
Note: Ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be excluded from stormwater drainage impact fee computations. 
In addition to the stormwater drainage fee as set forth above, each feepayer shall pay to the village a nonrefundable general administrative charge in the amount of 71/2 percent for the processing of all materials relating to improvements of stormwater drainage facilities. 
Note: For a more detailed explanation of the computation of this impact fee schedule, see Village of Pinecrest "Stormwater Drainage Impact Fee, Fee methodology and Computation" report, dated March 20, 2012. 
f.  Exemptions. 
1.  Alteration or replacement of an existing building or dwelling unit where the area of impervious surface coverage is not increased shall not be subject to the impact fees. 
2.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not create additional dwelling units. 
3.  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact fee has previously been paid. 
4.  All development activity permitted by an existing development of regional impact order adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, and approved prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be exempt. 
5.  An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer prior to paying the impact fee. Any exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the application for building permit Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed to have been waived by the feepayer. 
g.  Expenditures. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee, including any accrued interest, shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Planning, design, and construction plan preparation; 
B.  Permitting and fees; 
C.  Land and materials acquisition, including costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
D.  Financing of stormwater drainage improvements, including acquisition, construction, expansion or improvements; 
E.  Design and construction of new drainage facilities required; 
F.  Landscaping and site preparation, including demucking, filling to flood criteria and compaction; 
G.  Construction management and inspection; 
H.  Surveying, soils and materials testing and removal of hazardous and solid waste materials; 
I.  Acquisition of capital equipment for stormwater drainage improvement and maintenance; 
J.  Repayment of any monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, which were used to fund any of the growth-necessitated improvements as herein provided. Any funds that are borrowed shall be spent only to mitigate the impact of new development; 
K.  Purchase of land for additional stormwater drainage improvements; 
2.  The 71/2 percent general administrative cost portion of the impact fee shall be deposited into the general fund and shall be used to offset the costs of administering the impact fee. 
h.  Establishment of fund. Impact fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be accounted for in a capital outlay impact fee fund to be established by the village. 
i.  Appeals of administrative decision. A decision of the village manager may be appealed by the feepayer to the village council. If a feepayer wishes to appeal, that feepayer shall first file a notice of appeal within 30 days after the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision by the village manager; or 
2.  Acceptance of payment by the director of the village's building and planning department of the stormwater drainage impact fee. 
The feepayer shall, when filing an appeal, submit a letter which provides a full explanation of the request, the reasons for the appeal, and all supporting documentation. 
(5)  Potable water impact fees. 
a.  Short title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Potable Water Impact Fees Ordinance." 
b.  Legislative findings. The village council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  The Florida Legislature, through enactment of F.S. ch. 163, has sought to encourage the village to enact impact fees. 
2.  All residential and commercial development is deemed to create an impact and therefore an increased demand for potable water facilities including land and related improvements. As such, the cost of new facilities should be borne by new users to the extent that new use requires new facilities. 
3.  As such, the village council wishes to adopt fees which it has determined to be consistent with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or restrict funding of the potable water facilities and capital improvements from additional revenue sources to enhance potable water facilities in the village. 
c.  Definitions. In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, term, phrase or part hereof where the context will permit, the following definitions will apply: 
    Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat. 
    Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by wall in which there are not communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
    Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the village's building and planning department authorizing the construction or change of use of any building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
    Comprehensive development master plan (CDMP) means the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
    Credit means the present value of past provisions made by new developments for the cost of existing or future capital improvements. 
    Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the building code or any applicable village ordinance. 
    Encumbered means monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligated the village to expend the funded amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services or the conveyance of real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
    Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of this subsection and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this subsection. 
    Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this subsection. 
    Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this subsection, or a person who has paid an impact fee, or provided a letter of credit pursuant to this subsection. 
    Impact fee means the proportionate fair share charge required to be paid in accordance with this subsection. 
    Improvement means any physical improvement related to property, construction costs or other facility, or acquisition of capital equipment with respect to the impact of development. 
    Person, for the purposes of this subsection, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by the law of the state to own and develop real property. 
    Unit or unit of development means a residential structure which is a quantifiable increment of development activity, e.g., a single-family home, or a residential module, e.g., each condominium or apartment unit within a condominium complex or building. 
    Village manager shall mean the village manager of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
d.  Impact fees in general. 
1.  Any application for building permit for residential development activity within the corporate limits of the village in instances where the cost of proposed construction exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of existing development shall be subject to the assessment of a potable water impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this subsection. No such building permit shall be issued by the village until the applicant has paid the assessed impact fee as calculated pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Notwithstanding payment of the impact fees pursuant to this subsection, other state, county and village development regulations may limit the issuance of building permits for development activity. 
3.  In the event impact fees are paid prior to, or, concurrently with, the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
4.  If a building permit is canceled without development commencing, then the impact feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid except that the village shall retain an administrative charge of 71/2 percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The impact feepayer shall submit an application for such a refund to the village manager or his designee within 30 days of the expiration of the order or permit, or thereafter shall be deemed to waive any right to a refund. 
5.  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date of collection of fee shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner, without interest, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the village manager or designee within 180 days of the expiration of the ten-year period. Any claim not so timely made shall be deemed waived. 
6.  Funds shall be deemed expended for the purposes of this subsection when a contract or agreement encumbering all or a portion of the payment of said funds shall be approved by final village action. 
e.  Impact fee schedule. Any person requesting a building permit for residential development activity in instances where the cost of proposed construction exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of existing development shall pay the impact fee as follows: 
Potable Water System Development Impact Fee 
Zoning District Cost per single-family residence EU-I $5,026 EU-M or EU-S $2,957  
In addition to the potable water system development fee as set forth above, each feepayer shall pay to the village a nonrefundable general administrative charge in the amount of 71/2 percent for the processing of all materials relating to improvements of potable water system facilities. 
Note: For a more detailed explanation of the computation of this impact fee schedule, see Village of Pinecrest "Potable Water System Development Impact Fee Study" report, by Stantec, dated June 2017." 
f.  Exemptions. 
1.  Alteration or replacement of an existing building or dwelling unit where the cost of construction is less than 50 percent of the assessed d value of the existing development shall not be subject to the impact fees. 
2.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not create additional dwelling units. 
3.  All development activity permitted by an existing development of regional impact order adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, and approved prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be exempt. 
4.  An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer prior to paying the impact fee. Any exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the application for building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed to have been waived by the feepayer. 
g.  Expenditures. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee, including any accrued interest, shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Planning, design, and construction plan preparation; 
b.  Permitting and fees; 
c.  Land and materials acquisition, including costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
d.  Financing of potable water system improvements, including acquisition, construction, expansion or improvements; 
e.  Design and construction of new potable water system facilities required; 
f.  Landscaping and site preparation, including demucking, filling and compaction; 
g.  Construction management and inspection; 
h.  Surveying, soils and materials testing and removal of hazardous and solid waste materials; 
i.  Acquisition of capital equipment for potable water system improvement and maintenance; 
j.  Repayment of any monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, which were used to fund any of the growth-necessitated improvements as herein provided. Any funds that are borrowed shall be spent only to mitigate the impacts of new development; 
k.  Purchase of land for additional potable water system improvements; 
2.  The 71/2 percent general administrative cost portion of the impact fee shall be deposited into the general fund and shall be used to offset the costs of administering the impact fee. 
h.  Establishment of fund. Impact fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be accounted for in a capital outlay impact fee fund to be established by the village. 
i.  Appeals of administrative decision. A decision of the village manager may be appealed by the feepayer to the village council. If a feepayer wishes to appeal, that feepayer shall first file a notice of appeal within 30 days after the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision by the village manager; or 
2.  Acceptance of payment by the director of the village's building and planning department of the potable water system development impact fee. 
The feepayer shall, when filing an appeal, submit a letter which provides a full explanation of the request, the reasons for the appeal, and all supporting documentation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10,  1, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 2004-8,  1, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2004-9,  1, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2011-11,  1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2012-6,  1, 4-10-12; Ord. No. 2012-12,  1, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 2018-4,  1, 4-10-18) 
Secs. 8-2-8-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-13,  1, adopted September 11, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former  8-2-8-4 in their entirety. Former  8-2 pertained to variance procedures. Former  8-3 pertained to variance limits. Former  8-4 pertained to variance appeals. The former sections derived from Ord. No. 97-18, adopted November 27, 1997. 
Chapters 9-11 - RESERVED 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECURITY ALARMS 

Sec. 12-21. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide an emergency contact form for each alarm systems owner and to encourage security alarm users and alarm businesses (sales, installation, customer service and/or monitoring) to maintain the operational reliability and the proper use of alarm systems in order to limit unnecessary police emergency responses to false alarms and alarm malfunctions. 
(b)  This article applies to all alarm systems, including both local alarms and alarms sent to a central monitoring station, which are designed to elicit a response from the Police Department under the presumption that a crime has occurred, requires alarm system registration, provides for penalties for violations, creates a system of administration, and provides for an appeal process. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-22. - Definitions. 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons selected by the police chief to administer, control and review alarm registrations and false alarm notifications. 
    Alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police, which is designed either to be initiated purposefully by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. At the sole discretion of the alarm administrator, multiple false alarm notifications in a twenty-four-hour period of time may be counted as only one false alarm notification. 
    Alarm site means a single premise or location served by an alarm system or systems. 
    Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police services of the village, including, but not limited to, local alarms. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site. 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premise that does not have a local alarm. 
    False alarm notification means an alarm notification to the police department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense. Excluded from this definition are: 
(1)  Alarms occurring during electrical storms, hurricanes, tornadoes and other acts of God; where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the system requiring repair services; or 
(2)  The intermittent disruption or disruption of the telephone circuits used by the alarm system that are beyond the control of the alarm company and/or alarm user; or 
(3)  Electrical power disruption or outage in excess of two hours; or 
(4)  Alarms caused by a failure of the equipment at the alarm monitoring company with written verification. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of the structure protected. 
    Monitoring company means a company properly licensed by the State of Florida to monitor alarm systems. 
    Officer shall mean the Village of Pinecrest Police Department employee responding to an alarm covered by this article. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity. 
    Police chief means the chief law enforcement officer of the village or his or her designee. 
    Registered owner means the person designated in the application process as required in subsection 12-31(c)(1) who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site, and who is responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm and payment of penalties and fees relating to the operation of the alarm system. 
    Special trunkline means a telephone line leading into a communications center of the police department that is for the primary purpose of receiving emergency messages that originate from automatic protection devices and are transmitted directly or indirectly through an alarm monitoring company. 
    Village means the Village of Pinecrest, Dade County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-23. - Registration required; application; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  All persons must complete and submit to the village an emergency contact registration form for their alarm if they operate or cause to be operated an alarm system in the village. A separate registration is required for each alarm system. Upon receipt of a completed registration form, the police department shall issue a numbered alarm sticker to the applicant to facilitate retrieval of registration information. Each registration information must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person who is responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system under this article; 
(2)  The name, address and daytime and evening telephone numbers of at least one alternative person who can be contacted in the case of activation of the alarm system in the event that the alarm owner cannot be contacted; 
(3)  The classification of the alarm site, as residential, commercial or apartment; 
(4)  When required by this article, certification by a person licensed by the State of Florida to install or design systems stating: 
a.  The day of installation or maintenance of the alarm system, whichever is applicable; and 
b.  The current Florida State License of the person performing or directly supervising the installation or maintenance of the alarm system. 
(5)  Any other information required by the police chief which is required for enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of registering an alarm shall be a violation of law. 
(c)  An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person. When property changes ownership a new registration form with updated information must be completed by the new owner within 30 days. 
(d)  An alarm owner shall inform the village in writing of any change that alters any information listed on the registration within 15 days. No fee or charge shall be assessed for such changes. 
(e)  Upon the police department becoming aware of any unregistered alarm system, the following procedure shall apply prior to enforcement of the penalties contained in this section: 
(1)  A certified, return-receipt requested, letter that includes a blank registration form, shall be sent to the owner of record of the property, tenant or listed business proprietor in question notifying him/her of the requirement to register their alarm. 
(2)  This letter shall give the owner, tenant or business proprietor 15 days from receipt of this letter to comply by submitting the required registration form to the village. 
(3)  Failure to comply within the fifteen-day period shall make the alarm owner subject to the assessment of a twenty-five-dollar fee. An additional twenty-five-dollar fee shall be assessed for each subsequent false alarm notification where the alarm owner has not supplied the required information and shall be in addition to any other fees imposed. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-24. - Alarm systems in apartment complexes. 
(a)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm registration form from the village if any alarm system is operated on their premises. 
(b)  The individual or entity named in the master alarm registration form is responsible for false alarm notification emitted from unoccupied residential units. 
(c)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall provide a separate completed registration form for any alarm system operated in a non-residential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to common tenant areas and offices, and storage and equipment area. 
(d)  A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm registration form from the village before obtaining or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-25. - Registration information update. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of alarm system owners to notify the police department within 15 days of any changes in registration or emergency contact information. 
(b)  If the police department respond to an alarm and find that the registration or emergency contact information are incorrect, they shall forward a certified letter, return receipt requested, to the alarm owner, or in the absence of correct registration information to the location where the alarm system is installed. This letter shall include a blank registration form and shall inform them of the requirement to supply registration information. 
(c)  The alarm system owner must submit correct updated information to the police department within 15 days of receipt of this letter. Failure to do so will make the alarm system owner subject to the assessment of a twenty-five-dollar fee. This fee shall then be imposed for every instance where the police respond and the alarm owner has failed to supply current information and shall be in addition to any other fees imposed. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-26. - Proper alarm systems operations and maintenance. 
(a)  A registered alarm owner or person in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm notifications; 
(2)  Respond or cause his/her representative to appear at the systems location within a reasonable period of time when notified by the village to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises; 
(3)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; and 
(4)  Post any alarm sticker issued by the village on a window nearest to the front door of the residence or business of the alarm site or in the case of a gated house where it can be easily seen by responding officers. 
(b)  A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated (or 15 minutes for systems operating under UL 365 or UL 609). 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-27. - Signals sent to governmental agencies. 
(a)  No person in charge of a local alarm or alarm system shall permit an alarm indication from such alarm to be sent directly to any village governmental entity or facility without specific written permission of the police chief. 
(b)  In the event that such permission is obtained, the person in control of the local alarm or alarm system that sends its alarm signal indication directly to the village governmental entity or facility shall adjust the mechanism, or cause the mechanism to be adjusted, so that upon activation of the alarm the system will not transmit another alarm signal without being manually reset. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-28. - Use of licensed contractors. 
    A registered alarm owner or person in control of an alarm system shall not contract or retain an alarm company which is not properly licensed. Unlicensed alarm contracting is a violation of Florida Statutes and punishable by fine and/or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-29. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
    A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the village shall: 
(1)  Be properly licensed as required by the State of Florida and any jurisdiction where they have an actual place of business; 
(2)  Report alarms only over special trunklines or other communications facilities designed by the village or its contractor; and 
(3)  Communicate alarm notifications to the village in a manner and form determined by the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-30. - Alarm system operating instructions. 
    A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or passwords should not be included in these instructions. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-31. - Alarm dispatch records. 
(a)  The officer responding to a dispatch resulting from any alarm covered by this article shall record such information as necessary to permit the police chief to maintain records, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The identification of the registered owner or, if no registration exists, the owner or person in charge of the premises, if known; 
(2)  The exact address of the alarm site; 
(3)  The dispatched received date, time and arrival time; 
(4)  The weather conditions; 
(5)  The area of the premises involved, if known; and 
(6)  The name of the registered owner's representative, if on the premises. 
(b)  The responding officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense or was a false alarm/alarm notification. 
(c)  In the case of an assumed false alarm or alarm malfunction, the responding officer shall leave notice at the alarm site that the police department has responded to a false alarm or alarm malfunction notification. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  Date and time of the police response to the false alarm notification; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding officer; and 
(3)  A statement that shall, in substance, urge the registered owner to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated and maintained to avoid service fees. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-32. - System performance reviews. 
    It shall be considered prima facia proof in any alarm system that experiences seven or more false alarms within a registration year that there is reason to believe that the alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms and/or alarm malfunction. In such instances as detailed in section 12-33 below, the police chief shall have the authority to order the alarm owner to attend a meeting with the police chief, or his/her designee, where the alarm permit holder and the individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system come to the police station to review the circumstances of each false alarm/alarm malfunction. As a result of this meeting the police chief may require certain improvements to the alarm system such as, but not limited to, power, telephone and remote circuit surge protectors. Failure to either meet with the police chief or to comply with the systems improvement recommendations within 30 days of written notification is grounds for charging an additional $200.00 fee for each additional false alarm notification. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 12-33. - False alarm notifications. 
    The owner of the real property or the landlord of the leasehold premises where an alarm system is located and the owner of an alarm or the person in control of an alarm shall be subject to fees or penalties concerning the alarm(s) located on the property, within the leasehold premises or under their control depending on the number of false alarm notifications emitted from an alarm system covered by this article within a 12-month registration period commencing on January 1 of each year based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  No fee shall be assessed for the first three false alarm(s) malfunctions at the same specific alarm site during each 12-month permit period commencing on January 1 of each year. Thereafter the following fees shall be paid by the permit holder for each false alarm. 
Number of False Alarms/Alarm Malfunctions Fee per False Alarm  
Fourth\$100.00 
Fifth\200.00 
Sixth and above\300.00 
(2)  In the event of a second alarm within a 24-hour period occurring at a business premises during nonbusiness hours, the owner, or their designated emergency contact, shall respond within 45 minutes to the alarm site upon notification by the police department. Failure to comply with the provisions of this paragraph shall result in a $200.00 fee. 
(3)  Any person who operates a newly installed alarm system shall not be subject to false alarm notifications during the 60 calendar days following the systems completion provided a completed emergency contact form is received by the police chief. The completion date of the alarm installation shall be certified by a person currently licensed by the State of Florida or the form shall show the purchase date of self-installed systems. 
(4)  Alarm activation caused by an actual criminal offense or with evidence of a criminal attempt shall not be counted as a false alarm notification. 
(5)  The police chief or designee may waive fees and penalties for a false alarm notification upon receiving evidence of the following: 
a.  The false alarm was caused by a defect in the alarm system; and 
b.  The registered owner or person in control of the alarm system was unaware of the defect which caused the false alarm; and 
c.  The defect which caused the false alarm was repaired; and 
d.  A certificate from an alarm technician is submitted to the police chief within 30 days from the issuance of a false alarm notification, showing that the defect which caused the false alarm was not due to human error and that such defect has been repaired. 
If the police chief or designee declines to waive such fees and penalties, the owner of the pertinent real property, landlord of the leasehold premises where the alarm is located, the alarm owner, or the alarm company may appeal the assessment of fees or penalties to a special magistrate pursuant to section 12-34 of this article. In the appeal, the foregoing evidence of a defect in the alarm system may be presented to the special magistrate and such evidence shall be reviewed de novo. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 99-07,  1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2018-15,  2, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 12-34. - Appeal of fees or penalties. 
(a)  If the village, through the police chief, assesses administrative fees or penalties, the police chief shall send by registered mail, return receipt requested to the owner of the real property, or landlord of the leasehold premises where the alarm system is located and the alarm owner or the applicable alarm company written notice of the assessment of a fee and of the right to an appeal. 
(b)  The owner of the real property, landlord of the leasehold premises where the alarm is located, the alarm owner or the alarm company may appeal the decision of the village to a special master appointed by the village by submitting a written request for a review, together with a fee of $50.00, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days, after receipt of the notice from the police chief. If a request for an appeal is not filed within ten days the decision of the police chief is final. If the applicant is successful upon appeal, the $50.00 fee shall be returned. 
(c)  Filing of a request for an appeal shall stay the imposition of fees or penalties by the police chief until the special master has completed his/her review and rendered a decision. A hearing shall be scheduled and concluded within 30 days from the date of written request for same as received unless rescheduled by mutual agreement. 
(d)  The decision of the special master shall be determined by the conducting of a formal hearing and consideration of the evidence of any interested parties. 
(e)  The special master shall render his/her decision within 20 days after the hearing is conducted. 
(f)  In the case of penalties for excess false alarm notifications, this decision shall be based upon whether a preponderance of the evidence establishes that the alarm system has experienced the number of false alarm notifications based upon the criterion for false alarm notifications contained in this article. 
(g)  In any other cases, the decision shall be made upon a preponderance of evidence that either establishes or fails to affirm any other applicable violation of this article. 
(h)  The special master shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the police chief. 
(i)  The decision of the special master is final as to administrative remedies within the village, but does not preclude an appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(j)  Fees and costs incurred either as service charges for false alarms, late fees, violations and/or hearing assessments shall constitute a lien against the premises to the same extent as a lien for special assessment, and with the same penalties and same rights of collection for foreclosure sale and forfeitures obtained for special assessment liens, and may be handled in that manner by the village. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to pay any cost assessed pursuant to this article. The refusal or failure to make payment within 30 days of being notified of such expenses after assessment or once an appeal has been concluded, shall constitute a separate offense against the village. The penalty for this violation shall be a charge of not more than $250.00. 
(k)  Should any fee be assessed pursuant to this article and remain unpaid in excess of 100 calendar days from the date that the charge is billed, a collection fee in the amount of 20 percent of the outstanding balance shall be assessed and shall be payable by the owner of the premises or permit holder in addition to the original fee. The owner or permit holder shall also be responsible for any legal fees or costs incurred by the village in enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-17,  1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 99-07,  2, 3, 8-3-99) 
Sec. 12-35. - Alarm awareness class. 
(a)  The village may provide an alarm awareness class to inform alarm users of problems created by false alarm dispatches and teach alarm users how to operate alarm systems without generating false alarms. 
(b)  Successful completion of the alarm awareness class by the alarm user will result in the award of a class completion certificate. The certificate may be used as a credit against one chargeable false alarm report and the imposition of any related administrative fee as a result of that one false alarm. The certificate must be used within twelve months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 98-11,  1, 11-10-98) 
Secs. 12-36-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall be effective: 
    Average retail price shall mean the price at retail for merchandise, goods or services at which similar merchandise, goods or services were being sold immediately preceding a declaration of public emergency. 
    Emergency shall mean a condition which threatens or adversely affects the public health, safety, general welfare or security and which is or threatens to be beyond the control of those public and private agencies normally responsible for the management of such a condition, resulting from an act of imminent threatened act of war, riot, terrorism, mob or other acts of violence, from conflagration, explosion, hazardous materials incident or release, from a weather event such as a flood, hurricane or tornado, from a disruption in utility systems, or from any other cause. 
    Village manager shall mean the village manager, the acting village manager designated in accordance with section 3.3 of the Village Charter or interim village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-52. - Applicability of provisions. 
    All officers, employees, contractors, vendors, boards, commissions, authorities and other agencies of the village are subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-53. - Emergency management structure. 
(a)  The village manager shall perform the function of director of emergency management and shall implement, manage and report on all actions authorized and taken under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The village manager or the village manager's designee shall plan for the coordination of those actions necessary for the creation and maintenance of an effective emergency response capability to prepare for and manage emergency conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-54. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
    The village manager, when acting as the director of emergency management, shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To declare a state of emergency pursuant to provisions of this ordinance and to inform the mayor and village council of the reasons for and status of events requiring declaration. 
(2)  To direct the creation, revision and the exercise of emergency response plans consistent with state and county emergency plans for the mitigation of, preparation for, response to, and recovery from emergencies, and to exercise all powers permitted by F.S. ch. 252. 
(3)  To recommend a budget to the village council for the creation and maintenance of an emergency response capability as provided in this article. 
(4)  To issue emergency regulations necessary for the protection of life and property, establishment of public order, and control of adverse conditions affecting public welfare resulting from an emergency. 
(5)  To plan for and develop an emergency operations control center to include equipment, manning and operational procedures necessary to the management and control of emergency conditions. 
(6)  To develop and manage the village's emergency awareness public information program. 
(7)  To apply for public assistance or other disaster relief funding. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-55. - Declaration of a state of emergency. 
(a)  The village manager shall have the sole authority to declare a state of emergency. 
(b)  Any declaration of a state of emergency and all emergency regulations activated under the provisions of this article shall be confirmed by the village council by resolution no later than at the next regular meeting, unless the nature of the emergency renders a meeting of the village council impossible. Confirmation of the emergency declaration shall disclose the reasons for the actions proposed and taken to manage the emergency and other pertinent data relating to the emergency requiring the declaration. 
(c)  Emergency resolutions authorized by this article may include, but are not limited to, the following subjects: 
(1)  Evacuation; 
(2)  Curfews, declaration of areas off limits; 
(3)  Suspension or regulation of the sale of, or offer to sell, with or without consideration, alcoholic beverages, ammunition, firearms, explosives, or combustibles; 
(4)  Prohibiting the sale of merchandise, goods or services at more than the average retail price; 
(5)  Water use restrictions; 
(6)  Suspension of local building regulations; 
(7)  Regulating the use of and rationing fuel, ice and other essentials; 
(8)  Emergency procurement procedures. 
(d)  A declaration of a state of emergency shall activate the emergency plans applicable to the village. A declaration of a state of emergency shall automatically invoke the emergency measures of F.S.  870.044, if the emergency relates to overt acts of violence or the imminent threat of such violence. 
(e)  A state of emergency, when declared, shall continue in effect from day-to- day until declared to be terminated by the village manager or village council in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency, the village manager shall post a written notice of such declaration upon the main bulletin board in village hall, and shall, as promptly as practicable, file with the village clerk a notice of a declared state of emergency, or emergency measure declared or ordered and promulgated by virtue of Florida Statutes. The village manager shall notify the local media if practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-56. - Termination of a state of emergency. 
    A state of emergency shall be terminated by a vote of the village council if practicable or upon the certification of the village manager that the conditions leading to or causing the emergency no longer exist and the village's agencies and departments are able to manage the situation without extraordinary assistance; provided, that a state of emergency established under F.S.  870.041-870.048, shall terminate at the end of a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours after the declaration of the emergency, unless, prior to the end of the seventy-two-hour period, the village manager or the village council has terminated such state of emergency. Any extension of the seventy-two-hour time limit must be accomplished by a request from the village manager and the concurrence of the village council by resolution. Notice of the termination of the emergency declaration shall be made to the public by the village manager by the same means as the notice of the declaration of the state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-57. - Police emergencies. 
(a)  An emergency may be declared because of civil unrest or imminent threat to public peace or order when the chief of police, or if unavailable, the next highest ranking officer in the village police department chain of command certifies to the village manager that an emergency condition arising from hostile actions of others, armed or unarmed, or other imminent threat to public peace or order, requires extraordinary measures of control, including, but not limited to curfew; blockade; proscription of the sale of firearms, other weapons or alcoholic beverages; explosives and combustibles; evacuation; and other similar actions. The village manager may issue a declaration of a state of emergency in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The declaration of a state of emergency because of civil unrest or imminent threat to public peace or order, shall authorize the issuance of emergency resolutions and other appropriate resolutions, as may be required and may, if applicable, require automatic emergency measures pursuant to F.S.  870.044. In addition, additional discretionary emergency measures pursuant to F.S.  870.045, may be issued. 
(c)  A state of emergency may be declared because of fire and hazardous materials emergencies, utility emergencies, and weather emergencies when the chief of police, or designee, certifies to the village manager that an emergency condition exists. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-58. - Fire and hazardous materials emergencies. 
(a)  An emergency may be declared because of fire or a hazardous materials incident emergency when the Miami-Dade County fire chief, or designee, certifies to the village manager that an actual or potential condition arising from fire, explosion, chemical spill or release, building collapse, or plane, train or other vehicle accident, requires extraordinary measures for control, including, but not limited to calling out of off-duty personnel; assistance by outside agencies; evacuation; and other similar actions. The village manager may issue a declaration of a state of emergency in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The declaration of public emergency because of fire and hazardous material emergency shall authorize the issuance of emergency resolutions and other appropriate resolutions, as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-59. - Utility emergencies. 
(a)  An emergency may be declared because of utility conditions when the public works director, or designee, or the authorized representative of the relevant utility certifies to the village manager the following: 
(1)  A condition exists or is imminent that endangers the safety, potability, quantity, availability, collection, conveyance, transmission, distribution, treatment, or storage of water or waste through or within the village; or 
(2)  A condition exists or is imminent that endangers the safety, quality, quantity, availability, transmission, distribution, or storage of gas or electricity through or within the village; or 
(3)  Extraordinary actions to control and correct the situation are required, including but not limited to emergency purchase; calling out of off-duty personnel; assistance by outside agencies; and other similar actions. 
The village manager may issue a declaration of a state of emergency in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The declaration of a public emergency because of utility conditions shall authorize the issuance of emergency resolutions and other appropriate resolutions, as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-60. - Weather emergencies. 
(a)  An emergency may be declared because of weather conditions when the National Weather Service or a state, county or local emergency management agency informs the village or the public that emergency conditions resulting from meteorological conditions are present or imminent. Meteorological conditions covered by this section shall include, but are not limited to hurricanes, floods, tornados, or other severe weather conditions and the results therefrom. The village manager may issue a declaration of a state of emergency in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The declaration of a public emergency because of weather conditions shall authorize the issuance of emergency resolutions and other appropriate resolutions, as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-61. - Suspension of local building regulations. 
    The village manager may authorize a suspension of local building regulations during and following a declared state of emergency when the building official certifies to the village manager that such action is necessary for the expeditious restoration of property damaged by an emergency event. Such suspension of building regulations may be applied on a case-by-case basis as required to remedy specific conditions and to facilitate the provision of emergency housing to disaster victims. The building official shall specify the provisions of the building code to be suspended and the reasons therefore, when certifying the necessity of such suspension to the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-62. - Certification of emergency conditions. 
    A certification of emergency conditions to the village manager may be verbal, but each verbal certification shall be confirmed in writing within 24 hours following an emergency declaration. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 12-63. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article, for which another penalty in not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to such fine or imprisonment or both as Florida Statutes provide for the lowest class of misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-3,  1, 6-6-00) 
Chapters 13, 14 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-7,  1-2, adopted November 27, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 13,  13-1-13-5, 13-11-13-18, 13-31-13-33, 13-41-13-45, and 13-51, in its entirety. Former ch. 13 pertained to flood damage prevention, and derived from Ord. No. 98-6, adopted May 12, 1998; Ord. No. 98-13, adopted December 7, 1998. 

Chapter 15 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-8,  2, adopted November 13, 2002, amended the Code by renumbering former  30-82, 30-84 and 30-85 of the land development regulations as a new ch. 15,  15-1-15-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - General. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meeting: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any motor or other vehicle in a wrecked, junked or partially dismantled condition and does not display a current tag. 
    Enforcement officer means the village manager and/or designated village staff responsible for enforcing codes. 
    Garbage means every waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter. 
    Litter means garbage, trash and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create an adverse effect upon public health, safety or the economic welfare of surrounding properties. 
    Mobile home means a nonmotorized vehicle designed to be used either temporarily or permanently as a residence or living quarter. 
    Public nuisance means an act, which is committed by a person or persons, or a condition which is allowed to exist on a property by a person or persons, which has an adverse economic effect on neighboring properties or which threatens the public health, safety or welfare. 
    Receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle. 
    Stagnant water means any unsanitary water that is standing or ponding. 
    Swale area means that area immediately adjacent to a roadway between the driving surface of the roadway and the adjacent private property line. 
    Trailer means any wheeled device or vehicle upon or within which persons or property may be transported over a road, if coupled to or capable of being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Trash means every waste accumulation other than garbage and shall include: 
    Industrial waste defined as every waste accumulation of metal, metal products, minerals, chemicals, rocks, cement, asphalt, tar, oil, grease, glass, crockery, rubber, tires, bottles, cans, lumber, ashes, sawdust, wastes from animal packing or slaughterhouses or other materials usually created by commercial enterprises; and 
    Yard trash defined as every waste accumulation of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dryleaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky or noncombustible material. 
    Vehicle(s): 
    Bus is any motor vehicle used or originally designed for transporting ten or more passengers, whether or not such transportation is for compensation. 
    Commercial accessory use vehicle is a trailer used for commercial purposes. 
    Commercial vehicle is a motorized vehicle utilized for commercial purposes. 
    Inoperable vehicle is an abandoned vehicle. 
    Recreational vehicle is any vehicle or equipment which is designed or primarily used for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motor power, or which is mounted upon or drawn by another vehicle and used or designed to be used as temporary living or sleeping quarters or for recreational purposes. 
(b)  Weeds, wild growth, stagnant water, flora, trash. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land to permit weeds, grass or undergrowth to grow to a height beyond 12 inches or more from the ground or to allow trash, abandoned materials or other unsightly or unsanitary matter to accumulate thereon, or to allow a property to remain in an unsafe or unsanitary condition, or to allow the presence of stagnant water thereon. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain both improved and unimproved property, including swale areas, and to keep these areas free from the accumulation of trash, construction materials and other unsightly or unsanitary matter. 
(3)  The enforcement official shall notify the owner of any real property upon which a violation is alleged to exist. Notice to the owner shall be provided as required in the code. The notice shall state the nature of the violation and provide for a reasonable time for correction depending on the nature and extent of the violation. 
a.  Violations which are deemed to be threats to life safety or which may cause harm to an individual, may be corrected immediately by the village and the costs shall be borne by the owner, including recording, administrative, collection, and legal fees. The village shall make every effort to notify the owner but shall not be bound by strict notification requirements due to threats of life safety. 
b.  Notices to owners shall provide for corrective action within a specified time period and shall advise that, upon failure to correct or remedy the conditions causing or creating the violations within the specified time may be cause for the village to remedy the violation. Such notification shall be provided by certified mail to the owner of record according to the most current tax rolls of the county once per calendar year without the necessity for further notification by the village. Any other violations occurring during this one-year period will be remedied by the village without further notice and the costs shall be assessed accordingly. 
c.  The cost for clearing, cleaning or remedying violations shall be by direct or contract labor and the costs shall become a lien against the property upon which the work was performed, including administrative costs. 
d.  After performing the work, the owner shall be notified by the village that the work has been performed and the owner shall be responsible for paying the costs incurred by the village, including all administrative fees. If the owner fails to pay the village within 30 days of receipt of billing, the village may record a lien against the property in the public records of the county for the full amount of the work, including administrative and recording costs. The charges and liens provided herein shall bear interest at the legal rate and may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law for municipal tax and special assessment liens. 
(c)  Structure maintenance/depreciation of surrounding property. The exterior of every structure shall be so maintained with reasonable attractiveness so as not, in the case of excessive scaling of paint or excessive mildew, to cause depreciation in property values in the immediate neighborhood. The exterior wall surfaces shall be kept free from materials, objects and conditions, which will have an adverse effect on adjacent premises. Roofs shall be maintained free of scaling, cracking and mildew and if painted, shall be painted the same color over the entire surface, except for multicolored roof tile. The exterior surface of all fences shall be maintained in a uniform color consistent with the architectural style and color requirements of these regulations. Windows shall be maintained and broken window panes shall be replaced within 30 days of damage. Windows shall not be boarded except for a maximum period of 30 days during window repair or window pane replacement. 
(d)  Unlawful accumulations of materials; disposal and storage of goods. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place, sweep, scatter, throw or dump or cause to be placed, swept, scattered, thrown or dumped, for any purpose whatsoever, any refuse, rubbish or trash of any kind, any wrecked, derelict or partially dismantled motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery, refrigerator, washing machine, plumbing fixture, furniture or similar article, any garbage, household trash, commercial trash, industrial waste, yard trash, tree trimmings or similar material in or upon: 
a.  Any road, street, parkway, sidewalk, park, lake or bank of any river, stream, lake, watercourse or pool, or any portion thereof, within the limits of this village, or upon any village owned real property, except under the rules and regulations promulgated for the handling of such material, at a designated place, and with the consent of the village or its designated agents or employees. Garbage shall be placed in secured containers (i.e. garbage cans) in order to prevent disturbance of contents by animals. 
b.  Private property not owned by said person or persons, within the village limits, without the consent of the owner of said private property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to throw, drain, run, allow to seep, or otherwise discharge or allow to be thrown, drained, seep or otherwise discharge any organic or inorganic materials into or onto swales, alleys or streets. This shall not apply to individual single-family or duplex homeowners that may wash their own vehicles on their own property, provided that all runoff is contained on the property. Draining of pools must be contained within the property and must not spill onto public property. Dumping of wash buckets, chemicals, grease, liquid waste is prohibited on public or private property. 
(e)  Abandoned/inoperable vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store, allow or leave any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or trailer in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, abandoned, or inoperable condition on public or private property in the village. All vehicles, motor vehicles and trailers, which are wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, abandoned or inoperable are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed from the property upon "notice" from the village. Any vehicle or trailer, which does not display a current tag is presumed to be inoperable. 
(2)  Procedure for removal of abandoned, wrecked or derelict vehicles. 
a.  Abandoned, inoperable or derelict vehicles on public property. Whenever the enforcement officer of the village shall ascertain that an abandoned, inoperable or derelict vehicle is present on public property within the limits of the village, the officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such abandoned vehicle and proceed in compliance with F.S.  705.101 et seq. 
b.  Abandoned, inoperable or derelict vehicles on private property. Whenever the enforcement officer of the village shall ascertain that an abandoned, inoperable or derelict vehicle is present on private property within the limits of the village, the officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such vehicle in substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of location) is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance or section of village code) and must be removed within ten days from date of this notice; otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned, inoperable or derelict, and will be removed and destroyed by the village. Dated this: (setting forth date of posting notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer)." 
c.  Such notice as set forth in a. or b. above shall not be less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall make reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the property and vehicle owner, and if such is reasonably available to the enforcement officer he/she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or after the date of posting. 
d.  If at the end of ten days after posting (public property) such notice as set forth in a. above, the owner or any person interested in the inoperable or derelict vehicle described in such notice has not removed the same and complied with the ordinance or section of this ordinance cited in the notice, or shown reasonable cause for failure so to do, the enforcement officer may cause the abandoned vehicle to be removed and destroyed, and the salvage value, if any, of such abandoned vehicle shall be retained by the village to be applied against the cost of removal and destruction thereof. 
e.  At the end of the ten days of posting of the vehicle on private property the enforcement officer will schedule a hearing before the special magistrate for imposition of a fine if a finding is entered on behalf of the village. The special magistrate shall set a date for compliance and impose fines for both administrative costs and penalties for nonremoval of the vehicle. A lien may be imposed for noncompliance and the village may rectify the violation by having the vehicle removed. All procedures shall be consistent with the requirements of state statutes. 
f.  Costs and expenses of removal, etc., assessed against owner; interest. All costs and expenses incurred by the village in enforcing the provisions of the code shall be and constitute a charge and lien against the owner of the vehicle, the owner of the real property when it is determined that the abandoned vehicle belongs to the owner, and the abandoned vehicle, until paid, with interest to accrue at the rate of six percent annually. 
(f)  Commercial vehicles/equipment/open-air storage in residential districts. 
(1)  Commercial vehicles are prohibited in residential districts unless such vehicles are properly licensed contractor vehicles, where permits have been issued to perform work on the subject premises and the work is actively being performed at the site. 
(2)  Tow trucks are prohibited unless such vehicles or equipment are on the property or on the public right-of-way abutting the property for the purpose of delivery or retrieval of a vehicle owned or leased by the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned, or owned or leased by a bona fide house guest of the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned. 
(3)  Outside storage of commercial equipment, steel storage containers, supplies, or materials are prohibited in all land use districts within the village, except that one storage container or trailer may be temporarily located on a construction site within the commercial zoning districts to allow for the temporary storage of materials and supplies during construction provided the container is set back a minimum of 25 feet from any adjoining right-of-way and screened behind a required temporary construction fence. The storage container or trailer shall be permitted in conjunction with issuance of a building permit and shall be removed upon completion of construction and prior to issuance to a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Open-air storage of the following materials is prohibited: 
a.  Junk, as defined in Chapter 30, Land Development Regulations; 
b.  Merchandise or manufacturing materials; 
c.  Motor vehicle parts, including without limitation automobile engines and transmissions; 
e.  Household furniture, including without limitation sofas and recliners; 
f.  Construction materials, including without limitation lumber and cement blocks; 
g.  Construction and demolition equipment, including without limitation cement mixers, jack hammers, and roof tar pots, provided, however, that light-use equipment customarily used for do-it-yourself home repair, including without limitation hand tools, power tools, and table saws, shall not be prohibited. 
(5)  Tractor-trailers, tractor-trucks, semi-trailers, mobile homes, trailers, and portable dwelling units shall not be stored on any parcel of land within the village. Tractor-trailers may be permitted for purposes of loading and unloading. Port-a-potties shall not be placed on swales and must be located 15 feet from the property line. A construction trailer may be approved by the village for development of subdivisions (two or more lots) in residential districts or for a commercial/multi-family construction project, provided it is hooked up to a sanitary disposal system and used for an office on the site. A construction trailer permit is required and may only be issued in conjunction with a permit to develop a site. Construction trailers are to be utilized as offices only and may not be occupied overnight by employees, night watchman or security personnel, and may not be utilized as a construction equipment storage container. Upon completion of the work, and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion, all trailers and port-a-potties shall be removed from the site. 
(g)  Litter/waste. 
(1)  Waste liquid or refuse upon public ways. It shall be unlawful to permit waste water, oil, grease or other waste liquids to drain from any premises upon and across, or to permit or cause waste matter or refuse of any nature whatsoever to rest or accumulate upon the sidewalks, streets or other public ways of the village, except in alleys in receptacles approved by the enforcement official. 
(2)  Litter in public places. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the village except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official trash stations. 
(3)  Placement of litter in receptacles. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(4)  Sweeping litter into public ways. It shall be unlawful to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the village the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(5)  Litter in parks. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter in any park within the village except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(6)  Posting notices prohibited. It shall be unlawful to post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(7)  Litter on occupied private property. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the village, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain thereon private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(8)  Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in control of any private property whether occupied or vacant, shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. This ordinance shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(9)  Litter on vacant lots. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the village whether owned by such person or not. 
(10)  Lighting. Exterior lights installed on private property must be designed, arranged or shielded in such a manner that all adjacent properties and the public roadways are protected from direct or reflective glare or hazardous interference to pedestrians or motorists. The fixtures shall provide shall be shielded and aimed downwards. Lighting intensity shall be limited to 0.5 foot-candles at the property line. 
(h)  Public nuisances. No owner, lessee, occupant, guest, or agent for the owner shall allow the keeping of a public nuisance on any property, developed or undeveloped. 
(i)  Diseased trees. The existence of trees infected with Lethal Yellowing Disease and Laurel Wilt Disease are declared a public nuisance as those trees continue to be infectious and constitute a threat to healthy trees in the area and to the agricultural industry. Trees and shrubs infected with lethal yellowing disease and laurel wilt disease as certified by the village arborist shall be removed within 20 days of notification by the Village of Pinecrest. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  2, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 15-2. - Nuisance abatement; application of standards. 
(a)  Any use established or changed, and any buildings, structures or land developed, constructed or used for any permitted, conditional, or other permissible principal or accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved. 
(b)  If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged, structurally altered or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, structurally altered or reconstructed building or other structure or portion thereof. 
(c)  Within 24 months after the effective date of this regulation, all existing uses, buildings or other structures shall comply with the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved, provided, however, that if the village council finds that because of the nature of the corrective action required, the 24-month period is inadequate, it may, as a special exception, grant not more than one extension for a period not more than twelve months. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  2, 11-13-02) 
Sec. 15-3. - Nuisance abatement; procedures for enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose of procedures. The purpose of the procedures for enforcing nuisance abatement standards is to ensure that an objective determination is made in those cases where there may be uncertainty as to whether an individual land use or group of land uses complies with the performance standards of this chapter, and to formulate practical ways for the alleviation of such noncompliance. 
(b)  Enforcement procedures. Alleged violations of the performance standards shall be investigated by the enforcement official and/or other designated staff. 
(1)  Required data. Following the initiation of an investigation, the enforcement official and/or other designated staff may require the owner or operator of any proposed use to submit such data and evidence as is needed to make any objective determination. The evidence may include, but is not limited to, the following items: 
a.  Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development. 
b.  A description of the existing or proposed machinery; processes and products. 
c.  Measurements of the amount and rate of emission of said dangerous or objectionable elements. 
d.  Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to be used in restricting the possible emission of any of the dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in this section. 
Failure to submit data required by the village shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of an occupancy permit. 
(2)  Evaluation of proposed land uses. Subsequent to a review of proposed land uses or development plans, the enforcement official and/or other designated staff may determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed use may violate the performance standards cited herein. In such cases where substantial uncertainty exists as to whether a proposed new land use will comply with the performance standards, the enforcement official may, at the applicant's expense, request a statement of a professional engineer registered in the state, which certifies that the planned land is designed to satisfy the performance standards. Findings of the said engineer shall be presented to the village council for review and evaluation concurrent with site plan review. 
(3)  Evaluation of existing development. When the village ascertains a probable noncompliance by an existing land use, the enforcement official with the consent of the enforcement official and/or other designated staff shall investigate as follows: 
a.  Where determination can be made by the enforcement official, using equipment normally available to the village or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be made before notice of violation is issued. 
b.  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes an investigation utilizing village personnel and/or equipment unreasonable, the village council may retain an expert consultant to determine if a land use activity is in compliance with performance standards. Such consultants shall be fully qualified to give the required information and shall be persons or firms mutually agreeable to the village and to the owner or operator of the use in question. In the event of inability to select a mutually agreeable consultant, the village and the owner or operator may select independent consultants, in which event each party shall bear its own costs irrespective of the final determination of compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards in question. If one consultant is mutually agreed upon, the cost of the consultant's services shall be borne by the owner or operator of said use, if the use is found to be in violation of the performance standards, but if the use is found by the final authority to be in compliance with the regulations the village shall bear the cost of the consultant's services. 
(4)  Action by village. Within 30 days following the receipt of the required evidence, the enforcement official and/or other designated staff shall make a determination as to compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards. In the event of noncompliance, the enforcement official may require modifications or alterations in the existing construction of the operational procedures to insure that compliance with the performance standards will be maintained. The operator shall be given a reasonable length of time to effect any changes prescribed by the enforcement official for the purpose of securing compliance with the performance standards. If, after the conclusion of the time granted for compliance with the performance standards, the enforcement official and/or other designated staff finds the violation is still in existence, the matter shall be enforced as provided by the code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  2, 11-13-02) 
Secs. 15-4-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISES; UNNECESSARY AND EXCESSIVE PROHIBITED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, adopted December 11, 2007, amended the Code by renaming art. II. Formerly, art. II was entitled "Noises." 

Sec. 15-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, adopted December 11, 2007, amended the Code by repealing former  15-21 in its entirety. Former  15-21 pertained to unnecessary and excessive noises, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-2, adopted May 17, 2004; and Ord. No. 2006-2, adopted May 18, 2006. 
Sec. 15-21.1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted level (dBA) means the total broadband sound level of the noise spectrum as measured using the A-weighted network of a sound level meter. The unit of measurement is the dBA. Sound level meter settings shall be for slow response, except for motor vehicle measurements which shall be for fast response. 
    Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sound from many sources near and far. 
    Commercial zone means any area within the village having a "BU", RU-5 or NPBAD zoning classification. 
    Continuous noise means a noise which remains essentially consistent in level during the period of observation. 
    Decibel (dB) means a division of a logarithmic scale used to express the ratio of two like quantities proportional to power or energy. The ratio is expressed in decibels by multiplying its common logarithm by ten. 
    Emergency means a situation where immediate work is necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or immediate work is required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Impulsive noise means a noise which is characterized by brief excursions of sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient noise level. 
    Intermittent noise means a noise whose sound pressure level exceeds the ambient noise level at either regular or irregular intervals. 
    Noise means one or a group of loud, harsh, nonharmonious sounds or vibrations that are unpleasant and irritating to the ear. 
    Noise level means the sound pressure level as measured in dBA unless otherwise specified. A measurement of noise must be at least five dB above the ambient noise level. 
    Residential zone means any area within the village having a "RU" or "EU" zoning classification designated for single-family or multifamily dwellings by the zoning authority having jurisdiction over such area. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument to measure the sound pressure level of relatively continuous and broadband noises. The sound level meter used to determine compliance with this article shall meet or exceed the requirements for type 2 sound level meters in accordance with ANSI Standard SI-4. 
    Sound pressure level means the square ratio, expressed in decibels, of the sound pressure under consideration to the standard reference pressure of 0.0002 dyne/cm 2 . The ratio is squared because pressure squared, and not pressure is proportional to energy. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. 
    Village officer shall mean any police officer, community service aide, or code compliance officer of the village. 
    Violator shall be defined as any individual or legal entity that has committed or is alleged to have committed a code violation or is legally responsible for a code violation including, but not limited to a property owner or his agent, tenant, entity on the premises or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 15-21.2. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall make, continue, permit, or cause to be made or continued: 
(1)  Any unreasonably loud and raucous noise; or 
(2)  Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity; or 
(3)  Any noise which exceeds the maximum allowable limits set forth in this article. 
(b)  Factors which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of subsection (a) above exists shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise; 
(2)  The intensity of the noise; 
(3)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(4)  The nature and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived; 
(5)  The duration of the noise; 
(6)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
(7)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(8)  Whether a noise complaint, as set forth in section 15-21.4, has been received by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 15-21.3. - Specific acts considered to be unreasonably loud and raucous noise. 
    Any of the following acts is presumed to be in violation of this Article and to constitute unreasonably loud and raucous noise. This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list: 
(1)  Animals. The owning, harboring, possessing or keeping of any animal which causes frequent, habitual, or long continued noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or yard in which the animal is located. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, boomboxes, stereos, loud speakers, musical instruments, drums or similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, loud speakers, drum or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to be unreasonably loud and raucous, or in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. The operation of such equipment, instrument, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Radios, televisions, boomboxes, stereos, loud speakers, musical instruments, drums, sound trucks or similar devices in/on any vehicle or by pedestrian. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, boombox, stereo, loud speaker, musical instrument, drum, sound truck or similar device, which is located in or on any vehicle or by any pedestrian on publicly owned land, a public parking lot, public street, or alley which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to be unreasonably loud and raucous, or in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. This subsection is not intended to be construed in a manner that would interfere with the legitimate use of loudspeakers in political campaigns. 
(4)  Loading or unloading. Loading and unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, equipment, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day within or adjacent to a residential zone, provided that the noise is unreasonably loud and raucous, and can be heard across the property line of the property from which it emanates. 
(5)  Power tools and landscaping eguipment. The operation of noise-producing lawn mowers, lawn-edgers, weed trimmers, blowers, chippers, chain saws, power tools or other noise-producing tools which are used between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except emergency vehicles, on any street or public place of the village, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound and the sounding of any such signaling device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent unreasonably loud or explosive noises. 
(8)  Schools, courts, hospitals. The creation of any excessive or unreasonably loud noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, house of worship, hospital, or court while the same are in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys the patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that it is a school, house of worship, hospital or court street. 
(9)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display or advertisement of merchandise by creation of any unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise. 
(10)  Shouting. Any unreasonably loud, boisterous or raucous shouting in any residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2018-9,  2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-21.4. - Noise complaints. 
(a)  Noise complaints may be submitted orally or in writing to the village by any person and may be submitted anonymously. A noise complaint shall include the address, to the extent known, of the person or entity responsible for the loud and raucous noise, a description of the noise, and, if available, the date and time of the noise occurrence. 
(b)  Upon receiving and confirming a complaint as described in subsection (a) involving loud and raucous noise, the village will notify the person or entity responsible for the loud and raucous noise, advising that person or entity of the alleged noise and advising that immediate steps must be taken to abate the noise. Such notice may be an oral warning, a code compliance reminder or a civil violation notice, as deemed appropriate by a village officer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 15.21.5. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the noise prohibitions set out in this article, the following shall be permitted: 
(1)  The operation of warning or emergency signal devices such as sirens, horns, and bells when utilized for their intended purpose. 
(2)  Noises resulting from equipment or operations incidental to the emergency repair of facilities or restoration of services such as public utilities or other emergency activities in the public interest. 
(3)  Emergency machinery or equipment including generators, whether permanently installed or portable, shall be exempt from the application of this section in the event of loss of electrical power caused by a hurricane or other act of nature, as long as such machinery or equipment has a muffler or other noise reduction device at least as effective as that recommended by the manufacturer or provided as original equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 15-21.6. - Construction noise. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any power-driven construction equipment without a muffler or other noise reduction device at least as effective as that recommended by the manufacturer or provided as original equipment. 
(b)  No construction site preparation, work, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, delivery of materials, demolition or similar action, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, on public or private property, rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property is permitted between 6:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, between 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays and state holidays. Construction activities for which building permits are not required and construction activities that do not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood may be conducted beyond these hours, provided that such activities do not produce noise exceeding 60 dBA, measured at the nearest property line of the adjacent residential area. Construction equipment that must be operated within or adjacent to a residentially zoned area on a 24-hour per day basis (e.g., pumps, well points, generators, etc.) shall be shielded by an acoustical enclosure during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. unless the unshielded noise level is less than 60 dBA, measured at the closest adjacent residentially zoned property line. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2017-8,  2, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 15-21.7. - Allowable noise created within commercial zones. 
    In addition to the prohibitions set forth in section 15-21.2, no noise shall be created or permitted to be created in a non-residential zone which exceeds, at the adjacent property line, the following: 
Adjoining non-residential zone (all hours) 74 dBA Adjoining residential zone (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) 65 dBA Adjoining residential zone (11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) 60 dBA  
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2018-9,  2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-21.8. - Maximum allowable noises created within residential zones. 
    Except for those noises otherwise specifically provided for within this article, and in addition to the prohibitions set forth in sections 15-21.2 and 15-21.6, it shall be unlawful to create or to permit to be created any noise within a residential zone that exceeds 60 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or 55 dBA between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., daily, measured at the nearest adjacent property line. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2018-9,  2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-21.9. - Noises emanating from watercraft on canals or other water bodies adjoining residential zones. 
    No persons shall operate, or give permission for the operation of any watercraft on the waters within the village in such a manner as to exceed a maximum sound level of 60 dBA. 
    No persons shall operate, or give permission for the operation of any inboard or outboard motor on any watercraft in a residential zone while the watercraft is out of the water for more than a maximum of ten minutes per engine, not to exceed a total of 20 minutes, and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 15-22. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A village officer who finds a violation of this article shall issue an oral warning to the violator(s) to immediately correct the violation or to correct the violation within a specified time period. If circumstances are such that the violation cannot be corrected immediately, then the violator(s) shall be required to undertake such action as may be reasonably required as quickly as possible to correct the violation and to use continuous diligent effort to conclude such corrective action as is necessary. If the violation which is the subject of the verbal warning by the village officer is not immediately corrected or, if applicable, not corrected within the time period which it takes to do so with the use of all reasonable due diligence, then the village officer shall issue a civil violation notice to the violator(s) requiring correction of the violation as specified, and imposing a fine of $250.00 for which the violator(s) shall be liable. The written civil violation notice shall specify the nature of the violation of this article. If after the oral warning and the civil violation notice has been issued the violation persists or a subsequent violation occurs within a 24-hour period, then the village officer may subject the violator(s) to arrest. 
(b)  If a violator(s) of this article has previously received a written citation from a village officer for a violation of this same article which arose from the same kind of noise or disturbance, and which occurred within the 12 months prior to the current violation, then the village officer shall issue a written civil violation notice to the violator(s) which requires the correction of the violation, as specified, and which imposes a fine in the amount of $500.00 for the violation. 
(c)  If a violator(s) of this article has previously received two or more written citations from a village officer within (12) months of the current violation, the violation shall constitute a public nuisance and may subject the violator(s) to a written civil violation notice which requires the correction of the violation as specified, and which imposes a fine in the amount of $500.00 for the current violation, or may subject the violator(s) to arrest and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Enforcement may also be by suit for declaratory, injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-2,  2, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 2007-9,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2011-3,  1, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 2017-5,  2, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-5,  2, adopted May 9, 2017 changed the title of  5-22 from penalties to enforcement. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Acts recognized by the laws of the state as misdemeanors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the corporate limits of the village, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 97-11,  1, 7-1-97) 
Sec. 16-2. - Public consumption of marijuana. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, ingest or consume marijuana, medical marijuana, cannabis, or Low-THC cannabis as defined in chapter 28, article VI of this Code or state statues, in any form in any public building, public right-of-way, or public space within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10,  2, 9-8-15) 
Secs. 16-3-16-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED OR LOST PROPERTY 

Sec. 16-11. - Definitions. 
    Abandoned property means all tangible personal property which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed on public property in a wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled condition or which has no apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner. 
    Lost property means all tangible personal property which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been mislaid on public property, upon a public conveyance, on premises used at the time for business purposes, or in parks, places of amusement, public recreation areas, or other places open to the public in a substantially operable, functioning condition or which has an apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner. 
(Ord. No. 99-05,  2, 4-13-99) 
Sec. 16-12. - Unlawful to leave or abandon personal property on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, abandon, cause to be abandoned or permit to be left any personal property, owned by him, her or it in his, her or its possession, custody or control upon such sidewalk, street, right-of-way, or upon public property. 
(Ord. No. 99-05,  2, 4-13-99) 
Sec. 16-13. - Impoundment of abandoned or lost property. 
(a)  Authority to impound abandoned or lost property. Employees of the village are hereby authorized to remove abandoned or lost property to an impoundment area, or such other place of safety or to an area designated or maintained by the village, under the circumstances pursuant to the procedures for abandoned or lost property as provided in F.S. chapter 705, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Charges to be paid before property released from impoundment. No abandoned or lost property retained in an impoundment area as herein provided shall be released therefrom until the charges for notice, transportation of such property into the impoundment area, and storage charges have been paid. Such charges shall be fixed by the code compliance division of the building, planning and zoning department, such charges to be based upon a computation of all actual expenses entered into in the notice, removal and storage of same. Such charge or charges shall be posted for public inspection in the office of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 99-05,  2, 4-13-99) 
Sec. 16-14. - Notice of impounding. 
(a)  The village shall abide by the notice requirement contained in F.S. chapter 705. 
(b)  As to shopping carts, the village shall comply with notice requirements in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 99-05,  2, 4-13-99) 
Sec. 16-15. - Removal, redemption, destruction and notice. 
(a)  Any such property abandoned or otherwise left on public streets, public property or on private property without express consent of the owner or tenant thereof, shall be seized and impounded by the village, to be sold at public auction as unclaimed property after 90 days, unless the owner thereof shall claim them from the village within said period and pay the sum of $50.00 for such property to cover minimal transportation, retrieval and publication costs, and in addition thereto, $5.00 per day for storage for such property. 
(b)  Whenever the village shall retrieve any property containing identification of ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent by certified mail to such person advising that such property is being held by the village and that said property may be redeemed upon payment of $50.00 to the village. 
(Ord. No. 99-05,  2, 4-13-99) 
Secs. 16-16-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 16-21. - Definition. 
    A garage or yard sale means the sale of personal property at the residential property on which the sale is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2,  1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 16-22. - Number of sales. 
    Each residential homeowner or tenant is permitted four garage sales per calendar year, with each single day of sales being defined as a garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2,  1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 16-23. - Permit required. 
    Prior to holding a garage sale, the homeowner or tenant shall obtain a permit from the building and planning department. There shall be no fee for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2,  1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 16-24. - Penalties established. 
    The homeowner or tenant holding a garage sale shall be subject to a penalty as provided by section 2-174(b) of the Village Code of Ordinances for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(1)  No penalty shall be assessed for a first violation. A homeowner or tenant shall be issued a written warning for a first violation. 
(2)  A second or repeat violation in a calendar year will result in a civil notice of violation being issued. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2,  1, 4-11-00) 
Secs. 16-25-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS 

Sec. 16-31. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve the village's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10,  1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 16-32. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Permanent residence" shall mean a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
    "Temporary residence" shall mean a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10,  1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 16-33. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S.  794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 2500 feet of any school, day care center, park, playground, or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  A person residing within 2500 feet of any school, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S.  775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607 prior to November 1, 2005. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The school, day care center, or park within 2500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S.  775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10,  1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 16-34. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this article, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures, as provided in chapter 2, article V of this Code, including the provisions of chapter 2, article V that allow the village to seek relief as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10,  1, 10-11-05) 
Secs. 16-35-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE AND DELIVERY 

Sec. 16-41. - Unlawful to interfere with a utility. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, to disrupt, to impede, to prevent, or to alter the flow of a utility. No individual shall deny the right, or impede the ability of a utility company to enter private property for the purpose of entering a utility easement to remove or prune a plant/tree which is interfering with or is a risk of interfering with or impeding the utility company's ability to deliver safe and reliable utility services, nor shall an individual refuse to permit a utility company to remove or prune, when on private property, a plant/tree which is interfering with or impeding the utility company's ability to deliver safe and reliable utility services, when it is determined by the utility company that the condition caused by the offending plant/tree constitutes a "hazardous condition." 
(Ord. No. 2005-11,  1, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 16-42. - Hazardous condition. 
    A "hazardous condition" is deemed to exist when: 
(1)  The affected utility company has determined that a particular plant/tree on private property is interfering with or is a risk of interfering with, disrupting, impeding, altering, or preventing the delivery of utility services; and 
(2)  The utility company has given the property owner(s) and the village written notice that a particular plant/tree is interfering with, disrupting, impeding, altering or preventing the delivery of utility services to one or more properties; and 
(3)  The village's arborist concurs in writing to the village manager with the utility company's decision that a particular plant/tree is interfering with, disrupting, impeding, altering or preventing the delivery of utility services to one or more properties; and 
(4)  The village, through a code compliance officer or a police officer, subsequently requests permission for the utility company to come onto the property; and 
(5)  The property owner continues to refuse to allow entry to the property, or otherwise impedes the ability of the utility company to prune or remove the offending plant/tree, when deemed necessary by the utility company for the safe and reliable delivery of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11,  1, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 16-43. - Remedy for violation. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a violation of the village's Code of Ordinances and may be prosecuted, at the village's discretion, in accordance with F.S. ch. 162, or through a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  The village council may direct the village attorney to bring an action for injunctive relief in appropriate circumstances. 
(c)  A violation which is deemed to be a threat to the safe and reliable delivery of utility services to more than one property may be corrected immediately by the village and the costs shall be borne by the property owner, including recording, administrative, collection and legal fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11,  1, 12-20-05) 
Secs. 16-44-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FILMING 

Sec. 16-51. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all the properties within the village's jurisdiction, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 2006-5,  1, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 16-52. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall film or take still photographs within the village for commercial purposes without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the village manager. All permits shall be conspicuously displayed at the filming location. 
(b)  Permit application. Applications for a permit shall: 
(1)  Be on the form provided for by the village; 
(2)  Shall be consistent with the village filming guidelines which shall be adopted, and may be amended, by a resolution of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-5,  1, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 16-53. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 per violation per day and revocation of the permit. The fine for failing to obtain a permit shall be $500.00 and the immediate cessation of all filming and/or photography activity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-5,  1, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 16-54. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the terms of a permit issued by the village manager, by the decision not to issue a permit, by the revocation of a permit, or by the denial of a variance may, within ten days of the decision, appeal to the village council whose decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-5,  1, 10-10-06) 
Secs. 16-55-16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RETAIL SALE OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 16-60. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Animal shelter means a public animal shelter or duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adoption of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals, and which does not breed animals. 
    Cat means an animal of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
    Certificate of source means a document declaring the source of the dog or cat sold or transferred by the pet store. The certificate shall include the name and address of the source of the dog or cat. 
    Dog means an animal of the Canidae family of the order Carnivora. 
    Existing pet store means any pet store or pet store operator that displayed, sold, delivered, offered for sale, offered for adoption, bartered, auctioned, gave away, or otherwise transferred cats or dogs in the village on the effective date of this article and complied with all applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Pet store means a retail establishment open to the public and engaging in the business of offering for sale and/or selling animals at retail. 
    Pet store operator means a person who owns or operates a pet store, or both. 
    Retail sale includes display, offer for sale, offer for adoption, barter, auction, give away, or other transfer of any cat or dog. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11,  2, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 16-61. - Prohibition. 
    No pet store shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of dogs or cats in the village on or after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11,  2, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 16-62. - Existing pet stores. 
    An existing pet store may continue to display, offer for sale, offer for adoption, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer cats and dogs until December 31, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11,  2, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 16-63. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A person or establishment that sells, delivers, offers for sale- barters. auctions, gives away, or otherwise transfers or disposes of only animals that were bred and reared on the premises of the person or establishment; 
(2)  A publicly operated animal control facility or animal shelter; 
(3)  A private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization; or 
(4)  A publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11,  2, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 16-64. - Adoption of shelter and rescue animals. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent a pet store or its owner, operator or employees from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue agency and maintained at the pet store for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11,  2, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 16-65-16-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITION ON DISTRIBUTION, SALE OR USE OF PLASTIC STRAWS 

Sec 16-70. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
(a)  Plastic straw means a straw or stirrer provided, sold or distributed for the purpose of imbibing liquids or transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker by suction or for the purpose of mixing a beverage, which is predominantly made of plastic derived from one or more of the following: petroleum; a biologically-based source (such as corn or other plants); polypropylene; or polyethylene, and which is intended for a single-use. A plastic straw does not include a straw that is made on non-plastic materials such as paper, sugar cane, bamboo, or other similar materials. 
(b)  Special event permittee means any person or entity, and their subcontractor(s), issued a special events permit by the village for a special event on village property, or in a village facility or in the village's right-of-way. 
(c)  Village facility includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure, park, road, street, right-of-way, or other facility owned, operated or managed by the village. 
(d)  Village property includes, but is not limited to, any land, water, or air rights owned, operated or managed by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  2, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 16-71. - Plastic straws prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  A plastic straw shall not be used, sold or distributed in any commercial establishment or by any mobile vendor, at any village facility, on village property or any other public property, or by any special event permittee. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not apply to pre-packaged drinks sold at commercial establishments. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not apply to medical or dental facilities. 
(3)  This prohibition shall not apply to the school district or county, state, or federal governmental entities. 
(4)  This prohibition shall not apply where a reasonable accommodation is needed for an individual due to a medical or physical condition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  2, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 16-72. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Following adoption of this article, the village shall engage in public education efforts to inform commercial establishments of the provisions of the Code of Ordnances and to provide assistance with identifying alternatives to plastic straws. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2019, the village's building and planning department shall enforce all provisions of this article. 
(c)  Penalties for violations of the provisions of this article shall be through section 2-174 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  2, 10-9-18) 
Secs. 16-73-16-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), adopted May 8, 2018, set out provisions designated as art. VIII,  16-70-16-75, inasmuch as art. VIII already exist, and to preserve the style of the Code, these provisions have been designated as art. IX,  16-80-16-85, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 16-80. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise to the general public a special event which requires a permit without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a special event as hereinafter defined without first making application to the village, paying the prescribed fee, and obtaining a permit for such special event. Special events shall not be permitted to be located or operated in the village except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 16-81. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Special event shall mean 
(1)  A concert, festival, race, walk, carnival, show, exhibition, parade, and any other similar outdoor event whether operated totally outdoors, on stage, under tents, or with the use of any temporary building or structure, to which members of the public are invited as participants or spectators; or 
(2)  Any gathering of more than 20 people on a property used as a single family residence or vacation rental, where the property owner or a permanent resident of the property is not present during the event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 16-82. - Application. 
    All persons interested in conducting special events in the village shall first submit an application on a form available from the village. An application for a special event shall be filed along with the filing fee no less than 30 days in advance of the beginning date of the event and shall contain the following: 
(1)  A detailed description of the location of the event, the hours of operation, and length (in number of days) of the event. 
(2)  A parking plan. 
(3)  If the special event, or any part thereof, is to be held only on private property, an affidavit from the owner(s) of the property on which the event is to be conducted stating that the owner(s) has legal title to the property, consents to the event, and the owner or one of the permanent residents of the property will be responsible for cleanup of the property following the conclusion of the event. If the special event is to be held on public property, in whole or in part, an acknowledgement by the applicant that the applicant is responsible for cleanup of public property unless cleanup is otherwise assumed by the village. 
(4)  If the event will include amusement rides, a copy of any contract between the applicant and any person providing a ride, mechanical entertainment or amusement device, together with a valid county or state business license. No carnival operation shall be permitted to begin erecting its activities until the issuance of a special events permit. 
(5)  For any special event on public property or which includes amusement rides on private property, a statement from the applicant that it has the ability to provide commercial general liability insurance, whether through a single policy, or a combination of policies, in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, with a deductible or self-insurance retention no greater than $15,000.00, issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and rated A- or better per Best's Key Rating Guide, latest edition. The village shall be named as an additional insured on all required insurance policies, and an endorsement reflecting this requirement shall be issued as part of any required policies. Proof of such insurance shall be provided prior to issuance of the requested permit. 
(6)  An indemnity and hold harmless certificate in favor of the village in a form approved by the village attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 16-83. - Review of application. 
(a)  The village's administrative staff shall review all applications at time of submission. No application shall be accepted if it fails to provide any of the above required information. 
(b)  Following acceptance of an application, the village's administrative staff may request additional disclosure to substantiate the veracity of the information disclosed in the application. If any information is determined to be inaccurate or incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant for correction. 
(c)  Following acceptance and review of the application, the village administration may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. Any village administration's approval shall address conditions on the operation of the special event which may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Limitation on the days and hours of operation. 
(2)  Posting of surety, letter of credit, or cash bond to cover post-event cleanup, repairs, or unpaid utility charges. 
(3)  Provisions for sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Provisions for electrical, fire and building inspections. 
(5)  Provisions for security. 
(6)  Provisions for the regulation of alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Provisions for noise and pollution control. 
(8)  Provisions for comprehensive general liability insurance, naming the village as an additional insured, or other insurance as deemed necessary. 
(9)  Provisions for valet parking, traffic control and street closure. 
(10)  Whether, upon considering the location of the proposed special event, the potential impacts upon neighboring properties, and the day of the week on which the special event is proposed to occur, it is in the best interests of the village to allow the playing or broadcasting of live or recorded music. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village administration may deny a permit for a special event on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The application for permit (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed; 
(2)  The application for permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(3)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(4)  The application or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions damaged village property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the village; 
(5)  For a special event on public property, if a fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular public property or part hereof; 
(6)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with planned programs organized and conducted by the village; 
(7)  The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with the uses of the park or other public property; 
(8)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the applicant, other users of the park or other public property, village employees or the public; 
(9)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, or ordinances or regulations; 
(10)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted; 
(11)  The applicant has violated the terms or conditions of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant; or 
(12)  The applicant has been issued a citation or notice to appear for a violation of Chapter 15, Article II, "Noises; Unnecessary and Excessive Prohibited" of the Code of Ordinances in connection with a prior permitted event; 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 16-84 - Public notice. 
    All neighboring property owners within 250 feet of the subject property shall be notified of the event by Regular Mail. Notices shall be mailed 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Sec. 16-85. - Penalty. 
    Each violation of this article shall subject the property owner or permanent resident to a fine of $250.00. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this article. Each day that a special event is advertised to the public without a permit being first obtained shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Chapter 17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-1. - Rules and regulations. 
Rule 1. Definitions. 
    When used herein the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  The terms "parks," "parkways," "recreational areas," and other "areas operated and maintained by the village parks and recreation department" are defined to mean parks, wayside parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreation fields, museums, auditoriums, ranges and buildings, lakes, streams, canals, lagoons, waterways, water areas and therein and all public service facilities conducted on grounds, buildings, and structures in the village which are under the control of or assigned for upkeep, maintenance or operation by the parks and recreation department and Pinecrest Gardens. 
(b)  The term "park property" when used hereinafter is defined to cover all areas, buildings, locations, and facilities described in the foregoing paragraph. 
(c)  The terms "parks department" or "the department" when used hereinafter are defined as the parks and recreation department or Pinecrest Gardens and the term "department director" refers to the director of parks and recreation or Pinecrest Gardens or their designee. 
(d)  In construing the provisions hereof and each and every word, phrase or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions provided in F.S.  1.01 shall apply. 
Rule 2. Authority of village police department officials. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village police department to enforce all state, county and village laws and these police regulations within all parks and other areas maintained and operated by the parks department. 
Rule 3. Traffic ordinances and state vehicle laws. 
    The traffic ordinances of the county, the village and applicable state vehicle laws shall apply in and about all park property and in addition thereto the following traffic regulations shall be applicable. 
Rule 4. Roads and driveways within parks. 
(a)  No person driving, operating, controlling or propelling any motorized vehicle shall use any other than the regularly designated paved or improved park roads or driveways, except when directed to do so by a police officer or department employee. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of any self-propelled wheelchair, power wheelchair, electric scooter, or other mobility device by an individual with a mobility impairment. 
(b)  No driver or operator of any vehicle shall obstruct traffic or park or stop on any road or driveway except at places so designated or in case of an emergency beyond his control. 
Rule 5. Trucks, buses, other heavy vehicles. 
    No truck, commercial vehicle, or bus of any type shall be driven on any restricted park road or property without special authorization from the parks department for the purpose of park work, service or activities except that trucks and buses used for transporting persons to a park for recreational purposes will be afforded use of ingress and egress park roads and parking facilities as provided for conventional passenger vehicles. 
Rule 6. Bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles, scooters, dirt bikes, go carts. 
    No person shall ride, drive or propel any motorcycle, dirt bike, go cart or similar vehicle on any but the regular vehicular roads or other designated uses or areas except that such vehicles, with motors shut off, may be pushed by hand not faster than a walk over grassy areas normally reserved for the use of pedestrians and no person shall deviate from compliance with all traffic ordinance provisions governing the operation of bicycles while on park property. Violators of the provisions of this rule shall pay a fine not to exceed $100.00 for the first violation and $200.00 for each succeeding violation. Provisions of this rule shall not apply to the operation of these vehicles on those portions of park property specifically designated for such use. 
Rule 7. Parking. 
    No person shall park a vehicle any place on park property other than in the regular designated facilities provided for that particular type of vehicle, unless directed otherwise by police officers or parks staff who are authorized to designate other areas for parking when conditions so warrant. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of any self-propelled wheelchair, power wheelchair, or other mobility device by an individual with a mobility impairment. 
Rule 8. Preservation of property. 
    No person shall: 
(a)  Destroy, damage or remove real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property, belonging to the village. 
(b)  Throw or deposit, or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street or public passageway, or upon any public or private property, any waste or other material of any kind. 
(c)  No person shall tamper or meddle with or alter the condition of any meter, valve or meter identification, or other part of such system in the village, or appliance connected thereto in such manner as to cause loss or damage to the owner of such facilities or the users thereof, or to create a hazard to life or property. 
(d)  Tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug, topographical survey monument, or any other personal property erected or placed by the village. 
(e)  Move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground. 
(f)  No person shall write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or mark of any type on any public or private building or structure or other real or personal property, owned, operated, or maintained by the village. 
(g)  No fires shall be built by any person against or adjacent to any park building, structure, tree or plant or near the property of others or in any area of any park except in such areas as are specifically designated for fire building and for which permission has been given by the parks department. 
(h)  No person shall stand or sit on any fence rail or on any picnic table or any other structure not intended for such use in any park. 
Rule 9. Protection and preservation of wildlife. 
(a)  No person shall molest, harm, frighten, kill, net, trap, snare, hunt, chase, shoot or throw or propel by any means missiles at any wildlife creature be it animal, bird or reptile roaming free about a park or in captivity in a cage, nor shall any person remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the nest or eggs of any reptile or bird or to collect, remove, possess, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift any specimen dead or alive of any of the group of tree snails. 
(b)  No person shall disobey posted notices prohibiting feeding animals, birds or reptiles which are on restricted diets. 
(c)  No person shall place, dump, abandon or leave any animal, reptile or bird, either wild or domestic, in an effort to find a home for such creature, on the grounds of any park. 
Rule 10. Bathing and swimming. 
(a)  No person, regardless of age, sex or manner of dress shall swim, wade, or bathe in waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park. 
(b)  No person shall erect or cause to be erected any tent, shelter or structure on or in any beach, bathing or wading area in such a manner that a guide wire, rope, extension, brace or support connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object is necessary, nor shall any such structure, tent or shelter lack an unobstructed view of the interior from at least two (2) sides unless authorized by the village. 
Rule 11. Boating. 
(a)  No person shall bring any motorized vessels, including, but not limited to, boats, personal watercraft, etc. in any park property watercourses, bays, lagoons, lakes, canals, rivers, ponds, or sloughs other than those so designated for such use or purpose by the parks department and then only in strict conformance with Chapter 7 of the Code of Miami-Dade County (Metropolitan Safe Boating Ordinance). 
(b)  No person shall moor, anchor or tie up to the bank or any wharf, dock, tree, building, rock or any object or structure on the bank in waters within or contiguous to any park within 200 feet of the shore line unless the owner, or his representative, of the any motorized vessels, including, but not limited to, boats, personal watercraft, etc., has obtained written permission from the Parks department, except that if the boat or ship is the property of the government of the United States, or is in distress, or ties up at a dock, wharf or pier designated for such purpose and then only long enough to enable the occupants to obtain food, fuel, water, bait, tackle or marine supplies. 
Rule 12. Fishing. 
    No person, adult or minor, shall fish in park waters, either fresh or salt, by use of hook and line, seine, net, trap, spear gig or other device except at such places and in such areas as have been prescribed for such usage which will include stretches on ocean beaches marked by movable signs in areas other than those used for bathing. 
Rule 13. Hunting. 
(a)  No hunting, trapping or the pursuit of wildlife by any means or method whatsoever will be permitted on or in any park area. 
Rule 14. Picnic areas and use. 
    No person shall build, light or cause to be lighted any fire upon the ground or other object in any area except in an approved grill, stove, fireplace or other suitable container without written permission from the parks department, nor shall any person starting a fire leave the area without extinguishing the fire. 
Rule 15. Games, etc. 
    No person or persons shall engage in rough or potentially dangerous games or practice for same, such as football, baseball, softball, horseshoes, quoits, tennis, volleyball, badminton or any other games, practice or exercise involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, shuttlecocks, model aircraft or roller skates except in the areas specifically designated and set aside for such recreational usages. 
Rule 16. Fireworks and explosives. 
(a)  No person may bring into, or have in that person's possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn in any park area or on any public lands or highways adjacent thereto, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, or cannon or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material that may explode, discharge or burn, unless that person first obtains a written permit from the Department Director. 
(b)  Parents or guardians will be held strictly responsible and accountable for the actions of minors in regards to the prohibitions in the foregoing paragraph. 
Rule 17. Domestic animals. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to take any domestic animal other than a horse, as provided in Rule 27, into any park whether on leash, in arms or running at large, dogs in particular being excluded, and provisions of chapter 5 (sections 5-3 through 5-15) of the Code of Miami-Dade County (Dade County Dog Control Ordinance No. 58-28) shall apply to any and all park property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of a service animal which means any dog guide or other animal individually trained to work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability. 
(b)  Cattle, horses, other than as provided in Rule 27, mules, swine, sheep, goats, or fowl shall not be allowed upon park property and all owners or attendants of such animals are charged with the duty of preventing such occurrences but this prohibition does not apply to animals and fowl kept by the parks department or under its direction. 
Rule 18. Pollution of waters, sanitation. 
    Using the fountains, ponds, lakes, streams, bays, or any other bodies of water within the parks, or the tributaries, storm sewers or drains flowing into them as dumping places for any substance or matter or thing which will or may result in the pollution of said waters is prohibited. 
Rule 19. Refuse, trash, and destruction of park property. 
(a)  No person will deposit or drop or place any refuse including bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, tobacco products or containers of foil upon the ground or in or on any other park property except in the receptacles provided for trash disposal. 
(b)  No person shall vandalize, deface or destroy any park property. 
Rule 20. Aircraft. 
    No person operating, directing, or responsible for any airplane, helicopter, glider, hot air balloon, dirigible, parachute or other aerial apparatus including radio controlled aircraft will take off from or land in or on any park land or waterway, except when human life is endangered or written permission has been obtained from the department director. 
Rule 21. Authority of village police department officers and parks staff. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village police department and parks staff to enforce these rules. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by these rules or for any person to fail to comply with any lawful and reasonable order given by police officers or parks staff. 
Rule 22. No trespassing during closing hours. 
    No person shall be or remain in any part of any park which is fenced in or provided with gates between the closing of the gates at night and their reopening on the following day; nor shall any person be or remain in any park not fenced in or provided with gates, during posted closing hours, except in areas designated as 24-hour launching areas, and except that persons and vehicles may pass through such parks without stopping, on the most direct walk or driveway leading from their point of entrance to the exit nearest to their point of destination. The provisions of this section shall not apply to police officers or parks department employees while in the discharge of their duties nor to persons having a permit in writing to be or remain in any part of the parks between such hours. The department director has the authority to establish exceptions to the closing hours as set forth above when it is in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare. 
Rule 23. No trespassing on unfinished parks. 
    No person shall enter upon any part of any park which is in an unfinished state or under construction or withheld from general public usage in the interest of public safety, health and/or welfare unless otherwise authorized by the department director. 
Rule 24. Use of vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicles except those authorized by the parks department to carry passengers for hire or for fare will be permitted to so operate in the parks and these vehicles will be the only ones which pedestrians may hail for rides. 
(b)  No person shall change any parts, repair, wash, grease, wax, polish or clean a vehicle on any park roadway, parkway, driveway, parking lot or other park property. 
Rule 25. Recreational activities. 
(a)  No person shall engage in recreational or other activities other than those prescribed in certain areas set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall dress or undress except in such structures as may be provided and maintained by the parks department for that purpose and dressing or undressing in any vehicle, in any park area except as provided above is prohibited. 
(c)  The parks staff will regulate activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. If the facilities are crowded, persons holding picnics in any park picnic area, building or structure, will avoid using same to the exclusion of others for an unreasonable time, the determination of what is unreasonable being at the discretion of the parks staff. Use of the individual fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come, first served." 
(d)  No person or organization shall conduct bingo games, card games for money or participate in any other forms of gambling within park limits whether they are for charity or otherwise unless specifically authorized in writing by the department director. 
Rule 26. Noise. 
    No person entering or upon park and recreation areas shall make excessive unnecessary noise and all provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall apply to and be enforced in all park areas. 
Rule 27. Horseback riding. 
    No person shall engage in horseback riding in any park or parks department area other than those where provision for such is provided by clearly marked bridle paths, trails, and other necessary features and then only upon thoroughly broken and properly restrained animals that are ridden with care, prevented from grazing, straying unattended, untethered to any rock, tree or shrub and not ridden or led on any park land other than that so designated. 
Rule 28. Merchandising, vending, peddling, etc. 
    No person, persons, organization or firm other than the parks department or regularly licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority of the village will expose or offer for sale, rent or trade, any article or thing, or station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or merchandise within the limits of any park or recreation area. 
Rule 29. Advertising and publicity and signs. 
    No person shall advertise or obtain publicity through any means whatsoever within or upon any park property without obtaining specific approval in advance and in writing from the department director and such approval will be so worded as to prohibit damage to or marring of park property or vegetation, disturbance of park patrons or erection, painting or displaying of anything unsightly or in disharmony with park beauty. 
Rule 30. Public demonstration, gatherings, performances, speeches, etc. 
(a)  No band, procession, military company, or any company or group with flags, banners, or transparencies, shall be allowed within any park without written permission of the department director, said permit to clearly define the nature of the activity, the limit of its scope and time of setting forth such other restrictions and requirements as the department director may deem necessary. 
(b)  No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any park or recreation area excepting the entertainments given under the direction and authority of the parks department. 
(c)  No public meeting of any kind nor any public speaking by any person, persons, representatives of any political party, social club or society, officer aspirant, religious sect, theatrical or circus group, act, rite or ceremony, or other public exhibition shall be held in any park, parkway, playground or other recreational area without written permission of the department director. 
(d)  No person will perform acrobatic acts or feats, or make any display or exhibit or carry on any performance of doing anything that will cause numbers of persons to congregate to the interference or obstruction of traffic or to other proper use of a park or recreational area. 
(e)  No intoxicated persons will be permitted entry to parks or recreation areas and, if discovered therein, will be ejected forthwith. 
Rule 31. Proper use of facilities. 
    No person will loiter in or around any restroom or dressing room. 
Rule 32. Intoxicating liquors, beer, wine, etc. 
    Drinking of alcoholic liquors or beverages and the bringing of such into the park areas shall be permitted only for village sponsored or sanctioned events and only upon the written authorization by the department director. 
Rule 33. Enforcement of permits. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of police officers and parks staff to enforce all provisions of permits issued by the parks department. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by any permit issued by the parks department. 
Rule 34. Picnic shelter permits. 
(a)  Normally the larger picnic shelters and their facilities will be used only on reservation which must be obtained in advance and must be for a specific time and duration but such facilities, however, may be used by the public during unreserved periods if occasion demands and it is deemed feasible by the department director. Reservations for picnic shelters shall be subject to the provisions of the permit. 
(b)  Unless the department director otherwise authorizes in writing, financial arrangement in connection with picnics held in a park either on a reserved basis or otherwise must be made outside the limits of the park, and the sale of tickets, acceptance of money, soliciting or accepting donations or offerings for food, drink or refreshment, in order to defray the expenses of a picnic or to realize a profit therefrom is prohibited and subjects a permit holder to immediate cancellation of said permit. 
Rule 35. Distributing printed materials or soliciting funds at special events. 
    All persons, groups or firms who distribute printed or written materials or solicit funds at parks and other municipal facilities during special events shall do so only from fixed table locations designated by staff. The village shall designate such space and provide it free of charge on a first-come, first-served basis. This policy applies alike to all persons or entities that are solely distributing written materials or seeking monetary contributions. No sales of any kind shall be permitted in this designated area. This policy does not prohibit organizational representatives from walking about the premises and communicating the organization's views to patrons in face-to-face discussions so long as no printed material, money or other material objects are exchanged in such encounters. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01,  2, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 2011-9,  1, 9-16-11; Ord. No. 2015-1,  2, 1-13-15) 
Sec. 18-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of section 18-1, Rule 19(a), shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Violation of section 18-1, Rule 19(a), shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2001-01,  2, 5-8-01) 
Chapter 19-23 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-7,  1, adopted November 27, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 20,  20-1, 20-26-20-33, 20-61, 20-62, 20-81-20-84, in its entirety. Former ch. 20 pertained to planning and zoning, and derived from Ord. No. 96-6, adopted September 10, 1996; Ord. No. 97-2, adopted February 4, 1997; Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 1, 1997; Ord. No. 98-1, adopted March 10, 1998; Ord. No. 98-2, adopted March 10, 1998; Ord. No. 98-3, adopted March 10, 1998; Ord. No. 98-4, adopted March 10, 1998; Ord. No. 98-5, adopted March 10, 1998. 

Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
    Commercial establishment. Any structure used or constructed for use for business operations. For purposes of this chapter, hotels and motels are commercial establishments. The term "commercial establishment" shall not include any residential unit or multi-family residential establishment. 
    Customer. A person who uses the solid waste or recycling services of a private hauler. 
    Franchisee. The named person who obtains a franchise from the village pursuant to this chapter. 
    Multi-family residential establishment. Any structure other than a residential unit which is used, or constructed for use, as a multiple dwelling facility. Multi-family residential establishments shall include, without limitation, rooming house, tourist court, trailer park, apartment building with rental or cooperative apartments, or multiple story condominiums with common means of ingress and egress. 
    Person. Any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, municipality, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
    Private solid waster hauler (collector); private hauler; hauler. Any person, entity, corporation or partnership that removes, collects and transports for disposal for hire any solid waste over the streets or public rights-of-way within the incorporated area of the village. 
    Residential unit. Any single-family residence. 
    Solid waste. Garbage, trash, litter, yard trash, hazardous waste, construction and demolition debris, industrial waste, or other discarded material, including solid or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural or governmental operations. 
    Solid waste disposal. Disposition of solid waste by means of combustion, land filling or other final method of discard. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-2. - Franchise required by the village for solid waste collection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, collect and transport for disposal from any commercial establishment and/or multi-family residential establishment in the village, solid waste or recyclable material over the streets or public right-of-way within the incorporated area of the village without first applying for an receiving the appropriate solid waste franchise from the village to carry on such business. 
(b)  The franchise required by this section shall be in addition to any other permits, registration or occupational license which may be required by federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-3. - Application for franchise. 
    Applications for a franchise shall be made to the village upon such form and in such manner as shall be prescribed by the village manager, said form to elicit the following information and to be accompanied by supporting documents and such other information as may be required by the village manager from time to time: 
(1)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s) and business address(es) of the principal officers and stockholders and other persons having any financial or controlling interest of five percent or greater in the partnership or corporation. Provided, however, that if the corporation is a publicly owned corporation having more than 25 shareholders, then only the names and business addresses of the local managing officers shall be required. 
(2)  Character of applicant. The applicant for a permit under this section, if an individual or in the case of a firm, corporation, partnership, association or organization, any person having any financial, controlling or managerial interest of five percent or greater therein, shall be of good moral character. In making such determination, the following information, which shall be submitted by applicant, shall be considered: 
a.  Penal history. If the applicant is an individual, a record of all conviction and the reasons therefor shall be provided by the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, then the record of all convictions and the reason therefor of the principal controlling officers of applicant shall be provided. Provided, however, that in the case of a publicly held corporation having 25 or more shareholders, then only the aforementioned information applicable to its local managing officers shall be required. 
b.  Business history. Whether such applicant has operated a solid waste collection-removal business in this or another state under a franchise, permit or license and if so, where and whether such franchise, permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor. 
c.  Existence of business entity. If applicant is a corporation, applicant shall submit proof of incorporation in good standing in the state of incorporation and, if a foreign corporation, applicant shall provide information certifying that applicant is qualified to do business in the state. If applicant is other than a corporation and is operating under a fictitious name, applicant shall be required to submit information that such fictitious name is registered and held by applicant. 
(3)  Equipment and method of operation. The applicant for a franchise shall possess equipment capable of providing safe and efficient service. In making such a determination and approving the method of operation for each applicant, the village manager shall require the following information: 
a.  The type, number and complete description of all equipment to be used by the applicant for providing service pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  A statement that the applicant will use county-approved facilities for disposing of all solid waste which the applicant collects and removes, or those facilities not owned by the county which have been approved by the state department of environmental regulation. 
c.  The names of customers and addresses of each location served. 
(4)  Insurance requirements. The applicant for a franchise shall maintain insurance as specified herein and shall furnish a public liability policy to the village and also file with the village a certificate of insurance for all policies written in the applicant's name. This certificate shall name the village as an additional insured if required by the village manager and shall provide that the policies contain an endorsement requiring that the village shall be furnished with ten days written notice by registered mail prior to cancellation or material changes in the policies. 
a.  Comprehensive general liability. The applicant shall carry in his own name a policy acceptable to the village manager covering their operations in an amount not less than $300,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and $200,000.00 per occurrence for property damage liability. 
b.  Vehicle liability insurance. Applicants for a permit shall maintain vehicle liability insurance covering each vehicle utilized in the business of solid waste collection and disposal in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. 
c.  Liability of the village. The above insurance requirements shall not be construed as imposing upon the village or any official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for injury to any person or property by the insured, his agents or employees. 
(5)  Customer list. The applicant for or (applicant for renewal of) a franchise shall provide a list of existing customers in the village and service levels. 
(6)  Proof of county and/or state permits and licenses. The applicant for a franchise shall provide proof of county and/or state permits and licenses. 
(7)  The completed application shall be submitted to the village. Upon receipt of a completed application, the village manager or his designated representative shall review said application and, if satisfactory in all respects, and after payment of required application fee of $1,000.00, shall issue the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-4. - Denial of franchise. 
    Should the village manager deny an application for a franchise, he shall notify the applicant of such denial by certified mail not later than 14 days after taking such action. The notice of denial shall contain a statement of the reasons why the application was denied. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-5. - Appeal from village manager's denial of franchise; appeal from revocation of franchise under section 24-11. 
    The denial or revocation of a franchise by the village manager may be appealed to the village council. The notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the village manager no later than fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the certified letter advising applicant of the denial or revocation. 
    The village manager shall fix the date and time for hearing the appeal. Said hearing shall be held not less than 14 nor more than 60 days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The village council shall either affirm the decision of the village manager or direct the village manager to issue or reinstate the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-6. - Term of franchise. 
    Franchises awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-7. - Renewal of franchise. 
    A franchise may be renewed from year to year by the village manager. Any such renewal may be subject to the same terms and conditions applicable to the issuance of the original franchise. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-8. - Transfer of franchise prohibited. 
    No franchise for the collection of solid waste issued under the provisions of this chapter may be assigned or transferred. In the event of any change in ownership and/or name of the corporation or partnership, formal notification shall be given to the village manager within 30 days thereof. That upon any sale, a new franchise license must be applied for and shall be obtained from the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-9. - Information required of franchisee. 
    At least annually, but not more frequently than quarterly as determined by the village manager, each franchisee shall supply the following information on a form and in the manner prescribed by the village manager. 
(1)  A listing, which is organized as prescribed by the village manager, as of the reporting date, of the names and addresses of customers, and the addresses of each location served. For each customer on the list, the private hauler will indicate the following: 
a.  Whether the customer served is a multi-family residential or commercial establishment; and 
b.  Whether the service provided is solid waste collection, recycling, or a combination of both; and 
c.  A listing of those materials being recycled at each customer location; and 
d.  The name of a customer contact person who can provide additional information regarding the recycling program. 
(2)  A summary of the number of cubic yards of solid waste collected quarterly based on scheduled service, as of the reporting date. 
(3)  A summary of the number of tons and/or cubic yards of recyclable material collected and marketed quarterly, on a schedule and format prescribed by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-10. - Disposal required at county-approved facilities. 
    Any and all solid waste collected by a franchisee within the village shall be disposed of only at the solid waste disposal facilities provided, operated and designated or approved by the Dade County department of solid waste management and at no other location or facility except those which have heretofore been approved by the department of environmental regulation so long as it is required by the Code of Metropolitan Dade County. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-11. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  The following shall constitute cause for revocation of a solid waste franchise by the village manager: 
(1)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the Code of Metropolitan Dade County which violation endangers the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(2)  The violation of any of terms or conditions of the franchise; or 
(3)  The failure to promptly pay the franchise fee provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The village manager may revoke a franchise for a violation or violations. Upon a determination by the village manager that a franchise shall be revoked, the affected person shall be provided with written notice of such revocation and the reasons therefor. Upon receipt of such notice, the affected person may appeal said revocation to the village manager and the appeal and hearing thereon shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 24-5. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-12. - Solid waste collection franchise fee payable to village. 
    It shall be unlawful for any private hauler operating in the village to either collect, remove, or transport from properties in the village solid waste for disposal without payment of a solid waste franchise fee to the village. 
    Commencing upon the effective date of this chapter, and continuing monthly thereafter on the fifteenth day of each and every month, each private hauler operating in the village shall: 
(1)  File a report with the village manager. The report shall designate the names and addresses of each account located in the village that was provided solid waste collection and disposal service by the private hauler for the preceding month. The report shall include the gross monthly solid waste collection and disposal service fee collected receipts of all such accounts, which report shall be subject to audit by the village; and 
(2)  Simultaneously with the filing of such report, each private hauler shall pay to the village a franchise fee equal to ten percent of the total gross monthly solid waste collection and disposal service fee collected receipts of all of its accounts which are located in the village, as reflected on each monthly report. 
    An additional monthly surcharge, equal to one percent of total gross monthly service fee collected receipts for the preceding month per month, as reported to the village manager, shall be payable to the village if the ten percent franchise fee is not paid by the fifteenth of the month by the private hauler for each month the payment is delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-13. - Recordkeeping. 
    Each private hauler is hereby required to establish and maintain appropriate records, showing in such detail as the village manager may prescribe, the amount of monthly solid waste collection and disposal service fee collected receipts of each account provided solid waste collection and disposal service fee collected receipts of each account provided solid waste collection and disposal services which is located in the village. All such records shall be open to inspection by the village manager or his duly authorized agent at all reasonable times. The village manager is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate from time to time such rules and regulations with respect to the establishment and maintenance of such records as he or she may deem necessary to carry into effect the purpose and intent of the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-14. - Franchise granted, county permit holders, others. 
(a)  Each private hauler who has held a permit in good standing from Metropolitan Dade County on or immediately prior to March 12, 1996 (date of incorporation of the village) pursuant to county code 15-17 shall be allowed to continue to provide service in the village for a ninety-day period until a franchise application has been approved or denied by the village, so long as the private hauler meets all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Each franchise awarded pursuant to this chapter is subject to compliance with all of the terms and conditions hereof except that the franchisee eligible under section 24-14(a) may supplement the documentary materials and information which was provided by franchisee to secure a permit from Metropolitan Dade County to meet the application requirements of this chapter, as determined by the village manager. This shall not waive the fee required by section 24-3(7). 
(c)  The franchise granted shall confer to franchisee the right to operate upon the public streets of the village to provide the solid waste collection services in accordance with the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-15. - Restoration. 
    The franchisee agrees to repair all property, public or private, altered or damaged by it, its agents or employees in the performance of its services herein in as good or better condition as it was before being damaged or altered. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-16. - Compliance with laws. 
    Franchisee shall conduct operations under this chapter in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-17. - Services provided. 
    Services provided by franchisee shall comply with the village's ordinance governing the time and frequency of solid waste collection and removal. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-18. - Office and collection hours. 
(a)  The franchisee's office shall remain open Monday through Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of handling complaints; and for that purpose, there shall be maintained an adequate number of telephones and a responsible person in charge during the hours specified above. These requirements do not apply on legal holidays. 
(b)  Collections shall normally be made no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 7:00 p.m. (or as otherwise prescribed by the village) with no service on Sunday, except in time of emergency or to maintain schedules due to Holidays. Changes to these hours must be approved by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-19. - Collection equipment. 
    The franchisee shall have on hand at all times sufficient equipment in good working order to permit franchisee to perform its duties hereunder fully, adequately, and efficiently. Equipment shall be purchased or manufactured from nationally known and recognized manufacturers of garbage collection and disposal equipment. Garbage collection equipment shall be kept clean, sanitary, neat in appearance and in good repair at all times. The franchisee shall at all times have available to it, reserve equipment which can be put into service and operation within two hours of any breakdown. Such reserve equipment shall substantially correspond, in size and capability, to the equipment normally used by the franchisee to perform its duties hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-20. - Spillage and litter. 
    The franchise shall not litter premises in the process of making collection, but shall not be required to collect any waste material that has not been placed in approved containers or in a manner herein provided. During hauling, all solid waste shall be contained, tied or enclosed so that leaking, spilling or blowing are prevented. In the event of spillage by the franchisee, the franchisee shall promptly clean up the litter. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-21. - Storms and other emergencies. 
    In case of an unusually severe storm or disruption caused by other severe emergencies not caused by franchisee, village manager may grant franchisee reasonable variance from regular schedules. As soon as practicable after such storm or other emergency, franchisee shall inform the village of the estimated time required before regular schedules and routes can be resumed and, upon request of the village manager, franchisee shall provide notice to residential premises in the service area. In event of a storm or emergency requiring mass cleanup operations, franchisee, shall, upon direction of village, participate in said cleanup to the extent directed by the village. Where it is necessary for the franchisee and the village to acquire additional equipment and to hire extra crews to clean the village of debris and refuse resulting from the storm or disaster, the franchisee shall work with the village in all ways possible for efficient and rapid cleanup. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-22. - Nondiscrimination provision. 
    The franchisee agrees that it has adopted and will maintain and enforce a policy of nondiscrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, handicap, disability or national origin. Said nondiscrimination policy shall apply to employment practices of the franchisee and the provisions of services. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-23. - Complaints. 
    All complaints pertaining to pickup of waste shall be responded to and resolved within 24 hours. All other service complaints shall be investigated and responded to within 24 hours. Franchisee shall supply the village manager with copies of all customer complaints on a monthly basis and indicate disposition of each. Such records shall be available for inspection by village at all times during business hours specified herein. The form shall indicate the day and hours on which the compliant was received and the day and hour on which it was resolved. When a complaint is received on the day preceding a holiday or on a Saturday, it shall be serviced on the next working day. The franchisee shall establish procedures acceptable to the village to insure that all customers are notified as to the complaint procedure. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-24. - Franchise non-exclusive. 
(a)  Any franchise granted by this chapter is non-exclusive, and the village reserves the right to award additional franchises or utilize other solid waste collection programs. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall authorize collection of solid waste in areas of the village serviced by Dade County prior to March 12, 1996 without specific approval of the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-25. - Rights reserved. 
    The village reserves the right to adopt ordinances regulating the services provider hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-26. - Surrender of rights. 
    As a further consideration for the granting of the rights, privileges and franchises granted hereby, the company surrenders all rights, privileges and franchises heretofore granted by Dade County in the newly-incorporated Village of Pinecrest franchise area for any of the purposes stated in this chapter and now enjoyed by the franchisee in the franchise area; provided, however, that such surrender shall not be effective unless and until this chapter shall be finally adopted and in effect and the rights, privileges and franchises granted hereby shall be validly in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-27. - Village's right to regulate use of streets not abrogated. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a surrender by the village of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets in accordance with village's police powers or property rights. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 24-28. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. This chapter shall be subject to enforcement under the Local Government Code Enforcement Act, Chapter 162, F.S., as amended. Enforcement may also be by suit for declaratory, injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-7,  4, 5-6-97) 
Secs. 24-29, 24-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-7,  1-2, adopted November 27, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former  24-29 and 24-30 in their entirety. Former  24-29 pertained to dumpster enclosures, and derived from Ord. No. 99-3, adopted January 12, 1999. Former  24-30 pertained to specifications and materials location for dumpster enclosures, and derived from Ord. No. 99-3, adopted January 12, 1999. 
Chapter 25 - STORMWATER UTILITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, adopted November 13, 2002, amended the Code by renumbering former  30-118 of the land development regulations as a new ch. 25,  25-1-25-7. 

Sec. 25-1. - Legislative intent and applicability. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of F.S.  403.0893, by creating a municipal stormwater utility and adopting stormwater utility fees sufficient to plan, construct, operate and maintain stormwater management systems set forth in the local program required pursuant to F.S.  403.0891. The provisions of this chapter shall be effective throughout the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 25-2. - Construction. 
    This section shall be liberally construed to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to effectuate the purposes set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02) 
Sec. 25-3. - Creation of stormwater utility, governing body, and organization. 
(a)  Creation of stormwater utility. There is hereby created and established by the authority of F.S.  403.0893, a municipal stormwater utility implementing the provisions of F.S.  403.0891, which shall be named and known as the "Village of Pinecrest Stormwater Utility" (hereinafter also referred to as the "utility"). The utility shall be a public body corporate and politic which, through its governing body, the village council, may exercise all those powers specifically granted herein, those powers granted by law and those powers necessary in the exercise of those powers herein enumerated. 
(b)  Governing body and powers. The governing body of the utility shall be the village council. The utility, acting through the village council, shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, and governance of a village-wide stormwater utility to plan, construct, operate and maintain stormwater management systems set forth in the local program required pursuant to F.S.  403.0891. The village council may create by ordinance one or more districts and subdistricts within the service area of the utility. 
(c)  Director of the utility. The village manager shall be the director of the utility. 
(d)  Organization and operating procedures. The organization and operating procedures of the utility shall be prescribed by administrative orders and regulations of the village manager. The village manager shall appoint such employees as may be necessary to operate the utility. The salaries and compensation of all personnel of the utility shall be determined by the village council upon the recommendation of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 25-4. - Fees. 
    The utility is hereby authorized and directed to establish, assess, and collect stormwater utility fees upon all residential developed property and all nonresidential developed property in the village, sufficient to plan, construct, operate, and maintain stormwater management systems set forth in the local program required pursuant to F.S.  403.0891. Such fees shall be in an amount set forth in administrative orders of the village manager subject to approval by the village council. 
(1)  Residential assessments. Each residential developed property shall be assessed a stormwater utility fee calculated by multiplying the rate for one equivalent residential unit (ERU) by the number of the dwelling units on the parcel. 
(2)  Nonresidential assessments. Each nonresidential developed property shall be assessed a stormwater utility fee calculated by multiplying the rate for one ERU by a factor derived by dividing the actual impervious area of the particular nonresidential developed property by the statistically estimated average horizontal impervious area of residential developed property per dwelling unit, to wit, the square footage base equivalent established for one ERU. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each nonresidential developed property classified by the Miami-Dade County Property Appraiser as land use type 71 shall be assessed a stormwater utility fee which is 50 percent of the fee for nonresidential developed property calculated as described in the preceding sentence. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 25-5. - Use of fee revenues. 
    The fees payable hereunder shall be deposited in a separate village fund and shall be used exclusively by the utility to pay for the costs of planning, constructing, operating and maintaining the utility pursuant to F.S.  403.0891. No part of said fund shall be used for purposes other than the aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 25-6. - Billings, late fees, notice and advance fees. 
(a)  Billings and late fees. Fees shall be billed to the owner, tenant, or occupant of each developed property in accordance with the village manager's administrative orders. If the fees are not fully paid by said owner, tenant or occupant on or before the past due date set forth on the bill, a ten percent late charge may be added to the bill and imposed by the utility in accordance with regulations prescribed by the village manager. Any unpaid balance for such fees and late charges shall be subject to an interest charge at the rate of eight percent per annum. Imposition of said interest charge shall commence 60 days after the past due date of the fees set forth on the bill. 
(b)  Debts due recoverable by utility. Fees and late charges, together with any interest charges, shall be debts due and owing the utility and all of same shall be recoverable by the village or its assignee, on behalf of the utility, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Notice procedures for delinquent fees. The utility shall establish procedures to notify owners, tenants, occupants, and managers of developed property of delinquent fee accounts. 
(d)  Advance fees. Subscribers to this service shall pay in advance a fee in an amount set forth in the administrative orders of the village manager. 
(e)  Other collection methods. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village, pursuant to F.S.  403.0893(3), may use the non-ad valorem levy, collection, and enforcement method as provided for in F.S. ch. 197, for fees assessed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 25-7. - Liens. 
    All fees, late charges and interest accruing, thereupon due and owing to the utility which remain unpaid 60 days after the past due date of the fees shall become a lien against and upon the developed property for which the fees are due and owing to the same extent and character as a lien for a special assessment. Until fully paid and discharged, said fees, late charges, and interest accrued thereupon shall be, remain, and constitute a special assessment lien equal in rank and dignity with the liens of ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, and claims in, to or against the developed property involved for the period of five years from the date said fees, late charges, and interest accrued thereupon, become a lien as set forth in this chapter. Said lien may be enforced and satisfied by the village, on behalf of the utility, pursuant to F.S. ch. 173, as amended from time to time, or by any other method permitted by law. The lien provided for herein shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any other legal remedies for recovery of said fee, late charges, and accrued interest available in the village and to the utility. The section is not applicable to fees collected pursuant to section 25-6(e) of this chapter. 
(1)  Notice. For fees which become more than 60 days past due and unpaid, the village or the utility shall cause to be filed in the office of the clerk of the Circuit Court of Miami-Dade County, Florida, a notice of lien or statement showing a legal description of the property against which the lien is claimed, its location by street and number, the name of the owner, and an accurate statement of the fees and late charges then unpaid. A copy of such notice of lien may be mailed within a reasonable time to the owner of the property involved as shown by the records of the tax collector of the county. 
(2)  Satisfaction. Liens may be discharged and satisfied by payment to the village, on behalf of the utility, of the aggregate amounts specified in the notice of lien, together with interest accrued thereon, and all filing and recording fees. When any such lien has been fully paid or discharged, the village shall cause evidence of the satisfaction and discharge of such lien to be filed with the office of the clerk of the Circuit Court of Miami-Dade County, Florida. Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity, other than the present owner of the property involved, who fully pays any such lien shall be entitled to an assignment of lien and shall be subrogated to the rights of the village and the utility with respect to the enforcement of such lien. 
(3)  Exemption to notice. Notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary herein, the village, on behalf of the utility, shall have the discretion not to file notices of lien for fees, late charges, and interest accrued thereupon in an amount less than $50.00. If the village or the utility elects not to file a notice of lien, said fees, late charges, and accrued interest shall remain as debts due and owing in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Certificates verifying amount of debt. The utility is authorized and directed to execute and deliver upon request written certificates certifying the amount fees, late charges and interest accrued thereupon, which are due and owing to the utility and the village, for any developed property which is subject to payment of said fees, or the utility may certify that no fees, late charges or accrued interest are due and owing. Said certificates shall be binding upon the village and the utility. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2017-14,  2, 12-12-17) 
Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Use of right-of-way abutting schools by vendor. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Article shall mean any personal property, except vehicles temporarily parked in the public right-of-way. 
    Public right-of-way shall mean rights-of-way within the municipal boundaries of the village. 
    Vehicle shall mean functioning automobiles, trucks, buses or trailers. 
(b)  Unless otherwise authorized by law, no person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity shall place any article or vehicle in the public right-of-way adjacent to schools without first having obtained a permit from the village public works department; provided, however, the United States, its agencies and their contractors, the State of Florida and state agencies, in the execution of federal or state projects are exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The village shall have the authority to issue permits for the temporary placement or parking of vehicles in the public right-of-way abutting a school for the purpose of selling, serving, vending food or beverages to students of such school. The village shall have the authority to limit the number of permits issued to any vendor for any one location or school site. 
(d)  Permit application process. Applicants for permits to place articles or vehicles in the public right-of-way abutting a school shall file with the public works director a written application in a form prepared by the village. The applicant shall also submit written approval by the principal of such school abutting the right-of-way that the applicant has met and complied with all requirements and guidelines of the Miami-Dade School Board and further that the principal is recommending the applicant to the village for receipt of such permit. The village shall have final authority relative to the issuance of a permit for use of the right-of-way. If the application meets all requirements, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the fee set by the village council. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified within five working days of the village's receipt of the completed application. The applicant shall be advised of the specific cause of the denial. the determination by the village shall be final. 
(e)  Any and all permits issued subject to this section shall be for a limited term and shall not exceed the school year in which the permit is issued. 
(f)  Those applicants who receive permits under this section shall cause all vehicles, trash, rubbish and articles to be removed from the right-of-way upon the termination of business each and every day. All applicants who receive permits under this section shall be responsible for any and all damage to the right-of-way and/or streets or roads located in the village where the applicant has engaged in the temporary placement of parking of vehicles. Any and all permits issued pursuant under this section shall be subject to revocation by the village in the event any damage is caused to the right-of-ways, roads and/or streets located in the village due to activities contemplated within this section. Any violation of this section may result in the revocation of the permit. The applicant may also be assessed a civil penalty as provided in the Code of Ordinances as well as impose any other remedy available by law or ordinance. 
(g)  The village manager shall have the power to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section after providing written notice to the permit holder and upon a showing of good cause that the permit holder has violated this section or that the issuance of the permit, in a particular case, is not in the best interest and general welfare of the citizens of the village. Good cause for the purpose of this section shall include: 
(1)  The violation of any village ordinance or state statute whereby the health, safety or welfare of the citizens has been threatened; 
(2)  The operation of a business by the vendor within the municipal limits of the village constitutes a public nuisance and thereby also threatens the health and welfare of the citizens of the village; or 
(3)  The withdrawal of authorization by school principal. 
No permit shall be revoked, however, unless and until the permit holder has been notified by U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, with at least ten days notice that the village manager shall consider the revocation of said permit on a specific date. The notice shall identify the basis for the revocation of permit. If the village manager determines that good cause exists for the revocation of the permit, then the permit shall be revoked by the village manager and no portion of the permit fee paid by the permit holder shall be refunded. 
(h)  All permits issued under this section shall be subject to a permit fee as determined from time to time by the village council. No permit issued under this section shall be subject to transfer. All revenue derived from fees paid by applicants seeking the issuance of a permit under this section shall be paid into the general fund of the village. 
(i)  (1)  Any individual or business entity engaging in any business as a vendor without first obtaining a permit as required by this section, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the permit determined to be due in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(2)  Any individual or business entity covered by this section, who does not obtain a permit as required under this section, after engaging in business as a vendor at any school site located within the village, shall be subject to civil action and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts and a penalty to be determined by the village council. 
(Ord. No. 99-2,  2, 1-12-99) 
Secs. 26-2-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NAMING, RENAMING AND CO-DESIGNATING VILLAGE ROADS, STREETS OR PUBLIC WAYS 

Sec. 26-31. - Procedure. 
    The village council may, by resolution adopted after a public hearing, name, rename or co-designate any village road, street or public way, provided, however that no such road, street or public way shall be named, renamed or co-designated for any living person. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners of record on the affected road, street or public way with a pre-addressed and postage-paid response card. No road, street or public way shall be renamed unless positive response cards are received from at least 75 percent of the property owners of record on the affected street, road or public way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6,  1, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 26-32. - Certified copy of resolution to be provided to certain departments. 
    Upon adoption of a resolution naming, renaming or co-designating any village road, street or public way, the village clerk shall provide a certified copy of the adopted resolution to the village's building and planning department, the village's public works department, the Miami-Dade County public works department, and the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6,  1, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 26-33. - Public notice. 
    The village clerk shall publish notice of any street name change in a newspaper of general circulation within the village in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF STREET NAME CHANGE 
    Public notice is hereby given that the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida has enacted a resolution changing the name of ____________ to ____________ . This name change is effective immediately and has been duly recorded with the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6,  1, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 26-34. - Cost. 
    The cost for replacing any existing street signs with signs bearing the new street name or co-designation shall be the responsibility of the person, group, organization, or other entity initiating the request for the new street name or co-designation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6,  1, 11-14-00) 
Secs. 26-35-26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY-COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 26-51. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Pinecrest Rights-of-Way-Communication Facilities Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 26-52. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of the village to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: 
(1)  Providing for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the village; 
(2)  Adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including, but not limited to, F.S.  337.401, as amended, 47 USC  253(a), 332(c)(7) and 1455(a), 47 CFR 1.40001 and applicable policies and rules of the FCC, as they may be amended from time to time, the village's home-rule authority, and other federal and state laws; 
(3)  Establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and 
(4)  Minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the village shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
    Persons seeking to place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-53. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
    Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of the use of a communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. It may also mean the discontinued use of unutilized technology in favor of new technology, which would require the removal of the discontinued, abandoned technology. There is a rebuttable presumption that any communications facility that has ceased operations for a period of 180 days is abandoned. 
    Arterial roadway shall mean any street or roadway that constitutes the highest degree of mobility at the highest speed, for long, uninterrupted travel, and constitutes the largest proportion of total travel as per the Federal Functional Classification Map maintained by the State of Florida Department of Transportation District Six Office, as amended. 
    Building permit shall mean a permit issued by the village's department of building and planning authorizing construction or modification of proposed facilities in conformity with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    Collector roadway shall mean any street or roadway that provides a mix of mobility and land access functions, linking major land uses to each other or to the arterial highway system as per the Federal Functional Classification Map maintained by the State of Florida Department of Transportation District Six Offices, as amended. 
    Collocation shall mean the situation in which a communications services provider or a pass-through provider uses an existing structure to locate a second or subsequent antenna. The term includes the ground, platform, or roof installation of equipment enclosures, cabinets, or buildings, and cables, brackets, and other equipment associated with the location and operation of the antenna. 
    Communications facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennas, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, towers, distributed antenna systems (DAS), small cell facilities, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the village and used or capable or being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services, as per F.S.  337.401, as amended. 
    Communications facility provider shall mean a person (other than a communications services provider operating one or more communications facilities located within the village) who is engaged, directly or indirectly, in the business of leasing, licensing, subleasing, subletting or hiring to one or more communications service providers all or a portion of the tangible personal property used in a communications facility, including, but not limited to, towers, poles, tower space, antennas, transmitters, and transmission lines. Provisions of this article that apply only to communications facility providers shall not apply to communications service providers even if the communications service providers also operate, license, lease, sublease, or sublet communications facilities. 
    Communications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals, including video services, to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance, as per F.S.  202.11, as amended. The term includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code, or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance, or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to as voice-over-Internet-protocol services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added. The term does not include: 
(1)  Information services. 
(2)  Installation or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer's premises. 
(3)  The sale or rental of tangible personal property. 
(4)  The sale of advertising, including, but not limited to, directory advertising. 
(5)  Bad check charges. 
(6)  Late payment charges. 
(7)  Billing and collection services. 
(8)  Internet access service, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or similar on-line computer services. 
    Communications services provider shall mean any person including a municipality or county providing communications services, as that term is used in F.S.  337.401, as amended, through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
    Director, as used in this article, shall mean the village's public works director, or designee. 
    Emergency shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. 
    Existing structure shall mean a structure that exists at the time an application for permission to place antennas on the structure is filed with the village. The term includes any structure that can structurally support the attachment of antennas in compliance with the applicable codes. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Furniture zone shall mean the paved portion of the streetscape zone typically located between the back of curb or end of pavement and the sidewalk. The furniture zone typically includes street light poles and lights, utility poles, regulatory signage, traffic signal equipment and street trees. In some cases a streetscape zone may not have a furniture zone. 
    Historic structure shall mean a structure individually designated as historic, or located within a district designated as historic, by applicable village, county, state or federal law. 
    In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way shall mean in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
    Ordinance shall mean this article. 
    Parkway strip shall mean the unpaved portion of the right-of-way between the back of curb or edge of pavement and the sidewalk. The parkway strip typically includes street light poles and lights, utility poles, regulatory signage, traffic signal equipment and street trees. In some instances a streetscape zone may not have a parkway strip. 
    Pass-through provider is any person who places or maintains a communications facility in the roads or rights-of-way of the village and who does not remit taxes imposed by the village pursuant to F.S., Ch. 202, as per F.S.  337.401, as amended. A "pass-through provider" does not provide communications services to retail customers in the village. 
    Pedestrian clear zone shall mean the unencumbered paved, or sidewalk portion of the streetscape zone inside the right-of-way. The pedestrian clear zone may or may not be separated from the travel lane by a furniture zone or parkway strip. 
    Person shall include any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the village to the extent the village acts as a communications services provider. 
    Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, replace, occupy, locate, relocate or control the physical use of facilities. A person that owns or has the power to direct and control the physical use of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, such as the authority to enter upon, energize, de-energize, maintain, remove, replace, modify or repair physical facilities, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third-party communications services provider's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
    Public rights-of-way shall mean a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the village is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property, or easements over private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal village property except as described above and shall not include the village buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
    Registrant shall mean a person that has registered with the village in accordance with the provisions of section 26-54 of this article, and holds an effective registration. 
    Registration or register shall mean the process described in this article whereby a communications services provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider provides certain information to the village. 
    Repurposed structure shall mean an existing structure owned by the village or any utility (1) that has been renovated, reconfigured, or replaced with a similar structure so as to continue serving its existing purpose while also supporting the attachment of communication facilities or antennas, where possible through stealth design, (2) that is approximately in the same location as the existing structure, (3) that does not result in a net increase in the number of structures located within the public right-of-way, (4) that is installed near the outer boundaries of the public rights-of-way to the extent possible, (5) that does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access, and (6) that complies with the Americans with Disability Act, Florida Building Code, and Florida Department of Transportation's Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, as same may be amended from time to time, compliant. By way of illustration only, where a light pole existing within the public right-of-way is removed and is replaced with a new light pole that is substantially similar to the old light pole but now supports the attachment or integration of communication facilities, the new light pole shall be considered a "repurposed structure." Unless stated otherwise, all references to "communications facilities" or "wireless communications facilities" shall also apply to repurposed structures. To "repurpose an existing structure" shall mean the act of renovating, reconfiguring, or replacing an existing structure as described above. 
    ROW permit shall mean the village of Pinecrest public rights-of-way permit required by section 26-56 of this article. 
    Stealth design shall mean a method of camouflaging any tower, antenna or other telecommunications facility, including, but not limited to, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses and be as visually unobtrusive as possible. Stealth design may include a repurposed structure. 
    Tower shall mean any structure or pole designed solely or primarily to support antennas used to provide communications services, including but not limited to distributed antenna systems (DAS), and small cell facilities. Without reference to the stealth requirements provided herein, the dimensions and outward appearance of towers to be placed in the rights of way shall closely resemble the dimensions and outward appearance of other utility poles permitted to occupy the rights of way. 
    Wireless communications facility shall mean equipment used to provide wireless service, as the phrase, "wireless communications facility" is further defined and limited in F.S.  365.172, as amended. A wireless communications facility is a type of communications facility. 
    Wireless provider shall have the meaning set forth in F.S.  365.172(3)(hh), as may be amended from time to time. 
    Wireless service shall mean "commercial mobile radio service" as provided under  3(27) and 332(d) of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C.  151 et seq., and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, Pub. L No. 103-66, August 10, 1993, 107 Stat. 312, as per F.S.  365.172, as amended. The term includes service provided by any wireless real-time two-way wire communication device, including radio-telephone communications in cellular telephone service; personal communications service; or the functional or competitive equivalent of a radio-telephone communications line used in cellular telephone service, a personal communications service, or a network radio access line. The term does not include communications services providers that offer mainly dispatch service in a more localized, non-cellular configuration; providers offering only data, one-way, or stored-voice services on an interconnected basis; providers of air-to-ground services; or public coast stations. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Pinecrest, Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-54. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A person seeking to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the village shall first register with the village in accordance with this article. This article provides no right of access to the public rights-of-way for (1) persons other than communications service providers or (2) businesses other than providing communications services. Other uses of the public rights-of-way reasonably related to the provision of communications services may be allowed in the reasonable discretion of the village. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this article, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Tangible personal property placed in the public rights-of-way pursuant to this article shall retain its character as tangible personal property and shall not be regarded as real property, fixtures or mixed property. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a person from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities in the village or on another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a person from complying with all applicable village ordinances, codes or regulations, including this article. 
(c)  Each person seeking authority to place or maintain a communications facility, including, without limitation collocations, in public rights-of-way in the village shall file a single registration with the village which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is not a natural person residing in Florida or an entity organized under the laws of Florida, applicant shall supply proof of its authority to do business in Florida; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration and the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; and 
(4)  The number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state authority, if any. An applicant proposing to place or maintain a wireless communications facility operating on spectrum licensed by the FCC shall supply the file number of the FCC license authorizing such wireless service. 
(d)  The village shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the village manager or designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with subsection (c), above, the registration shall be effective and the village shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the village determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (c), above, the village shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The village shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this section. An applicant has 30 days after receipt of a notice of non-effectiveness of registration to appeal the decision as provided in section 26-58, hereof. 
(e)  A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the village stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities, including without limitation collocations, in public rights-of-way within the village and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the village but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a ROW permit. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional village ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted or amended from time to time. 
(g)  A registrant shall renew its registration with the village by April 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this article, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even numbered year. Each renewal shall include an inventory of the communications facilities, poles, towers, underground lines and equipment cabinets registrant installed in public rights-of-way in the village during the last term of the registration and an inventory of the wireless communications facilities, poles, towers, and equipment cabinets registrant abandoned in the public rights-of-way in the village during the last term of the registration. Within 30 days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the village. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the village restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(h)  In accordance with applicable village ordinances, codes or regulations, and to the extent permitted by law, a ROW permit is required of any person seeking to place or maintain a communications facility including, without limitation, a collocation, in public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a ROW permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, all permitting requirements, including building permit requirements, shall apply. A ROW permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a communications services provider having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-55. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way. 
    A registrant shall not transfer, sell or assign all or any portion of its assets located in public rights-of-way except to a person holding a valid registration issued pursuant to section 26-54, hereof. Written notice of any such proposed transfer, sale, or assignment, along with assignee/transferee's signed and sworn certificate of its compliance with the requirements of this article, shall be provided by such registrant to the village at least five days prior to the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If permit applications are pending in the name of the transferor/assignor, the transferee/assignee shall notify the village manager that the transferee/assignee is the new applicant. Violation of the requirements of this section 26-55 will subject the registrant to a fine of up to $500.00 for each day the registrant fails to comply; provided however, village does not claim the right to approve or deny registrants' asset transfers or assignments to communications services providers operating at least one communications facility within the village, and the failure to comply with this section does not void any such asset transfer or assignment. The village reserves its right to exclude persons other than communications services providers from its right-of-way. Transfers or assignments of a communications facility to persons other than a communications services provider who will operate at least one communications facility within the village require compliance with this section to insure continued use of the public right-of-way. Successors in interest to a registrant shall provide notice to the village of any transfer, whether voluntary or involuntary, within 30 days of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 26-56. - Placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registrant shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state and federal law and the village's ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility, including without limitation a collocation, in public rights-of-way until all applicable permits have been issued by the village or other appropriate authority, except in the case of an emergency, a registrant may restore its damaged facilities in the right-of-way to their pre-emergency condition or replace its destroyed facilities in the rights-of-way with facilities of the same size, character and quality, all without first applying for or receiving a permit. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the village of the repair, placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency and shall be required to obtain an after-the-fact ROW permit if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work undertaken in public rights-of-way in connection with the emergency. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. Registrant acknowledges that as a condition of granting such permits, the village may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit, and comply with the requirements set forth in section 26-84. The village may issue blanket permits to cover certain activities, such as routine maintenance and repair activities, which may otherwise require individual permits. 
(c)  As part of any ROW permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, a collocation, the registrant shall provide the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed facilities, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where the facilities are to be located, and the approximate size of facilities that will be located in public-rights-of-way; 
(2)  With respect to proposals to locate a new tower or replace an existing tower or wireless communication facility in the right-of-way, engineering documentation demonstrating either: (i) how the proposed tower or wireless communications facility can accommodate collocations; (ii) how stealth design can be used at this location; or (iii) why a repurposed structure is not better suited to or feasible for the site; 
(3)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e., anticipated construction methods or techniques); 
(4)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way; 
(5)  For purposes of the village assessing impact on right-of-way resources, effects on neighboring properties and potential for collocations or repurposed structures, information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, including information that identifies all above-ground and below ground structures (including light poles, power poles, equipment boxes and antenna), currently existing in the public rights-of-way in the village within a 750-feet radius of the proposed facility, if available (such information may be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other registrants with facilities in the public rights-of-way); however, if the applicable official or board determines that it either: (i) better serves the village's interests in safe, aesthetic, efficient and effective management of the public rights-of-way; (ii) is necessary to address a documented lack of capacity for one or more carriers; or (iii) will help minimize the total number of communication facilities necessary to serve a particular area, then the 750-foot distance requirement may be modified. The applicant shall provide competent substantial evidence to reflect that the above conditions are met, in order to waive the 750-foot distance requirements, and ensure compliance with all the other requirements of this article: 
(6)  If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way; 
(7)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the village which will be affected; 
(8)  Whether all or any portion of the proposed facilities will be rented, hired, leased, sublet, or licensed from or to any third party and, if so, the identity, and contact information of that third party; 
(9)  Prior to installation of any new or additional equipment in the rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, collocation at a specific site, the registrant shall be required to remove any and all unutilized or abandoned equipment. Any application to install new or additional equipment shall identify the unutilized or abandoned equipment that shall be removed prior to the installation of any new or additional technology or equipment in the rights-of-way; 
(10)  If there exists a telecommunication facility by the same registrant within the right-of-way that is adjacent to or within 50 feet of the proposed new telecommunication facility location, the registrant shall be required to remove and consolidate the equipment into one facility, so as to not create a second location for such facilities within such a minimal distance; however, if the applicable official or board determines that it either: (i) better serves the village's interests in safe, aesthetic, efficient and effective management of the public rights-of-way; (ii) is necessary to address a documented lack of capacity for one or more carriers; or (iii) will help minimize the total number of communication facilities necessary to serve a particular area, then the 50-foot distance requirement may be modified; and 
(11)  Such additional information as the village finds reasonably necessary with respect to the placement or maintenance of the communications facility that is the subject of the permit application to review such permit application. 
(d)  (1)  To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal laws, the village shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of public rights-of-way and may consider, among other things and without limitation, the sufficiency of space to accommodate all of the present communications facilities and pending applications to place and maintain facilities in that area of the public rights-of-way, the sufficiency of space to accommodate village announced plans for public improvements or projects that the village determines are in the public interest, the impact on traffic and traffic safety, and the impact upon existing facilities in the rights-of-way. The village manager or designee may impose additional reasonable regulations and conditions to ensure the public health, safety and welfare, and peaceful enjoyment of village residents and businesses. 
(2)  Where available, wireless communication facilities shall be located in the furniture zone or parkway strip. In no instance when a furniture zone or parkway strip is available, shall wireless communication facilities be located in the pedestrian clear zone. Wireless communications facilities in the furniture zone or parkway strip shall generally be placed in the center of the furniture zone or parkway strip and shall meet minimum Florida Department of Transportation ("FDOT") and village public works manual setback requirements from the back-of-curb or edge of pavement. Where there is no furniture zone or parkway strip, wireless communication facilities shall maintain either a minimum six foot wide pedestrian clear zone from back-of-curb or edge of pavement to the inward edge of a wireless communication facility or a minimum five foot wide pedestrian clear zone between the outward edge of a wireless communication facility and the back-of-sidewalk. 
(e)  All communications facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the collocation of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. To the extent not prohibited by federal and state law, the village shall require any registrant that does not have communications facilities in the village as of the date of adoption of this article to place any new cables, wires, fiber optics, splice boxes and similar communications facilities underground, unless such communications facilities can be collocated on existing or stealth design poles. The village manager or designee may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way consistent with this article and other applicable law. 
(f)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(g)  After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before such work. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within 30 days, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required under the circumstances, following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the village may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with F.S.  337.402, as amended. For 12 months following the original completion of the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this article as its own expense. 
(h)  Removal or relocation at the direction of the village of a registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S.  337.403 and 337.404, as amended. Subject to F.S.  337.403 and 337.404 and other provisions of law, whenever existing overhead utility distribution facilities are converted to underground facilities, any registrant having communications facilities on poles that are to be removed shall arrange for the conversion to underground facilities on the same terms and conditions as the other utilities that are being converted to underground facilities. 
(i)  A permit from the village constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(j)  A registrant shall maintain its communications facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law. 
(k)  In connection with excavation in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. Ch. 556, as amended. 
(l)  Registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(m)  Upon request of the village, and as notified by the village of the other work, construction, installation or repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable timeframe in the subject public rights-of-way, and registrant may be required to reasonably alter its placement or maintenance schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruption and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. 
(n)  A registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the village or any other person's facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the village. 
(o)  The village makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the village's public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the village's authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way, and the village makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(p)  The village shall have the right to make such inspections of communications facilities placed or maintained the public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article and all persons placing or maintaining communications facilities within the rights-of-way shall promptly make those communications facilities available for inspection upon request of the village. 
(q)  A ROW permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way shall include plans showing the location of the proposed installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the plans so provided require revision based upon actual installation, the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans. The plans shall be in a hard copy format or an electronic format specified by the village, provided such electronic format is maintained by the registrant. Such plans in a format maintained by the registrant shall be provided at no cost to the village. Upon completion of any communications facilities, the communications services provider shall furnish to the village, at no cost to the village, one complete set of sealed "as built" plans, or in the case of any underground communications facilities, a sealed survey showing the exact location of such communications facilities, including their depth; or in either case, such other documentation describing the location (including height or depth, as the case may be), of communications facilities as the village manager or designee, may approve. This requirement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any filings the registrant is required to make under the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. Ch. 556, as amended from time to time. The fact that such plans or survey is on file with the village shall in no way abrogate the duty of any person to comply with the aforesaid Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act when performing work in the public rights-of-way. Any proprietary confidential business information obtained from a registrant in connection with a permit application or a permit shall be held confidential by the village to the extent provided in F.S.  202.195, as amended from time to time. Such confidential proprietary business information shall be excluded from the evidentiary record of any public hearing held on an application for a ROW permit and registrant bears the risk that its claims of privilege protecting confidential proprietary business information may impair its ability to prevail at hearing on issues relevant to grant of a ROW permit. 
(r)  The village reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, stormwater drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the village in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant, and the village also reserves the right to reserve any portion of the public rights-of-way for its own present or future use. The village further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the village and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(s)  A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than 30 days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. 
(t)  The following additional requirements apply when a registrant seeks authority to locate a wireless communications facility in the public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Registrants seeking to locate wireless communications facilities within the village are encouraged to locate on private property or government-owned property outside of the rights-of-way, or in a commercial corridor. An application for a ROW permit to locate wireless communications facilities within the rights-of-way shall explain why the applicant is unable to locate the proposed facilities on private property or government-owned property or in a commercial corridor. The village may not deny an application based solely on the fact that the applicant is proposing to place a wireless telecommunications facility in the rights-of-way. 
(2)  Registrants seeking to place, construct or modify a wireless communications facility in the right-of-way shall: 
a.  Either collocate wireless communications facilities with the wireless communications facilities of other wireless providers, as set out in F.S.  365.172, as amended; or 
b.  Install their wireless communications facilities on existing structures within the right-of-way, including without limitation existing power poles, light poles and telephone poles in a stealth design; or 
c.  Repurpose an existing structure; or 
d.  With respect to proposals to locate a new tower or replace an existing tower or wireless communications facility in the right-of-way, engineering documentation shall be provided demonstrating either: (i) how the proposed tower or wireless communications facility can accommodate collocations; (ii) how stealth design can be used at this location; or (iii) why either a repurposed structure is not feasible or a new tower would be better suited to the site than a repurposed structure. 
(3)  Registrants seeking to construct wireless communications facilities within the rights-of-way shall locate their wireless communication facilities in the rights-of-way of arterial or collector roadways, whenever possible. An application for a permit to place wireless communication facilities in rights-of-way other than those of arterial or collector roadways shall explain why the applicant is unable to locate the wireless communications facilities in the rights-of-way of an arterial or collector roadway and shall include an engineering analysis from the applicant demonstrating to the satisfaction of the village engineer the need to locate the wireless communication facilities in the areas proposed in the application. 
(4)  a.  Whenever wireless communications facilities must be placed in a right-of-way with residential uses on one or both sides, neither towers, poles, equipment, antennas, or other structures shall be placed directly in front of a residential structure. If a right-of-way has residential structures on only one side, the wireless communications facilities shall be located on the opposite side of the right-of-way, whenever possible. All wireless communications facilities shall be located such that views from residential structures and to historic structures are not impaired. The requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to repurposed structures, when there is a one-to-one repurposing of an existing structure (e.g., existing light pole). The following locational guidelines, subject to waiver by the applicable official or board for a demonstrated engineering need, shall be adhered to in furtherance of the foregoing: In residential zoning districts, wireless communication facilities must be located where the shared property line between two residential parcels intersects the right-of-way. In nonresidential districts wireless communication facilities shall be located between tenant spaces or adjoining properties where their shared property lines intersect the right-of-way. 
b.  Newly installed poles, towers and wireless communications facilities should be located in areas with existing foliage or other aesthetic features in order to obscure the view of the pole, tower or wireless communications facility. 
c.  Landscaping, in a manner and degree approved by the village, shall be required to mitigate the visual impact of the wireless communications facility, its supporting structure and all equipment associated therewith. The registrant and permittee shall be responsible for maintaining, and replacing or expanding if needed as determined by the village, landscaping shielding views of the wireless communications facility, its supporting structure and equipment. The color of wireless communications facilities, their supporting structures and equipment shall be selected by the village, and maintained by the registrant and permittee. 
(5)  Registrants are required to locate wireless communications facilities within rights-of-way in a manner that minimizes their impact in the village. All other applications for permits to locate a wireless communications facility within the village shall be simultaneously served on the planning director or designee. The village reserves the right to condition the grant of any permit to locate a wireless communications facility within the right-of-way upon the registrant taking such reasonable measures, consistent with the village authority's jurisdiction, as the village may determine are necessary to mitigate the impact of the wireless communications facility on the village. Installation of a pole or tower or other equipment associated with a wireless communications facility under this chapter shall not interfere with a clear pedestrian path, at a minimum the width required by the Americans with Disabilities Act and Florida Building Code, unless a greater width is required herein. A registrant that later removes a repurposed structure shall reinstall a new light pole, or other applicable pole in the ROW, at the direction of the village. During the life of the use of the repurposed structure, the registrant shall pay all costs associated with operation, maintenance, and replacement of the repurposed structure. 
(6)  Stealth design shall be utilized wherever possible in order to minimize the visual impact of wireless communications facilities. Each application for a permit to place a wireless communications facility in the right-of-way shall include: 
a.  Photographs clearly showing the nature and location of the site where each wireless communications facility is proposed to be located; 
b.  Photographs showing the location and condition of properties adjacent to the site of each proposed wireless communications facility; and 
c.  A description of the stealth design techniques proposed to minimize the visual impact of the wireless communications facility, and shall include graphic depictions accurately representing the visual impact of the wireless communications facilities when viewed from the street and from adjacent properties. 
(7)  Stealth design of communications facilities to be located on new towers or wireless communications facilities in the rights-of-way shall eliminate the need to locate any ground or elevated equipment (other than antennas) on the exterior of a tower or wireless communications facility. Stealth design of communications facilities to be located on existing structures other than towers shall minimize the need to locate any ground equipment or elevated equipment (other than antennas) on the exterior of the structure. The use of foliage and vegetation around any approved ground equipment may be required by the village based on conditions of the specific area. 
(8)  Stealth design of communications facilities to be located on structures in the rights-of-way shall (a) top mount antennas within enclosures that do not extend beyond the diameter of the supporting structure at the level of antenna attachment and (b) shall side mount antennas within enclosures that do not extend more than two feet beyond the exterior dimensions of the supporting structure at the level of antenna attachment. Under no circumstances shall antennas be mounted less than eight feet above ground level. For purposes of calculating (a) and (b), above, the dimensions of the supporting structure do not include any platform, rack, mount or other hardware used to attach an antenna or antenna enclosure to the supporting structure. An applicant for a ROW permit may request that the official or board allow up to a 20 percent deviation from the above standards based upon a demonstrated engineering need. 
(9)  The following additional requirements shall apply to wireless communications facilities located in the rights-of-way: 
a.  Each application to locate equipment at ground level on or, adjacent to, the exterior of a pole or tower and each proposal to locate elevated equipment (other than antennas) on or adjacent to the exterior of a tower or pole shall include engineering documentation demonstrating to the satisfaction of the village engineer that the facility cannot employ stealth design and that the proposed exterior location and configuration of equipment proposes the minimum equipment necessary to achieve needed function. In order to avoid the clustering of multiple items of approved ground equipment or elevated equipment in a single area, only one equipment box may be located in any single location. 
b.  Where a registrant demonstrates that stealth design cannot be employed, the individual approved exterior equipment box shall not exceed 12 cubic feet in volume. A registrant may file an application to add an additional equipment box and exceed size restrictions up to a maximum of 30 cubic feet solely to allow for a transition to newer technology, which shall be accompanied by a transition schedule for removal of the original box, and demonstrated engineering need for the requests. 
c.  Wireless communications facilities in the rights-of-way must be spaced a minimum of 750 linear feet of right-of-way apart from each other except that no distance requirement shall apply to repurposed structures. This subsection may be waived upon a factual showing, supported by sworn testimony or matters subject to official notice, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the village, that locating a specific wireless communications facility less than 750 feet from other wireless communications facilities either: (1) better serves the village's interests in safe, aesthetic, efficient and effective management of the public rights-of-way than application of the 750 feet limitation: (2) is necessary to address a documented lack of coverage or capacity for one or more carriers; or (3) will help minimize the total number of wireless communication facilities necessary to serve a particular area. 
d.  The size and height of new wireless communications facility towers and poles in the rights-of-way shall be no greater than the maximum size and height of any other utility or light poles located in the same portion of the right-of-way within the village; provided however, that registrants proposing wireless communications facilities with antennas to be located on existing poles or repurposed structures may increase the height of the existing pole or repurposed structure up to six feet, if necessary, to avoid adversely affecting existing pole attachments; and provided further that the overall height above ground of any wireless communications facility shall not exceed 40 feet or exceed the existing height of an existing light pole in the same village right-of-way, which ever height is greater. In calculating the height of existing structures in the right of way, the height of any structure modified pursuant to an eligible facilities request filed under 47 USC 1455 is deemed to be the structure's height as it existed prior to such eligible facilities request modification. The height above ground of any tower or other structure supporting a wireless communications facility shall not exceed the distance from the exterior of the base of that tower or supporting structure to any abutting property owner's principal structure unless the registrant and abutting property owners submit binding agreement(s), in form and substance reasonably acceptable to the village, indemnifying abutting property owners from potential loss and damage from destruction or failure of the tower or supporting structure. 
e.  Wireless communications facilities installed on poles or towers that are not light poles, and repurposed structures that were not originally light poles, shall not be lit unless lighting is required to comply with FAA requirements. 
f.  Registrants shall not place advertising on wireless communications facilities installed in the rights-of-way. 
(10)  The village's action on proposals to place, construct or modify wireless communications facilities shall be subject to the standards and time frames set out in F.S.  365.172, 47 USC  1455(a), and rules and policies issued by the FCC, as they may be amended. 
(11)  Applications for telecommunications facilities proposing collocation or replacement that satisfy the requirements of F.S.  365.172(13) shall not require a public hearing and may be reviewed by the village manager or designee under the village's building permit review process. Final authority for all other applications, where a hearing is not prohibited by state or federal law, shall be vested in the village council, if the application presents a substantial or material question of fact as to whether the applicant satisfies this ordinance (summarized here for convenient reference) and other applicable law (including other portions of this ordinance not stated below). The village manager or designee may issue a ROW permit for applications that clearly satisfy the requirements of this Code. If the council decides that the application presents a substantial or material question of fact as stated above, it shall make such decision at a public meeting and hold a public hearing on the application. The applicable ordinance requirements primarily include (but are not limited to): 
a.  The proposed location is on private property or government-owned property outside of the rights-of-way, or in a commercial corridor. ( 26-56(t)(1)-this may not be the sole basis for denial). 
b.  The application proposes collocation, stealth design, or a repurposed structure. ( 26-56(t)(2)a-c.). 
c.  The proposed location is on an arterial or collector roadway or in a commercial corridor. ( 26-56(t)(3)). 
d.  The proposed location is in a right-of-way with residential uses on one or both sides, and the proposed location is not in front of residential structures, does not impair views from residential structures or to historic structures, or is located in areas with existing foliage or other aesthetic features obscuring the view of the tower, and sufficient landscaping has been proposed to mitigate the visual impact of the tower and all equipment associated therewith. ( 26-56(t)(4)). 
e.  The proposed location of the facility minimizes impacts to the village. ( 26-56(t)(5)). 
f.  The applicant has eliminated the use of ground equipment with stealth design. ( 26-56(t)(7)). 
g.  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the village engineer that stealth design cannot be used, or the proposed equipment is the minimum necessary to achieve needed function. ( 26-56(t)(9)a.). 
h.  The applicant does not propose stealth design, and the proposed equipment box is less than 12 cubic feet in volume. ( 26-56(t)(9)b.). 
i.  The proposed location is more than 750 feet from other wireless communications facilities, except for repurposed structures, or the applicant seeks a waiver of this requirement based upon the adopted criteria in section 26-56(t)(9)c. 
j.  The applicant proposes a size and height of the new tower or pole less than or the same as the maximum size and height of other utility or light poles in the same portion of the right-of-way, excluding existing or repurposed poles or structures, which may be raised up to six feet, or proposes a telecommunications facility that does not exceed 40 feet, or the height of an existing light pole in the village's right-of-way, whichever is greater. ( 26-56(t)(9)d.). 
    A meeting by the village council to consider the application shall be noticed at least seven days before by regular mail sent (deposited in the mail at least seven days prior to the hearing) and provided by the applicant to property owners within 300 feet of the proposed location of the telecommunications facility, and by a sign posted at least seven days prior to the hearing by the applicant on the site of the proposed location. Notices shall be approved in advance by village staff, and proof of notification through sworn affidavit shall be provided by the applicant to village staff five days prior to the hearing. The village council, village manager or designee shall base their decision whether to approve, deny, or approve with modifications the requested ROW permit, upon whether the standards in the Code and applicable law have been satisfied by competent, substantial evidence, and shall issue written findings evidencing their decision if it is for denial. 
(u)  The obligations imposed by the requirements of subsections above, upon registrants proposing to place or maintain wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall also apply to registrants proposing to place or maintain any other type of communications facility in public rights-of-way, if that other type of communications facility involves placement of over-the-air radio transmission or reception equipment in the public rights-of-way. 
(v)  Registrants and permittees shall follow all applicable federal, state, county and village regulations, including but not limited to noise and visibility triangle ordinances and rules. All questions as to whether a village regulation is applicable or not shall be determined by the village manager, appealable to the village council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-57. - Suspension of permits. 
    The village may suspend a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following reasons subject to section 26-58 of this article: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this article or other applicable village ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the village; or 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration. 
(4)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the village. 
    The village manager shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violations each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-58. - Appeals. 
    Final, written decisions of the village manager or designee, granting, suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the village manager within 30 days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The village's special master shall hear the appeal pursuant to section 2-146 of the Code of Ordinances. The hearing shall occur within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be rendered within 20 days of the hearing. Upon correction of the grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted. Further review shall be by petition for writ of certiorari to the appellate division of the circuit court pursuant to the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-59. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The village may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  Federal or state authorities suspend, deny, or revoke a registrant's certification or license to provide communications services; 
(2)  Registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; 
(3)  The registrant violates F.S.  843.025, as amended; 
(4)  The registrant violates F.S.  843.165, as amended; 
(5)  Willful or repeated violations of the requirements of this article III, which, taken together, constitute a pattern of abuse; or 
(6)  Registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with section 26-66 of this article. 
(b)  Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the village manager or designee, with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including which of (1) through (6) above is applicable as the reason therefore, and describing the proposed action of the village with respect thereto. The registrant shall have 60 days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the village manager, to accomplish the same. If the plan is rejected, the village manager shall provide written notice of such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the village council regarding a decision as to termination of registration. The village manager or designee shall provide notice to registrant of any resolution or other action to be taken up at any meeting of the village council and registrant shall be granted the opportunity to be heard at such meeting. A decision by the village to terminate a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the village council. A registrant shall be notified by written notice of any decision by the village council to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven days after the decision. 
(c)  In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: 
(1)  Notify the village of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or 
(2)  Provide the village with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply with this subsection (c), which determination of noncompliance is subject to appeal as provided in section 26-58 hereof, the village may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or requiring the registrant within 90 days of the termination, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the village and registrant, to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to its original condition before the removal. 
(d)  In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-60. - Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
    A communications services provider with an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the village has 60 days from the effective date of this article, or amendments thereto, to comply with the terms of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-61. - Insurance. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the village the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the state and having a rating reasonably acceptable to the village. All liability policies shall provide that the village is an additional insured as to the activities under this article. The required coverage must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the village annually. Thirty days' advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile as determined by the village must be given to the village of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in the policy coverage. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the village. 
(b)  The limits of coverage or insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance: 
Worker's compensation-Florida statutory requirements 
Employer's Liability-$1,000,000.00 limit each accident 
$1,000,000.00 limit per accident 
$1,000,000.00 limit per each employee 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage 
$1,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence 
(3)  Automobile liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage 
$1,000,000.00 combined single limit each accident 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 26-62. - Indemnification. 
(a)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the village, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the village arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications system or facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the village. The provision includes, but it is not limited to, the village's reasonable attorney's fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. The village agrees to notify the registrant, in writing within a reasonable time of the village receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the village from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the village's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the state; or (2) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S.  768.28, as amended. 
(b)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 26-63. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will require restoration of public rights-of-way, the village may require a construction bond to secure proper performance under the requirements of any permits and the restoration of the public rights-of-way. Twelve months after the completion of the restoration in public rights-of-way in accordance with the bond, the registrant may eliminate the bond. However, the village may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent work in the public rights-of-way. The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a rating acceptable to the village; shall be subject to the approval of the village manager or designee; and shall provide that: "For 12 months after issuance of this bond, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after receipt by the village, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." Notwithstanding the foregoing, a construction bond hereunder may only be required to the extent that the cost of the restoration exceeds the amount recoverable against the security fund as provided in section 26-64. 
(b)  The rights reserved by the village with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the village may have under this article, or at law or equity. 
(c)  The rights reserved to the village under this section are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the village may have. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-64. - Security fund. 
    At or prior to the time a registrant receives its first permit to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way after the effective date of this article, the registrant may be required to file with the village, for the village's approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of $25,000.00 having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the state, and acceptable to the village manager, which shall be referred to as the "security fund." The security fund shall be maintained from such time through the earlier of: (1) Transfer, sale, assignment or removal of all communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or (2) Twelve months after the termination or cancellation of any registration. The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this article. The security fund shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this article, subject to section 26-65, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the security fund, any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or abandonment of any facilities of the registrant in public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village may at its discretion not require a security fund or may accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-65. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  A registrant's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the registrant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in chapter 2, article V, of the village's Code of Ordinances, including the provisions of chapter 2 that allow the village to seek relief as otherwise provided by law. In addition, violation of this article may be punishable as provided in F.S.  162.22, as amended. 
(b)  Failure of the village to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the village's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-66. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  In the event of abandonment of a communications facility owned by a registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the village in writing within 90 days. 
(b)  The village shall direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the village determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but not shall not be limited to, a determination that such facility: 
(1)  Compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or during construction or maintenance in the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or 
(3)  Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way's use. 
In the event of (2) above, the village may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(c)  In the event that the village does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the village, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the village or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the village within a reasonable time period, not to exceed 60 days, as may be required by the village under the circumstances, the village may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant, and utilize the bond required for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-3,  1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 26-67. - Force majeure. 
    In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the registrant's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a registrant's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 26-68. - Reservation of rights and remedies. 
(a)  The village reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable to all communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of this article and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(c)  The adoption of this article is not intended to affect any rights or defenses of the village or a communications service provider under any existing franchise, license or other agreements with a communications services provider. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall affect the remedies the village or the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(e)  Any person who uses the communications facilities of a registrant, other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be entitled to any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the rights of the registrant that places or maintains the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05,  1, 9-5-01) 
Secs. 26-69-26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VACATION OF PUBLIC EASEMENTS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-8, adopted November 13, 2002, amended the Code by renumbering former  30-13 of the land development regulations as a new art. IV,  26-81. 

Sec. 26-81. - Generally. 
    The village council shall cite specific findings in support of a final decision to vacate a public easement or right-of-way, including an absence of public purpose for the subject easement or right-of-way. Similarly the village council shall identify specific findings in support of any decision to retain the public easement or right-of-way. Any decision to vacate a public easement or right-of-way shall be by resolution of the village council. 
(1)  Proposals to vacate. A proposal to vacate a public easement or right-of-way, excepting street closures, may be initiated by a vote of the Village Council or upon the filing of an application, as specified herein, by one or more owners of property within the village. 
(2)  Application and review. The village manager or his designee shall review all applications for vacation of public easements and rights-of-way, excepting street closure. Any proposal for vacation of public easements or rights-of-way shall be submitted as an application to the building and planning department. The village manager shall prescribe the form and content of the application for vacation of public easements and rights-of-way, excepting street closure, and shall coordinate a thorough review of such applications with the police department and other village staff as may be appropriate and such other relevant public or private entities providing utilities or other public services within the village as the village may deem appropriate. 
(c)  Findings of no public purpose. In the considering applications for vacating public easements or rights-of-way, the village manager and all relevant village staff shall review whether any public purpose is served by the subject easement or right-of-way. This evaluation shall consider all relevant public purpose options associated with drainage systems; water service; sanitary sewer services; roadways, pedestrian and/or bicycle ways, and alleys; public safety, including emergency service access and egress; communication systems; power and/or fuel networks; or other public or semi-public services essential to the public welfare and safety. Consideration shall include present and future needs for the easement or right-of-way for purposes of accommodating or improving delivery of public services and alternatives available and/or ensuring convenient access for service and/or maintenance or other public benefit now or in the future. In order to affirmatively recommend vacation of easements and/or rights-of-way, the village manager shall render a finding that no current or future public propose can be identified for the subject easement or right-of-way. 
(d)  Public hearing, notice and final determination by village council. The village council shall render the final determination regarding a vacation of a public easement or right-of-way after convening a public hearing with notice given as required by Florida Statutes and written notice to the applicant and/or property owner and providers of public services setting forth the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 11-13-02) 
ARTICLE V. - ARTICLES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND OTHER PLACES 

Sec. 26-82. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Storage bin shall mean any container used for the collection, storage or distribution of personal property. 
(2)  Vehicle shall mean functioning automobiles, trucks, buses or trailers. 
(3)  Public right-of-way shall mean rights-of-way in the Village of Pinecrest. 
(4)  Article shall mean any personal property, including but not limited to storage bins, utility facilities and trees, except newsracks and vehicles temporarily parked in the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Utility facility shall mean any pole line, pole, railway, ditch, sewer, waterline, gas main, pipeline, fence, gasoline tank or pump within the village, which is not a "communications facility" as defined in section 26-53. 
(6)  Director, as used in this article, shall mean the Village's Public Works Director, or designee. 
(7)  Redundant, as used in this article, shall mean a utility facility within 50 feet of a newer utility facility. With respect to utility poles installed to support utility lines, the transfer of any pole line or any equipment otherwise fixed to the utility pole to another utility pole shall create a presumption that the utility pole from which equipment is transferred is redundant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-83. - Permit required. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by law, no person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity shall place any article or utility facility in or on the public right-of-way without first having obtained a permit from the public works department; provided, however, the United States, federal agencies and their contractors, the State of Florida and State agencies, in the execution of federal or state projects are exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-84. - Issuance of permit. 
    The department of public works shall have the authority to issue permits for the placement of articles and utility facilities in the public right-of-way in accordance with standards established by the public works department. In establishing standards for the placement of articles and utility facilities in the public right-of-way, the department shall take into consideration: 
(1)  Pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; 
(2)  Public and property safety during hurricane conditions; 
(3)  Access for the use and maintenance of poles, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes; 
(4)  Uniformity in the treatment of similar articles and utility facilities. 
    In addition to foregoing considerations, the village may impose conditions upon the issuance of a permit, including, but not limited to, the removal of utility facilities, and specifically utility poles, deemed by the village to be abandoned or redundant as well as requiring the transfer of existing utility facilities, including but not limited to pole lines, cables, or fibers, to the new pole, for purposes of co-location with newer utility facilities. Failure to comply with such conditions shall be deemed a violation, enforceable under chapter 2, article V of the code, as amended, which may result in the imposition of per diem fines, per utility facility, until the violation is corrected. 
    It shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee to relocate any equipment from a redundant facility to a new facility and to remove and dispose of any redundant utility facility. 
    If the director finds that a permittee has failed to comply with a permit condition requiring the removal of a utility facility deemed by the village to be abandoned or redundant, or requiring the transfer of an existing utility facility to a newer utility facility to achieve joint trenching or co-location of utility facilities, the director may issue an order requiring compliance within a reasonable period of time. In addition, the Director may condition the issuance of a new permit upon compliance with a condition imposed for a prior permit or payment of previously imposed fines. 
    Should code enforcement proceedings ensue, the permittee shall have the initial burden of demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence, any engineering or legal preclusions preventing compliance with the imposed conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-85. - Permit application. 
    Applicants for permits to place articles or utility facilities in the public right-of-way shall file with the public works director a written application in a form prepared by the public works department. If the application meets the standards set forth in the public works department manual, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the fee set forth in an administrative order. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified within five working days of the department's receipt of the completed application. The applicant shall be advised of the specific cause of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-86. - Application fee. 
    The public works department shall charge and collect permit fees at rates established by the village council. All such fees will be used solely to defray administrative expenses incurred pursuant to this section. Any applicant who, after paying a permit fee, chooses not to place the article or utility facility for which the permit was obtained in the public right-of-way may be entitled to a partial refund to the extent any part of the fee was not needed to defray administrative expenses and the permit shall be cancelled. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified within five working days of the department's receipt of the completed application. The applicant shall be advised of the specific cause of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-87. - Existing articles. 
    Owners of trees and precast concrete traffic buttons existing in the public right-of-way at the time this article V is adopted shall not be required to obtain permits under this section but shall be required to comply with all other standards set forth in the public works department manual. Owners of any other articles in the public right-of-way at the time this section is adopted shall have 90 days from the date this section becomes applicable to such article within which to obtain the permit or permits required by this section, or have the article removed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-88. - Order of removal. 
    The director shall have the authority to order the removal of any article and utility facility from the public right-of-way which does not comply with this article or is otherwise determined by the director to be redundant, abandoned or a hazard to the public. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted by the village in writing, it shall be unlawful to maintain an abandoned article or an abandoned or redundant utility facility within the village. 
(b)  If an article or utility facility is deemed by the director to be abandoned or redundant, the owner of the article or utility facility shall, upon 30 days written notice by the director, initiate the work necessary to remove the article or utility facility at its own expense. Thereafter, all remedial work must be completed within a reasonable time unless otherwise provided by the director. 
(c)  The village may proceed to cause the work necessary to remove the article or utility facility at issue if the owner of the article or utility facility fails to perform the work at their own expense within the time contemplated by this section. The expense incurred by the village shall be charged against the owner of the article or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26-89. - Enforcement. 
    In addition to all other legal remedies, the director shall have the authority to initiate enforcement proceedings, pursuant to chapter 2, article V of the code, as amended, against any person or legal entity who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter. Should such proceedings be initiated, a per diem fine of up to $250.00 (or $500.00 for repeat violations) may be levied against the violator until the violation is complied. The resulting per diem fines pursuant to this section shall be levied per article, pole or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-2,  2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-2,  2, 1-10-17) 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 26-90. - Maintenance. 
    The issuance of a building permit by the village shall be conditioned upon maintenance of the adjoining right-of-way and street pavement in its existing condition from the commencement of construction through the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The property owner and permittee shall be responsible for maintenance of the condition of the pavement and right-of-way during the period of construction. All street, sidewalk, and driveway apron restorations, including temporary and permanent work shall be performed by and at the permittee's sole expense and in accordance with the village's pavement standards. All repairs and restoration work shall be completed by the permittee to village standard details and specifications in a manner and to the extent deemed acceptable to the village public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Chapter 27 - RESERVED 
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying taxes or fees or charges, or any appropriation or budget ordinance saved from repeal,  1-6(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal,  1-6(11); finance department,  2-92; finance,  2-261 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-6,  1, 2, amended the Code by repealing former art. II,  28-26-28-32, and adding a new art. II,  28-26-28-34. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 96-3, adopted May 28, 1996; and Ord. No. 2001-13, adopted December 11, 2001. 

Sec. 28-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes hereof, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Electronic transfer means the use of the automated clearing house (the "ACH"), or other electronic transfer system approved by the finance director on a case by case basis, by the seller, to send the taxes collected directly from the seller's bank to the village's primary bank. 
    Finance director means the village manager or his designee. 
    Fuel oil means fuel oil grades Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, kerosene and coal oil. 
    Levy means the imposition of the tax under F.S.  166.231 or 166.232, all changes in the rate of the tax imposed under either of those sections, and all changes of election under F.S.  166.231(9)(a). 
    Remit: The terms "remit," "remittance" and "remitting," for purposes of the tax imposed by this article means the sending by the seller and the receipt by the village of all taxes levied and collected pursuant to this article. The date of receipt of such taxes by the village will be the date of postmark, or if by electronic transfer, the date received by the village's primary bank as indicated on the village's bank statement. 
    Return means the supporting documentation submitted periodically in accordance with the provisions of this article, and to be accompanied by the tax remittance, if any for that period, to the finance director, which at a minimum shall indicate: 
(1)  Name and address of the seller; and 
(2)  Time period covered with respect to the particular return being filed; and 
(3)  Amount (in U.S. dollars) of the revenue collected from the sale of the taxable service; and 
(4)  Amount (in U.S. dollars) of any collection allowance taken in accordance with Florida law; and 
(5)  Amount (in U.S. dollars) of tax being remitted to the village, or having been sent by electronic transfer to the village's bank, which is the subject of the particular return being filed; and 
(6)  The name and telephone number of a person authorized by the seller to respond to inquiries from the village concerning how the seller is administering and collecting the tax. 
Those sellers remitting the tax by electronic transfer must nevertheless send periodic returns to the finance director. 
    Seller means a person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who sells a service that is subject to a levy. 
    Tax means the municipal utility tax authorized pursuant to F.S.  166.231 or 166.232 and this article. 
    Village means the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-27. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any purchaser to: 
(1)  Evade the payment of the excise tax provided for in this article or any part thereof; or 
(2)  Fail or neglect to pay such excise tax within 30 days after the tax has become due and payable. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any seller to: 
(1)  Fail or refuse to pay to the village all amounts of excise tax payable to the village by the seller; 
(2)  Fail or refuse to file the monthly certified statement; 
(3)  Set forth any erroneous or false information in the monthly certified statement with intent to defraud the village; or 
(4)  Refuse to permit the finance director to examine the accounts and records to be kept as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-28. - Purchase of electricity, gas, fuel oil, and water service-Levy of tax; amount; payment generally of tax. 
(a)  Except as provided below or as otherwise exempted by section 28-30, there is hereby levied and imposed by the village upon every purchase in the incorporated area of electricity, metered gas, bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), coal, fuel oil, and water service, a tax at the rate of ten percent of the total amount charged for such utility service or commodity. For the purposes of calculating the tax, the amount charged for such utility service shall be deemed to include any gross receipts taxes and franchise fees separately stated on the customer's bill. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this section shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. A "fuel adjustment charge" shall mean all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of section 28-31, such tax shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the village to the seller of such electricity, metered or bottled gas, fuel oil, or water service at the time of paying the charge therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-29. - Collection generally and disposition of tax; discontinuance of service upon failure of purchaser to pay tax and seller's charge. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service to collect from the purchaser for the use of the village the tax levied by the preceding section, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction and to file a return and remit on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, or if the twentieth day is either a legal holiday or is not a village business day, then on or before the first village business day, that is not also a legal holiday, following the twentieth day of the month, unto the finance director all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sales, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the village for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had actually been paid to the seller, and the mayor of the village shall cause to be brought all suit actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the village as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected charges. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(b)  Sellers remitting tax collections of $10,000.00 or more, on average, per month over a period of three consecutive months shall thereafter, beginning in the month immediately following the third consecutive month, make all tax remittances to the village's primary bank by electronic transfer using the ACH system, or other electronic means as may be approved by the finance director on a case by case basis. Those sellers meeting this criteria shall continue remittances by electronic transfer regardless of whether the seller's average collections fall below the $10,000.00 threshold for any subsequent consecutive three-month period. All other sellers may remit by hand-delivery, postal service or electronic transfer. However, if a seller elects to remit by electronic transfer, that seller shall thereafter always remit by electronic transfer. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the event the total amount of tax anticipated to be collected within a calendar quarter does not exceed $120.00, the seller of such service may, with the written authorization of the village, remit the taxes collected during such calendar quarter to the Village quarterly. In such case, the tax shall be due on or before the 20th day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter in which the taxes were collected. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-30. - Exemptions and exclusions from payment of tax. 
(a)  Purchases by the United States Government, the State of Florida, and all counties, school districts, and municipalities of the state, and by public bodies exempted by law or court order, are exempt from the tax authorized by section 28-28. However, governmental bodies which sell or resell taxable service to non-exempt end users must collect and remit the tax levied under section 28-28. 
(b)  The following purchases of bottled gas and/or fuel oil are hereby excluded from the tax levied by section 28-28: 
(1)  Purchases of special fuels as defined in F.S.  206.86(1), to be used in an internal combustion engine or motor to propel any form of vehicle. 
(2)  Purchases of fuel oil for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant. 
(3)  Fuel oil to be used as a raw material in a manufacturing process or to be used as a cleaning agent or solvent when certified by the purchaser that such fuel oil shall be used only as a raw material or cleaning agent or solvent. Such purchases and certification shall be reflected monthly on forms prescribed by the finance director. 
(c)  Purchases by any recognized church in the village for use exclusively for church purposes are hereby exempt from the tax authorized by section 28-28. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-31. - Computation of tax when seller collects the price thereof in monthly periods. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service collects the price thereof in monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period; provided, that the amount of tax to be collected shall be to the nearest whole cent to the amount computed, and shall not exceed the rates set forth in section 28-28 for any monthly period on each separate service. Such service shall be classified as a separate service in case of metered electricity, gas or water, whenever an individual meter is used for the measuring thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-32. - Records to be kept by seller; general administrative audit plan for enforcement of ordinance; authority of village to audit such records. 
(a)  Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service shall keep at its principal place of business complete records showing all sales in the village of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon such sale, the amount of taxes charged upon each sale, the date of the sale, the date of payment thereof, the date such tax was remitted to the village, the period of time covered by such remittance and other related information that may be required to verify proper collection and remittance of said taxes. 
(b)  To assure proper administration of the provisions of this article, the village may, where possible and practical, conduct a periodic audit of such sales records of all businesses in connection with which the tax is imposed under this article. Failure to conduct such an audit will not eliminate the liability of the seller for collection and remittance of such tax. 
(c)  Pursuant to F.S.  166.234, the village may, during the seller's normal business hours at the official location of the seller's books and records, audit the records of any seller of a service that is taxable by the village under F.S.  166.231 or 166.232, for the purpose of ascertaining whether taxable services have been provided or the correctness of any return that has been filed or payment that has been made, if the village's power to assess tax or grant a refund is not barred by the applicable limitations period. Each such seller must provide to the village, upon 60 days' written notice of intent to audit from the village, access to applicable records for such service, except an extension of this 60-day period must be granted if reasonably requested by the seller. The seller may at its option waive the 60-day notice requirement. If either the village or the seller requires an additional extension, it must give notice to the other no less than 30 days before the existing extension expires, except in cases of bona fide emergency or waiver of the notice requirement by the other party. In an audit, the seller is liable only for its taxable accounts collected which correspond to the information provided to it by the village under F.S.  166.233(3). As used in this section, "applicable records" means records kept in the ordinary course of business which establish the collection and remittance of taxes due. Such applicable records may be provided to the village on electronic media if agreed to by the seller and the village. In accordance with F.S.  166.231(9)(c), any information received by the village or its agent in connection with such audit is confidential and exempt from the provisions of F.S.  119.07(1). 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-33. - Interest and penalties for late payments and late returns. 
    Any seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (manufactured or natural), fuel oil, or water service failing to remit to the village on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month or quarter, as applicable, or if the twentieth day is either a legal holiday or is not a village business day, then on or before the first village business day, that is not also a legal holiday, following the twentieth day of the month or quarter, as applicable, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding tax period shall be liable for interest on the unpaid amount of tax at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax was due until paid. In addition, penalties will be assessed at a rate of five percent per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty of 25 percent, except that in no event will the penalty for failure to file a return be less than $15.00. In the case of a fraudulent return or a willful intent to evade payment of the tax, the seller making such fraudulent return or willfully attempting to evade payment of the tax, shall be liable for a specific penalty of 100 percent of the tax. Interest and penalties shall be computed on the net tax due after application of any overpayments. The interest and penalties shall accrue from the due date until the date such taxes are paid, provided however, that the finance director may settle or compromise any interest due pursuant to this section as is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 28-34. - Costs incurred in pursuit of tax or information as a result of a violation of this article. 
    The village is entitled to, and may assess against sellers not complying with any provision of this article, a fee being based upon the actual costs incurred by the village in collecting the tax or information due. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6,  2, 7-15-03) 
Secs. 28-35-28-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, adopted April 10, 2007, amended the Code by retitling art. III. Formerly, art. III was entitled "Occupational License Tax." 

Sec. 28-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means and includes all vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on or from any premises in the village; "business" does not include the customary activities of religious, charitable, non-profit service clubs and organizations, or educational nonprofit institutions as those terms are defined in F.S. chapter 205. 
    Employee means persons who occupy a position of employment in any business as defined hereunder. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver or other fiduciary. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith or as a base for any business, and any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business. 
    Receipt means the document that is issued by village which bears the words "Local Business Tax Receipt" and evidences that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this article. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Tax means the applicable local business tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
    Taxpayer means any person liable for taxes imposed under the provisions of this article; any agent required to file and pay any taxes imposed hereunder; and the heirs, successors, assignees, and transferees of any such person or agent. 
    Village officer means the village manager or his designee which may be a code compliance officer as defined in Chapter 2, Art. V,  2-131-2-147. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  1, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-52. - Local business tax receipt required. 
    No person, either directly or indirectly, shall, within the village limits, engage in or manage any business in the village for which payment of the local business tax is required by this article without first having paid the amount of tax required in section 2-61 below. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  2, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-53. - Purpose; adoption of state law. 
    This article is enacted for the purpose of complying with F.S. chapter 205. The terms and provisions of F.S. chapter 205 and any subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  3, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-54. - Separate payment for each place of business. 
    A separate payment of the local business tax shall be made in the manner prescribed in this article for each place of business as if each such place of business were a separate business. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  4, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-55. - Term of receipt and transfer. 
(a)  The village officer shall issue a receipt for each local business tax paid. The tax shall be payable each year beginning on October 1 of each year. 
(b)  No receipt shall be issued for any fractional portion of a year, except that receipts required under this article for businesses established after April 1 of any year may be issued, which are valid until the following October 1, upon the payment of one-half the tax provided for in section 28-61. 
(c)  Receipts may be transferred to the new owner of a business upon a bona fide sale of the business, and upon payment of a transfer fee of $10.00 and presentation to the village of the original receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(d)  Upon written request and presentation of the original receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one premises to another premises within the village upon payment of a transfer fee of $10.00. 
(e)  Upon written request and presentation of the original receipt by the taxpayer and any proof as required by the village, a change of business name may be made upon payment of a fee of $10.00. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of every person assuming operation of or purchasing an existing business which is required to make payment of the local business tax under this article to notify the village officer and to comply with the requirements of this article within 30 days of such assumption or purchase. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  5, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-56. - Due date for payment of local business tax; delinquent payment; penalties. 
(a)  The tax shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year. If October 1 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax shall be due and payable on or before the first working day following October 1. Those businesses failing to make payment of the local business tax by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided, that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the tax due. 
(b)  Any person engaging in or managing any business without first making payment of the local business tax, if required under this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  6, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-57. - Issuance of receipt; application. 
(a)  Each business shall submit an application filed with the village officer. Such application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the village and shall include a statement, under oath, detailing the full and complete information necessary to calculate the applicable tax. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person submitting an application under this article to make a false statement. 
(c)  All receipts shall be applied for and issued in the real name of the applicant. In cases where the applicant does or will do business under a fictitious trade name or firm name, the application and receipt, if issued, will show the real name as well as the fictitious trade or firm name of the applicant. In such case, the applicant will deliver to the village either its application for registration of a fictitious name pursuant to F.S. section 865.09, or, if such name is already registered, shall deliver to the village a certificate of status from the state's division of corporations acknowledging the name registration and its current status. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  7, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-58. - Display of receipt of local business tax. 
    Each receipt issued by the village shall be displayed conspicuously at the place of business and in such a manner as to be open to the view of the public and subject to the inspection of all duly authorized officers of the village. Failure to display the receipt in the manner provided for in this section shall result in the payment of a penalty equal to the tax applicable to the business for which the receipt was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  8, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-59. - Village officer; duties. 
    The village manager or his designee shall be the village officer, shall collect all taxes and shall issue a receipt in the name of the village to all persons or businesses qualified under the provisions of this article and shall: 
(1)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a receipt and/or the current status of any receipt as prescribed in this article. 
(2)  Examine the books and records of any applicant or taxpayer when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(3)  Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of their application and shall, upon rejection of any application, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant in accordance with section 28-63 herewith. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  9, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-60. - Examination of records. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person and/or business to refuse to allow the village officer to investigate and examine relevant records for the purpose of determining whether such person and/or business has a valid receipt and/or whether such person and/or business shall be issued a receipt. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  10, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-61. - Tax schedule. 
    Taxes for the following businesses, occupations or professions are hereby levied and imposed in accordance with the following schedule: 
Residential uses 
Up to 5 units\$ 56.25 
6 to 50 units\  97.50 
51 to 100 units\ 150.00 
101 to 200 units\ 187.50 
201 or more units\ 225.00 
Public and institutional uses 
Up to 1,000 square feet\$ 75.00 
1,001 to 3,000 square feet\ 112.50 
3,001 to 10,000 square feet\ 150.00 
10,000 square feet and over\ 180.00 
Business and professional services 
Sole proprietor\  97.50 
2 to 9 employees\ 150.00 
10 to 24 employees\ 206.25 
25 or more employees\ 262.50 
Home office\97.50 
Retail and wholesale trade 
Up to 1,000 square feet\$ 97.50 
1,001 to 2,000 square feet\ 150.00 
2,001 to 5,000 square feet\ 262.50 
5,001 to 15,000 square feet\ 375.00 
More than 15,000 square feet\ 562.50 
Transportation, warehousing and communications 
Minimum rate\$150.00 
Over 10 employees\ 168.75 
7,500 to 20,000 square feet an additional\  18.75 
20,001 square feet and over an additional\  37.50 
Manufacturing and intensive uses 
Minimum rate\$168.75 
7,500 to 15,000 square feet\ 187.50 
15,001 to 25,000 square feet\ 206.25 
25,001 square feet and over\ 225.00 
Coin-operated machines 
Each machine\$22.50 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  11, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 98-7,  1, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 2005-8,  1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-62. - Approval of business location required. 
    No receipt shall be issued for any business until the location of the business is first approved by the building and planning department of the village as to its compliance with the land development code and other regulatory ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  12, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2005-8,  1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-63. - Denial of application. 
    Any person whose application has been rejected as provided in this article, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the village officer to the village council by appropriate written petition and shall be heard by the village council at its next regular meeting, provided however, that the petition is filed with the village clerk at least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  13, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-64. - Renewal. 
(a)  Any current receipt may be renewed for each new year by the village officer without prior approval of any other departments, provided the applicant signs the following certification: 
"I the undersigned hereby certify that the local business tax receipt for which I am now applying is one for a renewal of a current receipt which is now in full force and effect, and that I have not changed the authorized use of the premises and do not plan to make any physical or structural changes to the premises." 
(b)  Any renewal application in which the applicant changes the authorized use of the premises or makes or proposes any physical or structural changes in the premises, shall be reprocessed as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  14, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-65. - Lost or stolen receipt, issuance of a duplicate. 
    A duplicate receipt shall be issued by the village officer to replace any receipt previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the taxpayer upon the filing by the taxpayer of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to that fact and paying to the village officer the fee of $10.00 to reimburse the Village for any expense incidental to executing and delivering each duplicate receipt. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  15, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-66. - Obtaining receipt by false statement. 
    Any receipt obtained under the provisions of this article upon a misrepresentation of a material fact shall be deemed null and void and the taxpayer who was thereafter engaged in any business under such receipt shall be subject to prosecution for doing same without a receipt with the same effect and degree as though no such receipt had ever been issued. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  16, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-67. - Receipt does not permit illegal activity. 
    The issuance or possession of a valid receipt obtained under the provisions of this article does not constitute an approval of any offense, illegal activity or act prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  17, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-68. - Revocation. 
    The village officer is granted authority and is charged with the duty to revoke, refuse to renew or suspend any license heretofore issued as follows: 
(1)  Grounds. The following matters shall be taken into consideration as grounds for revocation: 
a.  The number, frequency, and severity of complaints received from the public; 
b.  The number, frequency, and severity of existing code violation; 
c.  The number frequency and severity of similar prior code violations and or complaints; 
d.  The effects of continued uses and operations on the surrounding properties, including the effect on occupants and tenants thereof; 
e.  The effects of such continued uses and operations on the health and safety of the residents and citizens of the village and general public; 
f.  Any additional factors or considerations which may reasonably be calculated to materially affect public health, safety and welfare; 
g.  Any unlawful activity; 
h.  If the taxpayer permits premises to be utilized for solicitation for prostitution, pandering, lewd and lascivious behavior, sale, distribution or display of obscene materials or conduct; sale or possession of any controlled substances or narcotic; and 
i.  Failure of taxpayer to comply with any provision of this article. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  The village officer may petition the village manager (or, in the case of the village manager, he shall issue a petition) to revoke, suspend or refuse to issue or renew a receipt on any grounds set forth in subsection (1) hereinabove. The petition shall set forth the grounds upon which the petition is issued. Written notice of the hearing and the petition shall be served upon the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested at the address in the application not less than five days prior to the hearing. Alternate service may be made by delivery of the petition and notice of hearing to the place of business provided posting thereon five days prior to the hearing. If no appeal is taken by the taxpayer as provided herein, the receipt shall be automatically revoked. Upon revocation of the receipt, the taxpayer shall immediately cease doing business in any location listed therein. 
b.  At any time prior to the expiration of 30 days following the receipt of service of the notice of intent to revoke a local business tax receipt from the village, the taxpayer may request in writing that the village manager schedule a hearing on the basis that he/she wishes to appeal the pending revocation notice. A hearing will be set by the village officer within 15 days after such officer is notified in writing by said person that he or she desires a hearing. The taxpayer shall receive a minimum of five days written notice of the hearing which shall set forth the time and place for the public hearing on the petition. 
c.  The hearing shall be conducted by the village council (or a board that may be designated and delegated such authority by the village council by separate ordinance). The village officer may be represented at the hearing by the village attorney or a special village attorney appointed for such purpose, and the taxpayer may be represented by legal counsel at his/her own expense. 
d.  The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the formal rules for admission of evidence in court shall not apply, provided, however, that the taxpayer shall be entitled to present evidence and witnesses and shall have a right to cross examine at all times. 
e.  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded by the village clerk, and shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  The village officer shall present testimony in evidence. 
2.  The taxpayer shall then present testimony in evidence. 
3.  Each side shall have the right of cross examination. 
4.  Village council or its delegated board shall have the right of inquiry. 
5.  The party shall have the right to present rebuttal evidence. 
6.  Upon completion of the presentation of testimony in evidence, the hearing shall be closed, and the village council or its designated board shall analyze testimony in evidence so presented and shall render a decision by majority vote either confirming or denying the determination of the village officer. 
7.  This decision shall be reduced to writing within five days of the hearing, and copies thereof shall be furnished to the village officer and the taxpayer. 
8.  This decision shall be appealable within 30 days of such written order to the circuit court of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit of the State of Florida, or by such other remedy as may be provided by Florida law. 
9.  Upon the time period for such appeal having expired, and no such appeal having been filed, or upon the expiration of such appeal procedures resulting in the affirmation of the decision of the village council or its designated board of a written decision confirming the determination of the village officer, the receipt shall stand automatically and immediately revoked and no new receipt shall be issued. Upon revocation, the taxpayer shall immediately cease doing business in any location listed therein. 
10.  No application for a receipt shall be considered by the village until one year after the date of any revocation or non-renewal. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  18, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-69. - Special provisions of revocation of adult entertainment establishment receipt. 
(a)  In the event that a person holding a current receipt for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment shall be convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude in connection with the operation of such adult entertainment establishment by a court of competent jurisdiction, the village officer shall immediately issue a written notice of intent to revoke the receipt. 
(b)  Procedures set forth in section 28-68 hereinabove shall be utilized in connection with the revocation of a receipt pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  19, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 28-70. - Business falling under more than one classification highest fee to be paid. 
    Each person engaged in a single business which might fall under two or more classification shall pay the highest tax imposed by this chapter, but only one tax. This provision shall not be construed to permit any person to exercise two or more taxable privileges by the payment of only one tax. 
(Ord. No. 97-6,  20, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2007-2,  1, 4-10-07) 
Secs. 28-71-28-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 

Sec. 28-91. - Additional exemption for persons 65 years of age or older. 
    In accordance with section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution and F.S.  196.075, any person 65 years of age or over who has legal or equitable title to real estate located within the village in Miami-Dade County and maintains thereon his/her permanent residence which residence qualifies for and receives homestead exemption pursuant to section 6(a), Article VII of the Florida Constitution, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00, or the annually adjusted amount as prescribed in this section, shall be entitled to make application for an additional homestead exemption of $50,000.00. This additional homestead exemption, if granted, shall be applicable to all ad valorem tax millage rates levied by the village. 
(1)  Application required. Every person claiming the additional homestead exemption pursuant to this article must file an application therefore with the county property appraiser no later than March 1 of each year for which such exemption is claimed. Such application shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household and shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue. On or before June 1 of each year every applicant must file supporting documentation with the property appraiser. Said documentation shall include copies of all federal income tax returns, wage and earning statements, and such other documentation as required by the property appraiser, including documentation necessary to verify the income received by all of the members of the household for the prior year. 
(2)  Failure to file application. Failure to file the application and sworn statement by March 1 or failure to file the required supporting documentation by June 1 of any given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional exemption privilege for that year. 
(3)  Commencement for additional exemption availability. This additional exemption shall be available commencing with the year 2007 tax roll, and the property appraiser may begin accepting applications and sworn statements for the year 2007 tax roll as soon as the appropriate forms are available from the department of revenue. 
(4)  Annual income limitation to be adjusted annually. Commencing January 1, 2001, and each January 1 thereafter, the $20,000.00 annual income limitation in this section shall be adjusted annually and applicable as of January 1 of that year. The annual income limitation shall be adjusted by the percentage of change in the average cost-of-living index for the immediately preceding calendar year compared with the average cost-of-living index for the calendar year immediately prior to that year. As used herein "index" shall be the average of the monthly consumer-price index figures for the stated period, for the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(Ord. No. 99-09,  1-5, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2007-6,  1, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 2013-2,  1, 2-12-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-2,  1, adopted February 12, 2013, amended the Code by combining former  28-91-28-95 into the current  28-91. 
Sec. 28-92. - Additional exemption for low-income senior citizens who are longterm residents. 
(a)  Additional exemption. In accordance with Article VII, Section 6(dd)(2) of the Florida Constitution and F.S. 196.075, any person who meets the following criteria shall be entitled to make application for an additional homestead exemption for the amount of the assessed value of the property: 
(1)  Has the legal or equitable title to real estate located within the village in Miami-Dade County with a just value of less than $250,000.00; 
(2)  Has maintained thereon the permanent residence of the owner for at least 25 years; 
(3)  Has attained the age of 65; and 
(4)  Has a household income that does not exceed the income limitations set forth in state law, which is currently $27,030.00, and adjusted annually. 
This additional exemption shall be in addition to and shall not replace the additional $50,000.00 senior citizen homestead exemption codified in Sec. 28-91 and adopted by Ordinance 2007-6. 
(b)  Application required. Every person claiming the additional homestead exemption pursuant to this article must file an application therefore with the count property appraiser no later than March 1 of each year for which such exemption is claimed Such application shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household and shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue. On or before June 1 of each year every applicant must file supporting documentation with the property appraiser. Said documentation shall include copies of all federal income tax returns, wage and earning statements and such other documentation as required by the property appraiser, including documentation necessary to verify the income received by all of the members of the household for the prior year. 
(c)  Failure to file application. Failure to file the application and sworn statement by March 1 or failure to file the required supporting documentation by June 1 of any given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional exemption privilege for that year. 
(d)  Commencement for additional exemption availability. This additional exemption shall be available commencing with the year 2013 tax roll and shall continue with all subsequent tax rolls. The property appraiser may begin accepting applications and sworn statements for the year 2013 tax roll as soon as the appropriate forms are available from the department of revenue. 
(e)  Annual income limitation to be adjusted annually. Commencing January 1, 2013, and each January 1 thereafter, the annual income limitation in this section shall be adjusted annually as provided in state law and shall be applicable as of January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2,  1, 2-12-13) 
Note- See editor's note,  28-91. 
Secs. 28-93-28-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX; PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 28-111. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the village to make an election under F.S.  337.401(3)(c)1, as amended by Section 34, Enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature, regarding the village's decision on whether to require and collect permit fees from any providers of communications services that use or occupy municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 26-112. - Election not to require and collect permit fees. 
    The village elects not to require and collect permits fees from any provider of communications services that uses or occupies municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services. As provided in F.S.  337.401(3)(c)1, this election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 28-113. - Election to increase local communications services tax. 
    Pursuant to F.S.  337.401(3)(c)1.b, as amended by Section 34, Enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature, the village elects to increase its total rate for the local communications services tax as computed under F.S.  202.20(1) and (2), as amended, by an amount of 0.12 percent, and this election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 28-114. - Notice to the department of revenue. 
    The village clerk shall provide notice of the above elections to the department of revenue by certified mail no later than July 16, 2001, as provided in Section 34, Enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, 7-10-01) 
Secs. 28-115-28-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1,  2, adopted January 9, 2018, repealed art. VI in its entirety. Former art. VI,  28-130-28-134 pertained to marijuana business, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-10,  3, adopted September 8, 2015. 

Secs. 28-130-28-134. - Reserved. 
Chapter 29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The land development regulations of the Village of Pinecrest have been codified as ch. 30, the entire text of which, along with comparative tables and index, may be found in Volume II of this Code of Ordinances. 

Chapter 31-35 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-7,  1, adopted November 27, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 32,  32-31-32-38, in its entirety. Former ch. 32 pertained to telecommunications, and derived from Ord. No. 97-13, adopted July 29, 1997. 

Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning, shall supplement the definitions contained in Florida Statue 316.003 as amended from time to time. 
    Alley means a narrow street or thoroughfare through the middle of a block giving access to the rear of lots or buildings for public use, vehicular traffic and local convenience, except footpaths. 
    Business road shall mean a road that is open to travel by the public that is located within a business or commercial zoning district as defined by the Code of Ordinances. 
    Residential road shall mean a road that is located within a residential zoning category as defined by the Code of Ordinances. 
    Road shall mean a way open to travel by the public, including, but not limited to, a street, highway, avenue or alley. 
    Village manager shall mean the manager of the village or his/her authorized designee. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to every alley, road, street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, park area and every other way within this municipality, including without in any way restricting the generality of the foregoing, to any area which is privately owned and to which the public is invited or the use of which is or may be afforded to the public by acquiescence and without invitation. 
(c)  Speed limits. 
(1)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to overtake and pass another moving vehicle within any school zone. 
(3)  There is hereby established municipal speed limits within the Village of Pinecrest as follows: 
a.  15 MPH roads: 
1.  A speed limit of 15 miles per hour in any alley. 
2.  A speed limit of 15 miles per hour within any school zone. 
b.  20 MPH roads: 
1.  A speed limit of 20 miles per hour on all residential roads in the following prescribed areas: 
a.  Pinecrest-by-the-Sea. The area bounded by Old Cutler Road on the west, but not including Old Cutler Road, Southwest 136 Street (Howard Drive) on the south, Southwest 57 Avenue (Red Road) on the east, and Southwest 128 Street (Lugo Avenue) on the north. 
b.  Elysium. The area bounded by Southwest 58 Court on the west, Southwest 113 Street on the south, Southwest 57 Avenue (Red Road) on the east, and Southwest 111 Terrace on the north. 
c.  30 MPH roads: 
1.  A speed limit of 30 miles per hour on all residential roads not otherwise prescribed herein. 
d.  35 MPH roads: 
1.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on all business roads not otherwise prescribed herein. 
2.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 72 Avenue from US1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway) to Southwest 136 Street (Howard Drive). 
3.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 77 Avenue (Palmetto Road) between Southwest 104 Street (Lombardy Street) and Southwest 136 Street (Howard Drive). 
4.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 67 Avenue (Ludlam Road) between Southwest 88 Street (Kendall Drive) and Southwest 136 Street (Howard Drive). 
5.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 104 Street (Lombardy Street) between Southwest 57 Avenue (Red Road) and US1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway). 
6.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 120 Street (Montgomery Drive) between Southwest 57 Avenue (Red Road) and US1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway). 
7.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Southwest 124 Street/Chapman Field Drive between US 1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway) and Old Cutler Road (Ingraham Highway). 
8.  A speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Killian Drive (Southwest 112 Street/Southwest 111 Street) between US 1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway) and Southwest 57 Avenue (Red Road). 
(Ord. No. 97-19,  1, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 98-14,  1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 2012-11,  1, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 2017-11,  1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 36-2. - Parking restrictions; posting regulatory signs. 
(a)  The village manager shall have the authority to change the restrictions upon parking in public areas throughout the village after a study determines that such change is reasonable and in the best interest of the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village subject to approval by a resolution of the village council. 
(b)  The village manager shall have the authority to post parking regulatory signs. 
(Ord. No. 98-9,  2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 99-06,  1, 5-10-99; Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 9-5-01) 
Sec. 36-3. - Dangerous intersection safety. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to authorize the use of the traffic infraction detectors to promote compliance with the red light signal directives and to adopt a civil enforcement system for red light signal violations, prescribed by Laws of Florida 2010-80 (the "Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act," or "Act"), as amended by CS/CS/HB 7125 (2013). Consistent with state law, this section shall not prohibit law enforcement officers from issuing a citation for a red light signal violation in accordance with other statutory traffic enforcement techniques. 
(b)  Authorization for enforcement program. In accordance with the provisions of the Act as of the effective date of this section, the village authorizes the implementation of the provisions and requirements of Law of Florida 2010-80 (the "Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act") as amended. 
The village shall utilize image capture technologies to enforce compliance with red light signal directives pursuant to the Act. The village shall comply with the requirements of the Act, including without limitation the enforcement of violations as defined herein and in the Act, authorized fines for violations, citation forms, review of affidavits of non-responsibility, utilize its local hearing officer reporting obligations to state agencies, payments to the state, and public notice. This section shall not supersede, infringe, curtail or impinge upon state laws related to red light signal violations or conflict with such laws. 
(c)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in the Act, as may be amended, shall apply to the village's implementation and application of the Act. In addition, the following definitions shall apply to this section: 
(1)  Notice of violation. Initial notification from the village to the registered owner of a motor vehicle involved in a violation, notifying the registered owner of the violation and containing information required by the Act, as amended. 
(2)  Owner/vehicle owner. The person or entity identified by the state department of motor vehicles, or other state vehicle registration office, as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
(3)  Petitioner. Any person that has received a notice of violation and has requested a hearing before the local hearing officer for the purpose of determining whether the alleged violation has occurred. 
(4)  Recorded images. Images recorded by a traffic infraction detector, which includes but is not limited to photographic or electronic images or streaming video, and operate in accordance to the Act. 
(5)  Traffic infraction detector. A vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with a traffic control signal and a camera or cameras synchronized to automatically record two or more sequenced photographic or electronic images or streaming video of only the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop behind the stop bar or clearly marked stop line when facing a traffic control signal steady red light. 
(6)  Traffic infraction enforcement officer. The police department employee or employees designated by the police chief who meets the qualifications set forth in F.S.  316.640(5)(A), or any other relevant statute, and who shall review the recorded images prior to the issuance of notice of violation to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the recorded images, pursuant to the requirements of this section and the Act. 
(7)  Violation. Shall occur when a motor vehicle does not comply with the requirements of F.S.  316.074(1) or F.S.  316.075(1)(c)(1). Violations shall be enforced pursuant to F.S.  316.0083 and this section of the Code. In the event of a conflict between state law and this section of the Code, state law shall apply. 
(d)  Use of traffic infraction detectors. In accordance with the provisions of the Act, as may be amended from time to time, the village hereby exercises its option under F.S.  316.008 and F.S.  316.0083, as amended by CB/CB/HB 7125 (2013) to use traffic infraction detectors within its jurisdiction to enforce F.S.  316.074(1) or  316.075(1)(c), as amended, when a driver fails to stop at a traffic signal on streets and highways within the village's jurisdiction. The village may utilize the traffic infraction detectors as a supplemental means of monitoring and assisting law enforcement personnel in the enforcement compliance with laws related to traffic control signals as permitted and provided for by state law, which are designated to protect and improve the public health, safety and welfare of the community and thereby reduce accidents, injuries and disruption of traffic associated with such violations. 
When the village installs a traffic infraction detector at an intersection, it shall erect signage at the intersection sufficient to notify the public that a traffic infraction detector may be in use at the intersection safety camera enforcement of violations. 
(e)  Review of recorded images. 
(1)  The owner of the vehicle which is observed by recorded images committing a violation shall be issued a notice of violation no later than 30 days after the violation occurs. The recorded image shall be sufficient grounds to issue a notice. 
(2)  Once the traffic infraction enforcement officer has verified the accuracy of the recorded images, the officer shall complete a report, and a notice shall be sent to the vehicle owner at the address on record with the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles or the address on record with the appropriate agency having such information in another state. 
(3)  If a vehicle owner receiving notice of violation fails to pay the penalty imposed by F.S.  316.0083, to provide an affidavit that compiles with the provisions of F.S.  316.0083, or request a hearing within 60 days of the date the notice of violation is issued, then a Uniform Traffic Citation shall be issued to the vehicle owner as provided by general law. 
(f)  Notice of violation, designation of local hearing officer and hearing procedure. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall be served via first class mail and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the vehicle owner; 
b.  The license plate number and registration number of the vehicle; 
c.  The make, model, and year of the vehicle; 
d.  Notice that the infraction charged is pursuant to this article; 
e.  The date and time of the infraction; 
f.  The location of the intersection where the infraction occurred; 
g.  A statement that the owner has a right to review the recorded images that constitute a rebuttable presumption against the owner, together with a statement of the time and place or internet location where the evidence may be observed; 
h.  Images depicting the infraction; 
i.  Instructions on all methods of payment of the penalty; 
j.  A statement specifying the remedies available under F.S.  318.14; 
k.  A statement that the owner must pay a penalty of $158.00 to the city or provide an affidavit that compiles with F.S.  316.0083, or request a hearing within 60 days of the date the notice is issued in order to avoid the issuance of a Uniform Traffic Citation; 
l.  A signed statement by the traffic infraction enforcement officer that, based on inspection of recorded images, the vehicle was involved in and was utilized to commit a violation; 
m.  Information on the person's right to request a hearing and on all court costs related thereto and a form to use to request a hearing or shall direct the person to a web address for a website that provides that information. 
(2)  The village shall utilize its special magistrate, pursuant to section 2-141 of the Village Code, to serve as the local hearing officer(s) who shall preside over notice of violation hearings, as established by the Act, as amended. 
(3)  The village manager, or designee, shall designate code compliance staff to implement the authorizations contained in the Act, as amended, and to have code compliance staff serve as the clerk to the local hearing officer. 
(4)  A petitioner who elects to request a hearing shall be scheduled for a hearing by the clerk of the local hearing officer to appear before a local hearing officer with notice to be sent by first-class mail. Upon receipt of the notice, the petitioner may reschedule the hearing once by submitting a written request to reschedule to the clerk of the local hearing officer, at least five calendar days before the day of the originally scheduled hearing. The petitioner may cancel his or her appearance before the local hearing officer by paying the penalty assessed by F.S.  316.0083(1)(b), as amended, plus $50.00 in administrative costs, before the start of the hearing. 
(5)  All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The local hearing officer shall take testimony from a traffic infraction enforcement officer and the petitioner, and may take testimony from others. The local hearing officer shall review the photographic or electronic images or the streaming video made available under F.S.  316.0083(1)(b)1.b, as amended. Formal rules of evidence do not apply, but due process shall be observed and govern the proceedings. 
(6)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local hearing officer shall determine whether a violation under F.S.  316.0083. as amended, has occurred, in which case the hearing officer shall uphold or dismiss the violation. The local hearing officer shall issue a final administrative order including the determination and, if the notice of the violation is upheld, require the petitioner to pay the penalty assessed under F.S.  316.0083(1)(b), as amended, and may also require the petitioner to pay municipal costs, not to exceed $250.00. The final administrative order shall be mailed to the petitioner by first-class mail. 
(7)  An aggrieved party may appeal a final administrative order consistent with the process provided under F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 2013-9,  2, 9-11-13) 
Secs. 36-4-36-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-5,  1, adopted September 3, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. II,  36-31-36-34, in its entirety. Former art. II pertained to use of cellular telephones while operating motor vehicles, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-10, adopted October 9, 2001. 

Appendix A - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - GAS FRANCHISES 

Sec. 1. - Ordinance No. 97-16. 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA, GRANTING TO CITY GAS COMPANY, A FLORIDA CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF THIRTY (30) YEARS TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN GAS SYSTEM FACILITIES IN THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH FRANCHISE; PROVIDING FOR PAYMENT OF A FRANCHISE FEE; PROVIDING FOR INDEMNIFICATION; PROVIDING FOR INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS; PROVIDING FOR REVOCATION AND TERMINATION OF THE FRANCHISE; PROVIDING FOR ACCEPTANCE OF THE FRANCHISE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE VILLAGE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City Gas Company Franchise Ordinance." 
Section 2. Findings, determinations and declarations. 
    The Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida does hereby find, determine and declare as follows: 
(a)  It is the municipal responsibility of the Village of Pinecrest, incorporated on March 12, 1996, and further, it is in the public interest to ensure that service areas within its corporate limits are adequately provided with high quality gas service. 
(b)  After due notice to the public, the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest held a public hearing affording all interested parties an opportunity to address the Village Council concerning the granting of a non-exclusive franchise in the Village of Pinecrest to City Gas Company Inc., a Florida corporation. 
(c)  After the close of said public hearing and due deliberation, the Village Council of the Village of Pinecrest voted to award a franchise to City Gas Company, a Florida corporation, in the public interest. 
Section 3. Grant of non-exclusive franchise. 
    City Gas Company, a Florida corporation hereinafter referred to as "Grantee," is hereby granted a non-exclusive right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain gas system facilities in, under, over and on the streets of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida, upon the terms and conditions set forth below (hereafter referred to as the "Franchise"). 
Section 4. Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
(a)  Village Council shall mean the governing body of the Village or any successor to the legislative powers of the present governing body. 
(b)  Village shall mean the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
(c)  Village Manager is the chief administrative officer of the Village. 
(d)  Grantee shall mean City Gas Company, a corporation organized pursuant to the laws of the State of Florida, as further described in Section 15 below. 
(e)  Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, bridge, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the Village for the purpose of public travel as they now exist, or as they may be established at any time during the term of this Franchise. 
(f)  Gross receipts shall mean the total of all gross revenues from the sale of gas provided within the corporate limits of the Village by Grantee. 
(g)  Facilities shall mean and include, but not be limited to, pipes, gas mains, supply pipes, conduits, ducts and other means of conveyance of gas, located or to be located in, under and over the streets of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida. 
(h)  Gas shall mean natural, manufactured and/or other gas. 
Section 5. Franchise term. 
    The Franchise granted pursuant hereto shall commence on the effective date of this ordinance and shall terminate thirty (30) years thereafter. 
Section 6. Grantee's acknowledgment of Village's police powers; compliance with laws and regulations. 
(a)  Grantee shall comply with the terms of the charter of the Village of Pinecrest, and all applicable codes, rules, regulations and laws, as they presently exist, and, as they may be subsequently amended or created. 
(b)  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the Village of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets. 
(c)  This Franchise does not obviate or modify the provisions of section 337.401(2), Florida Statutes (1995) which requires Grantee to obtain authorization by written permit issued by the Village and other governing authorities which have jurisdiction over any street for the installation, location or relocation of Grantee's facilities. All said permits shall require the Grantee to be responsible for any damage resulting from the issuance of such permits. The provisions of that section of state law is incorporated in this Franchise by this reference and such provisions shall be applicable for the duration of the term of this Franchise. 
Section 7. Franchise fee; payment to Village; annual certified statement required; late charges; delinquency; extensions; inspection of Grantee's records. 
(a)  Grantee shall pay Franchise fees to the Village during the term of the Franchise as consideration for, and as a condition of, the grant to Grantee of the non-exclusive right to occupy municipal streets and rights-of-way for the construction, operation and maintenance of Grantee's facilities. The Franchise fee shall be calculated as an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts of Grantee, as defined in section 4(f) of this Franchise Ordinance, received by Grantee in each month. Such fee shall be based upon a statement as described in subsection (e) of this section which shall be forwarded to the Village. Payment of the Franchise fees shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owned or paid to the Village by Grantee. 
Such Franchise fee shall be due and payable by Grantee on a monthly basis within thirty (30) days after the last day of each month. 
(b)  In the event any monies due and owing under section 7(a) above are not timely paid as specified therein, and no extension as described in section 7(d) has been granted, the Village may impose and the Grantee agrees to pay, a late charge equal to one point five percent (1.5%) per month on the unpaid balance. 
(c)  Should any of Grantee's payments as required under this section be delinquent for thirty (30) days, the Village may proceed under section 16 herein. 
(d)  The Village finance director or his/her successor may, upon request of Grantee, grant a ten (10) day extension for payment of monies due and owing under section 7(a), above. The Village Council may grant a reasonable extension of any of the foregoing time periods for good .cause shown. 
(e)  The Grantee, at its sole expense, shall file with the Village, for each month during the term of this Franchise, a statement in such reasonable form and detail as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Village showing the gross receipts of the Grantee as defined in section 4(f) of this Franchise for the preceding fiscal month. Each such statement shall be sworn to by an authorized official of Grantee. Such statement shall be presented to Village by Grantee on or before the thirtieth day of each month. 
(f)  Any statement rendered by Grantee to Village is for accounting purposes only. 
(g)  In the event Franchisee fails to pay franchise fees under this ordinance, or any other amount due the Village under this ordinance, Franchisee agrees to pay all costs of collection and attorney fees incurred by the Village. This provision shall apply to all trial and appellate proceedings. Franchisee waives all rights to reciprocal attorney fees under the law. 
Section 8. Service standards. 
    The Grantee shall maintain and operate all present and future gas system facilities in such manner as will enable it to furnish adequate and continuous service to its customers. 
Section 9. Indemnification. 
(a)  The parties hereto specifically agree and understand that the award of this Franchise to Grantee and all terms, promises, covenants, conditions and obligations contained in this Franchise are sufficient consideration for the indemnification provisions contained herein, in accordance with section 725.06, Florida Statutes (1995). 
(b)  For and in consideration of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged by the parties hereto, and in consideration of the award of this Franchise to Grantee, Grantee shall indemnify Village as follows: 
The Grantee shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Village, its officers, agents and employees, against, and assume all liability for, any and all claims, suits, actions, damages, liabilities, expenditures, or causes of action of any kind arising from this Franchise and/or arising from the construction, operation and maintenance of a gas utility system and related facilities and or the use of the public streets for the purposes authorized herein and resulting or accruing from any negligence, act, omission or error of the Grantee, its agents or employees or arising from the failure of the Grantee, its agents or employees to comply with each and every covenant of the Franchise or with any other ordinance or law regulating the use of the streets of the Village resulting in or relating to, bodily injury, loss of life or limb or damage to property sustained by any person, firm, corporation or other business entity. Grantee shall save the Village, its officers, agents and employees harmless from and against all judgments, orders, decrees, attorney's fees, costs, expenses and liabilities incurred in and about any such claim, investigation or defense thereof, which may be entered, incurred or assessed as a result of the foregoing, including costs and legal fees through the appellate level. Grantee shall defend, at its sole cost and expense any legal action, claim or proceeding instituted by any person against the Village, its officers, agents and employees as a result of any claim, suit or cause of action accruing from this Franchise, for injuries to body, life, limb or property as set forth above. 
Section 10. Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the Franchise, Grantee shall obtain and pay all premiums for a general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the Village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person with regard to all damages provided in section 9 above, with a combined single limit coverage of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(b)  The insurance policy obtained by the Grantee in compliance with this section shall be issued by a company or companies acceptable to the Village and a current certificate or certificates of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the Village during the term of the Franchise. Said policies shall name the Village as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the Village thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. It is understood and agreed that the continuance of operations by the Grantee without required insurance will be considered a material breach of this Franchise agreement by virtue of which the Village may terminate the same upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the Grantee. 
(c)  The insurance requirements of the Grantee hereunder shall not be affected by any insurance which the Village may carry in its own name. 
Section 11. Books and records of Grantee. 
    All books and records of Grantee concerning Grantee's operations within the corporate limits of the Village applicable to this Franchise shall be made available for inspection and audit by the Village or its designee during normal business hours of Grantee, for the purpose of verifying any statements, including statements of revenues furnished by the Grantee to Village and for the purpose of examining and auditing the gross receipts of Grantee from which Franchise fees are computed. Further, the Village or its representative shall have the right to utilize through Grantee whatever means or mechanisms used by Grantee to record, store and retrieve the data necessary to make such verification of Franchise fees. Village shall have the right to recompute any and all amounts paid under this Franchise. In the event a disagreement arises between Grantee and Village as to any amount paid or to be paid by Grantee, and the parties are unable to resolve the disagreement within thirty (30) days from the date Village furnished Grantee written notice of the disagreement, then the provisions of section 16 of this Franchise Ordinance shall apply. 
Section 12. Uses permitted to Grantee. 
    Grantee is hereby authorized to use streets within the Village to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and maintain Grantee's facilities as may be necessary and appurtenant to its operations authorized under the Franchise, subject to the conditions set forth below. 
(a)  Grantee shall be responsible for securing any permits, licenses or agreements that may be necessary to the Grantee or required by any private property owners, public utilities or governmental agencies. 
(b)  Grantee's facilities shall be installed or relocated, whichever is applicable, as to cause a minimum of interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners, and so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic over the streets, avenues, alleys, waterways, bridges and public places and ways of the Village, and to allow for reasonable egress from and ingress to abutting property. Prior to the complete blocking of any streets or public places, Grantee shall consult with the Village Building Official, Village Chief of Police, and other proper Village officials to achieve the least possible traffic interference. 
(c)  Grantee's facilities shall be installed or relocated, whichever is applicable, in locations in the right-of-way so as to cause a minimum of interference with the utilization of the right-of-way by the Village. The Village retains the right, on a case by case basis, to prohibit the installation or relocation, whichever is applicable, of Grantee's facilities in a particular location in the event the Village, in its sole and reasonable discretion, determines that such facilities will interfere with the use of the streets by the Village. 
(d)  Grantee shall place its facilities underground whenever reasonably possible. 
(e)  Grantee's facilities shall be constructed, installed, repaired, replaced and relocated by the Grantee with the approval by permit of the proper Village officials; and the Grantee shall at its own expense replace without undue delay any sidewalks, pavement, subgrade, soil, grass or landscaping that may be displaced by the Grantee and restore same to as good condition as same existed prior to such construction, installation, repair or replacement of Grantee's facilities. 
Upon failure of the Grantee to do so within ten (10) days after receipt by Grantee of written notice from the Village Building Official, the Village may repair and replace such portion of the sidewalk or street or other place that may have been disturbed by said Grantee, and the cost of the same including administrative and engineering costs shall be paid by Grantee. The proper Village officials may grant Grantee a reasonable extension of the foregoing time period for good cause shown. 
Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, in the event the Village Building Official or Grantee construes a repair or replacement to be an emergency, Grantee shall make such repairs and replacements as soon as practical. 
(f)  Grantee shall endeavor to coordinate all construction, installation or repairs of Grantee's facilities with all governmental entities having jurisdiction over Grantee, and utilities which provide services in the vicinity of such activities of Grantee, in order to minimize any adverse effects, disruption or disturbance. 
(g)  All street cuts made by Grantee under this Franchise shall be maintained by Grantee in accordance with the standards determined and required by the Village Building Official as such standards are applied to all other Franchises of Village. 
Section 13. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    Grantee shall not as to rates, charges, services, facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage. All rates, rules or regulations established by Grantee's rates for gas shall at all times be subject to such regulation as may be provided by law. 
Section 14. Complaints. 
    Grantee shall maintain a business office accessible to residents of the Village for the resolution of complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Grantee shall keep a record of all complaints in compliance with Florida Statutes and the rules and regulations of the public service commission of the State of Florida and make copies of such complaints available to the Village for inspection. 
Section 15. Restriction against assignment. 
    The Grantee shall not lease, assign or otherwise alienate this Franchise or any renewal of this Franchise Ordinance, except with the consent of the Village Council expressed by ordinance. The consent of the Village Council shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided that the prospective transferee is capable of performing all obligations of this Franchise, and that such transferee agrees with the Village, in writing, to comply with all provisions of this Franchise. 
Section 16. Revocation of Franchise. 
(a)  Failure on the part of the Grantee to comply in any material respect with any of the provisions of this Franchise Ordinance, shall be grounds for a termination and forfeiture of this Franchise, but no such termination shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by Grantee until a court of competent jurisdiction (with right of appeal in either party) shall have found that Grantee has failed to comply in a material respect with any of the provisions of this Franchise, and the Grantee shall have three (3) months after the final determination of the question, to make good the default before a termination shall result with the right in Village at its discretion to grant such additional time to Grantee for compliance as necessities in the case require. In the event such a protest is filed, Grantee shall continue to pay to Village the Franchise fee required by this Franchise. 
The foregoing requirement shall apply even in the event that the Franchise fee is the subject matter of the protest. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, and at the sole option of the Village the adjudication of Grantee as bankrupt shall be cause for immediate revocation of this Franchise without the benefit of public hearing. 
Section 17. Termination of Franchise. 
    As a condition of this Franchise, the Village hereby reserves the right to terminate this Franchise upon purchase by the Village of the property and property rights of Grantee and the extensions thereof within and without the Village, which property and property rights are used in or useful to or connected with the Grantee, including all contracts for service or motive power fairly and reasonably made in good faith by Grantee. If the Village exercises its reserved right to terminate this Franchise upon purchase of Grantee property and property rights, then the parties agree to institute and conduct negotiations in good faith, in a mutual effort to establish a fair purchase price. Upon conclusion of successful negotiations, resulting in an executed purchase and sale agreement for such property and property rights, the Village shall have no more than two (2) years following the complete execution by the parties of such agreement within which to consummate the purchase; provided, however, that during such two-year period, the terms and conditions of this Franchise shall continue. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from acquiring said property of Grantee by condemnation proceedings, or in any other lawful manner and all such methods of acquisition shall be alternative to the power to purchase reserved in this Franchise. Upon the acquisition by the Village of the property of Grantee by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, this Franchise shall at once terminate. 
Section 18. Notices. 
    Any notice or demand, which under the terms of this Franchise or by any statute or ordinance, is to be given or made by Village or Grantee, shall be in writing and sent by registered United States mail, return receipt requested, sent to the other party at the address set forth below, or to such other address as Village or Grantee may from time to time designate by written notice to the other. 
For Village: 
Village Clerk 
Village of Pinecrest 
11551 South Dixie Highway 
Pinecrest, FL 33156 
For Grantee: 
City Gas System, Inc. 
Vice President, Operations 
955 East 25th Street 
Hialeah, FL 33013 
Section 19. Acceptance. 
    The grantee shall, within 10 days after passage of this Ordinance, file with the Village Clerk, its acceptance of same in writing, signed by the proper officers and attested by its corporate seal. 
Section 20. Severability. 
    That if any clause, section or other part of this ordinance shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 21. Conflicting provisions. 
    That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Section 22. Effective date. 
    That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect commencing retroactively as of March 12, 1996. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED ON FIRST READING this 29th day of July, 1997. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED ON SECOND READING this 11th day of September, 1997. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES 

Sec. 1. - Ordinance No. 97-5. 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA GRANTING TO BELLSOUTH TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INC. A NON-EXCLUSIVE PERMISSION IN THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST; AUTHORIZING BELLSOUTH TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INC. TO USE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND STREETS OF THE VILLAGE, FOR THE PURPOSE OF ERECTING, CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING AND OPERATING LINES OF TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT THEREON AND THEREUNDER; PROVIDING FOR A PERMISSION FEE; PROVIDING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH GRANT; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR INCLUSION IN THE CODE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, the Village of Pinecrest finds it in the public interest to retain control over the use of public rights-of-way by providers of Telephone Services to ensure against interference with the public convenience, to promote aesthetic considerations, to promote planned and efficient use of limited right-of-way space, and to protect the public authority over right-of-way property; and 
    WHEREAS, the Village of Pinecrest finds that the granting of nonexclusive permissions is the best means of assuring that the interests of the Village of Pinecrest are promoted; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE VILLAGE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA, AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. Grant of Permission. Permission is hereby granted to BellSouth Telecommunications, Inc, its successors and assigns (the "Company") to construct, maintain and operate lines of telephone and telegraph equipment, including the necessary conduits, poles, cables, electrical conductors, fiber optics and digital technology fixtures upon, along, under and over the public roads, streets, and rights-of-way of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida as its telephone and telegraph business may from time to time require. 
    Section 2. Term and Limits of Permission. This non-exclusive permission granted by this Ordinance, if accepted by the Company, shall be in force and effect for a period of fifteen (15) years from and after its passage provided, however, by written notice within ninety (90) days prior to the fifth and tenth anniversaries hereof, either party may commence negotiations for modification of the consideration paid by the Company to the Village set forth in Section 3 herein. If new terms cannot thereafter be agreed upon, either party may terminate this permission upon an additional ninety (90) days notice to the other party. The permission granted by this permission covers the following geographic area: The corporate limits of the Village of Pinecrest as set forth in the Charter of the Village of Pinecrest, as amended from time to time. Company agrees that the limits of the permission are subject to expansion or reduction by annexation and contraction of municipal boundaries and that the Company has no vested right in a specific area. The Village shall notify the Company of any annexation or contraction of municipal boundaries and provide the Company a map of the new boundaries in a timely manner. The Company shall take prompt action to implement computations and corresponding payments to annexation or contraction and notify Village of effective date of same. 
    Section 3. Permission Fee Payments. In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, and to defray the cost of regulating the Company's activities under this permission, the Company shall pay to the Village annually a sum equal to one percent (1%) of the gross receipts of the Company on recurring local service revenues for services provided within the corporate limits of the Village by the Company. Included within such one percent (1%) maximum fee or consideration are all taxes, licenses, fees, and other impositions (except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings, and similar improvements and occupational license taxes) levied or imposed by the Village upon the Company. The annual payment shall be made to the Village for each year that the permission granted herein is in effect and shall be made to the Village in four installments. The first, second and third installments of the annual payment shall be based upon the gross receipts for the first, second and third quarters, respectively, of the fiscal year and shall be made no later than sixty (60) days following the end of these periods. The fourth installment of the annual payment shall be made no later than sixty (60) days following the end of such fiscal year, and shall be based upon such gross receipts for the fiscal year but shall be adjusted to reflect payment of the first three installments and any credits not previously taken. For purposes of this payment, such fiscal year shall end on the anniversary of the last day of the month in which the ordinance becomes effective. The first such payment shall be based upon receipts for the first quarter of the fiscal year and shall be made within sixty (60) days following the end of the first quarter. Payments shall be payable to the Village of Pinecrest, Attention: Finance Department, during regular business hours of the Village. 
    Section 4. Review of Billing Records. If the Village wishes to verify the payments to the Village under this Ordinance, the Company shall permit the Village or a designated representative of the Village, upon reasonable advance written notice, to review the Company's billing and payment records, upon which the payments were based, during normal business hours at the location of the Company where such records are maintained. However, no Company records may be taken from the Company's premises, and the Village shall maintain the confidentiality of the information disclosed in these records and use the information solely for the purposes of verifying payments by the Company. Such Company records shall be maintained by the Company for the period prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission and/or the Florida Public Service Commission. 
    Section 5. Transferability. If the rights granted herein to the Company are transferred or assigned by the Company to any third party incident to a sale or other transfer of the Company's system or plant, the transferee or assignee shall be obligated to comply with all of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. 
    Section 6. Forfeiture. Failure on the part of the Company to comply in any substantial respect with any of the material provisions of this agreement shall be grounds for a forfeiture of the permission granted herein, but no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by the Company, until a court of competent jurisdiction (with right of appeal in either party) shall have found that the Company failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the material provisions of this Ordinance. The Company shall have six (6) months after the final determination of the question to make good the default, before a forfeiture shall result, with the right in the Village at its discretion to grant such additional time to the Company for compliance as necessities in the case require. 
    Section 7. Hold Harmless. The Company shall indemnify the Village against and assume all liabilities for damages which may arise or accrue to the Village for any injury to persons or damage to property from the grant of permission hereunder including the doing of any work herein authorized, or the neglect of the Company or any of its employees to comply with any ordinance regulating the use of the streets of the Village, and the acceptance by the Company of this Ordinance shall be an agreement by it to pay to the Village any sum of money for which the Village may become liable from or by any reason of such injury or damage, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by Village. 
    Section 8. Underground Installation. The Company shall install underground extensions of telephone distribution lines in new residential subdivisions over five units or new multiple occupancy buildings where all other utilities will also be installed underground. Such installation shall be provided in accordance with and subject to the requirements of applicable statutes, and the Florida Public Service Commission Rules and Regulations, including any requirements applicable to the applicant for such services, such as the provision of necessary rights-of-way or easements. 
    Section 9. Excavation Maintenance and Restoration. The work which may be performed by the Company under this Ordinance shall be done subject to the right, but not the obligation of supervision of the Village. The Company shall replace or properly relay and repair any sidewalk, street, lawn, landscaping or swale that may be displaced or damaged by reason of such work. Except where law requires the cost to be borne by Village, whenever the Company shall cause any opening or alteration to be made in any of the streets or public places within the Village for the purpose of installing, maintaining, operating or repairing its equipment, such work shall be completed at the Company's expense within a reasonable time and the Company shall upon the completion of such work restore such portion of the streets or other public places in compliance with street specifications of the Village and to substantially the same condition as it was before the opening or alteration was so made and will promptly remove any debris. Upon failure of the Company to perform said repair or restoration, after twenty (20) days notice provided in writing by the Village to the Company, the Village may repair such portions of the sidewalk, street, lawn, landscaping or swale that may have been disturbed by the Company and collect the cost so incurred from the Company. The Village shall promptly provide to the Company all permits, licenses and other authorizations reasonably necessary for the purpose of installing, maintaining, operating and repairing the system and facilities. 
    Section 10. Use of Streets and Rights-of-Way. All poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures erected by the Company in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the public roads, streets and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village shall be so located as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the streets, avenues, alleys, and public rights-of-way by the traveling public and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said roads, streets and public rights-of-way. 
    Section 11. Complaints. All complaints shall be addressed or resolved by the Company in accordance with the Florida Public Service Commission rules and regulations if applicable. 
    Section 12. Successors and Assigns. Whenever in this Ordinance either the Village or the Company is named or referred to, it shall be deemed to include the respective successor, successors or assigns of either, and all rights, privileges and obligations herein conferred shall bind and inure to the benefit of such successor, successors or assigns of the Village or the Company. 
    Section 13. Village's Right to Regulate Use of Streets not Abrogated. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the Village of its fight or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets in accordance with Village's police powers or property rights, provided, however, that such regulation shall not be inconsistent with the rights granted herein. 
    Section 14. Written Acceptance by the Company. The Company shall, within sixty (60) days after this Ordinance takes effect, file a written acceptance of the Ordinance with the Village Clerk of the Village. 
    Section 15. Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this Ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. 
    Section 16. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon adoption on second reading. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED on first reading this 8th day of April, 1997. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED on second reading this 6th day of May, 1997. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the village used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. Ordinances used in the Land Development Regulations are listed in the Land Development Regulations Comparative Table, located in Volume II. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 96-3  5-28-96 1(1.01) 28-26 1(1.02)-1(1.06) 28-28-28-32 1(1.07) 28-27 96-6  9-10-96 1-3 20-26-20-28 4-6 20-31-20-33 9, 10 20-29, 20-30 96-7  9-10-96 1 2-176 2 2-201-2-204 96-9  9-10-96 1 2-286 2-4 2-290-2-292 5 2-288 6 2-287 7 2-289 96-11 11-19-96 1(1)-1(4) 2-26-2-29 96-14 12-11-96 1-17 2-131-2-147 97-1  1- 7-97 1(1-1)-1(1-3) 2-91-2-93 97-2  2- 4-97 1(1), 1(2) 20-61, 20-62 97-3  3- 4-97 1 2-232 97-4  3- 4-97 1 2-231 97-5  5- 6-97 1-16       Added App. A, Art. II,  1 97-6  5- 6-97 1-20       Added 28-51-28-70 97-7  5- 6-97 1       Added 24-1-24-27 4       Added 24-28 97-9  7- 1-97 1-3 2-137-2-139 4, 5 2-141, 2-142 97-10  7- 1-97 1       Added 8-1 2       Added 20-1 97-11  7- 1-97 1       Added 16-1 97-13  7-29-97 1-17       Added 32-21-32-38 97-16  9-11-97 1-22       Added App. A, Art. I,  1 97-17 10-14-97 1       Added 12-21-12-34 97-18 11-12-97 2       Added 8-2-8-4 97-19 12- 9-97 1       Added 36-1 97-20 12- 9-97 1-4 Adopting Ord., p. xi       Rpld 1-12 98-1  3-10-98 1, 2       Added 20-81 98-2  3-10-98 1       Added 20-83 98-3  3-10-98 1       Added 20-84 98-4  3-10-98 1, 2       Added 20-82 98-5  3-10-98 1 20-26 2 20-31 98-6  5-12-98 1       Added 13-1-13-5 13-11-13-18 13-31-13-33 13-41-13-45 13-51 98-7  7-28-98 1 28-61 98-10 10-13-98 1 2-91-2-94 98-11 11-10-98 1       Added 12-35 98-13 12- 7-98 1 13-42 98-14 12- 7-98 1       Added 36-1(c)(3)c.8. 99-1  1-12-99 2       Rpld 2-131-2-147       Added 2-131, 2-132, 2-141-2-149 2-161-2-175 99-2  1-12-99 2       Added 26-1 99-3  1-12-99 2, 3       Added 24-29, 24-30 99-05  4-13-99 2       Added 16-11-16-15 99-06  5-10-99 1 36-2 99-07  8- 3-99 1 12-33 2 12-34(a) 3 12-34(b) 99-09 10-12-99 1-5       Added 28-91-28-95 2000-1  5- 8-01 2       Added 18-1, 18-2 2000-2  4-11-00 1       Added 16-21-16-24 2000-3  6- 6-00 1       Added 12-51-12-63 2000-4  9-12-00 1 2-91       Rnbd 2-93, 2-94       as 2-94, 2-95       Added 2-93 2000-6 11-14-00 1       Added 26-31-26-34 2000-7 11-27-00 1-2       Rpld 13-1-13-5 13-11-13-18 13-31-13-33 13-41-13-45 13-51 20-1 20-26-20-33 20-61, 20-62 20-81-20-84 24-29, 24-30 2001-02  7-10-01 1       Added 2-56 2001-04  7-10-01 1       Added 28-111-28-114 2001-05  9- 5-01 1       Added 26-51-26-68 2001-06  9- 5-01 1 36-2 2001-07  9- 5-01 1 2-231, 2-232 2001-10 10- 9-01 1       Added Art. I (tit.) 36-31-36-41 2001-13 12-11-01 1 28-26, 28-28 28-32 2002-2  4- 9-02 1 2-290 2002-3  4- 9-02 1       Added 16-2 2002-5  9- 3-02 1       Rpld 36-31-36-34 2002-6  9- 3-02 1 16-2 2002-8  11-13-02 1       Added 25-1-25-7 2       Added 15-1-15-3 4       Added 26-81 2003-1  1-14-03 1 2-174       Rpld 2-175 2003-6  7-15-03 1       Rpld 28-26-28-32 2       Added 28-26-28-34 2004-2  5-17-04 1       Rpld 16-2 2       Added ch. 15, art. I(tit.) 15-21, 15-22 2004-8 11- 9-04 1       Added 8-1(b)(1) 2004-9 11- 9-04 1       Added 8-1(b)(2) 2005-2  3-15-05 1 2-204 2005-8  9-12-05 1 28-61, 28-62 2005-10 10-11-05 1       Added 16-31-16-34 2005-11 12-20-05 1       Added 16-41-16-43 2006-2  5-18-06 1 15-21 2006-5 10-10-06 1       Added 16-51-16-54 2006-6 10-10-06 1 2-290 2007-2  4-10-07 1 Ch. 28, art. III(tit.) 28-51-28-70 2007-3  5- 8-07 1 2-141-2-149 2-161-2-174 2007-6  5-24-07 1 28-91-28-95 2007-9 12-11-07 1 ch. 15, art. II(tit.) 15-22       Rpld 15-21       Added 15-21.1-15-21.9 2007-10 12-11-07 1 2-231 2009-4 11-10-09 1       Added 2-96 2011-3  5-10-11 1 15-22 2011-9  9- 6-11 1 18-1 2011-11 12-13-11 1 8-1 2011-12 12-13-11 1 2-132       Added 2-175 2012-6  4-10-12 1 8-1(b) 2012-7  5- 8-12 1 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2(tit.) 2-141-2-148 2-161-2-163 2-168, 2-170       Added 2-150 2012-11  7-10-12 1 36-1(c) 2012-12  7-10-12 1       Added 8-1(b)(5) 2012-13  9-11-12 1       Rpld 8-2-8-4 2012-19 11-13-12 1 2-141(c), 2-143 2-146(n) 2-147(c) 2-150, 2-162(b) 2-164, 2-168(i), (r) 2-169, 2-170 2013-2  2-12-13 1       Rnbd 28-91-28-95       as 28-91       Added 28-92 2013-7  5-14-13 1       Added 2-57 2013-9  9-11-13 2       Added 36-3 2013-11 10- 8-13 2       Added 16-60-16-64 2014-02  4- 8-14 2 Ch. 2, Art. V (tit.) 2-131, 2-132 2-141, 2-145 2-146, 2-148 2-161, 2-169 2-173, 2-175 15-1       Added 26-82-26-90 2014-6 10-14-14 1       Added 2-58, 2-59 2015-1  1-13-15 2 18-1 2015-10  9- 8-15 2       Added 16-2 3       Added 28-130-28-134 2016-2  2-16-16 2 26-82-26-89 2016-3  4-12-16 1 26-52-26-54, 26-56-26-60, 26-63-26-66 2017-2  1-10-17 2 26-2-26-89 2017-5  5- 9-17 2 15-22 2017-8  5- 9-17 2 15-21.6 2017-11  9-19-17 1 36-1(c)(3) 2017-14 12-12-17 2 25-1 25-4-25-7 2018-1  1- 9-18 2       Rpld 28-130-28-134 2018-4  4-10-18 1 8-1(b)5.e. 2018-5  5- 8-18 2(Exh. A) 15-1(c), (f), (i)       Added 16-80-16-85 2018-9  7-17-18 2       Added 15-21.3(10) 15-21.7 15-21.8 2018-11  7-17-18 1 2-231 2018-14 10- 9-18 2       Added 16-70-16-72 2018-15 10- 9-18 2 12-33  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Florida Statutes. Any state law references located in the Land Development Regulations are listed in the Land Development Regulations State Law Reference Table in Volume II. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 18-1 99.061(2) 2-231 119.07(1) 28-32 ch. 162 2-132 2-148 2-173 24-28 36-3 162.22 26-65 ch. 163 8-1 13-1 163.3174 20-61 163.3174(4) 20-62 163.3191 20-62 ch. 166 13-1 166.22 26-65 166.231 28-26 28-32 166.232 28-26 28-32 166.233 28-32 166.234 28-32 ch. 173 25-7 196.075 28-91 28-92 Ch. 197 25-6 ch. 202 26-53 202.11 26-53 202.20(1), (2) 28-113 202.195 26-56 ch. 205 28-51, 28-53 206.86(1) 28-30 212.08(6) 28-26 ch. 252 12-54 286.0114 2-59 286.0115(1)(b) 2-176 316.003 36-1 316.008 36-3 316.0083 36-3 316.074(1) 36-3 316.075(1)(c)(1) 36-3 316.640(5)(A) 36-3 337.401 26-52 26-53 337.401(2) App. A, Art. I,  1 337.401(3)(c)1 28-111 28-112 28-113 337.402 26-56 337.403 26-56 337.404 26-56 365.172 26-53 365.172(3)(hh) 26-53 365.172(13) 26-56 ch. 380 8-1 381.986 28-134 403.0891 25-1 25-3-25-5 403.0893 25-1 25-3 403.0893(3) 25-6 ch. 556 26-56 ch. 705 16-13, 16-14 705.101 15-1 725.06 App. A, Art. I,  1 775.21 16-33 768.28 26-62 775.082 2-28 2-166 775.083 2-28 2-166 794.011 16-33 800.04 16-33 827.071 16-33 843.025 26-59 843.165 26-59 847.0145 16-33 865.09 28-58 870.041-870.046 12-56 870.044 12-55 12-57 870.045 12-57 943.0435 16-33 944.067 16-33  
VOLUME II 
CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF PINECREST, FLORIDA 
Volume II 
Land Development Regulations 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Village Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 9, 1997 
Effective: December 9, 1997 
Published September, 2001 
____________ 

Chapter 30 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, adopted November 13, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 30,  30-1-30-12, 30-14-30-20.5, 30-21-30-81, 30-83, 30-86-30-117, and 30-119-30-208, and adding a new ch. 30 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2000-7, adopted November 27, 2000, and Ord. No. 2001-08, adopted September 5, 2001. Ord. No. 2002-8,  1, amended the Code by repealing former  30-118, and adding similar provisions as a new ch. 25. Ord. No. 2002-8,  2, amended the Code by repealing former  30-82, 30-84, and 30-85, and adding similar provisions as a new ch. 15. Ord. No. 2002-8 also repealed  30-13, and added similar provisions as a new  26-81. 
State Law reference- County and municipal planning, F.S.  163.2511 et seq.; limitations on adoption of zoning ordinances, F.S.  166.041(3)(b), (c); family day care homes, as affected by zoning, F.S.  166.0445; state and regional planning, F.S.  186.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Div. 1.1. - Authority and purpose. 
    This chapter, the village land development code, is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act), the general powers confirmed in F.S. ch. 166 (Home Rule Powers Act), the village Charter and the Constitution of the State of Florida. 
    The land development code shall apply to all development, including redevelopment or changes in land use, throughout the village. No development, redevelopment or change in land use shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this Code. When used within this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms "this chapter" refers to the village land development code. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish comprehensive controls and management for the use of land and water within the village; to preserve the unique village character; and to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, and general welfare of the people within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 1.2. - Relationship to the village comprehensive development master plan. 
    The land development code is established to implement, and be based upon, the comprehensive development master plan in a manner consistent with F.S.  163.3201. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 1.3. - Official zoning map. 
    The village is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map and described in this Code. The official zoning map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this land development code. The official zoning map is the official record of the zoning status of property within the village. It shall be maintained in the village offices and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested to by the village clerk, and bear the seal of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 1.4. - Compliance with comprehensive development master plan and land development code. 
    All development, redevelopment, alterations, change of use, and change in soil contour, including fill, shall comply with the requirements of the village comprehensive development master plan and the land development code. A development order shall only be permitted if the final development plan complies with the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive development master plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
ARTICLE 2. - DECISION MAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES 

Div. 2.1. - Village council. 
    In addition to any authority granted to the village council by state law or by provisions of the Village Code, the village council shall have the powers and duties listed herein concerning this land development code. The village council's authority shall include, but not be limited to approval, approval with conditions or modifications or denial. Specifically, but without limitation, the village council shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Take such action deemed desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of the land development code and the comprehensive development master plan, including acting as the local planning agency for the village under F.S.  163.3174; 
(b)  Adopt and amend the official zoning map in accordance with the procedures outlined herein; 
(c)  Adopt amendments to the text of this land development code; 
(d)  Review and approve applications for site plan approval for conditional uses; 
(e)  Review and approve applications for conditional uses; 
(f)  Review and approve applications for accessory uses; 
(g)  Review and approve preliminary plats, and review and approve final plats before recording in accordance with the procedures of this land development code; 
(h)  Hear and decide appeals from any decision of the zoning board; 
(i)  Review applications for development approval for developments of regional impact (DRI) and to issue development orders therefore; and 
(j)  Enter into development agreements; and 
(k)  Review and approve variances for off-street parking and flood regulations. 
(l)  Hear and decide appeals with regard to administrative interpretations or decisions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 2.2. - Local planning agency. 
    Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S.  163.3174, the village council is established as the local planning agency for the village. The local planning agency shall have the powers and duties as provided in the referenced statute, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Prepare and recommend to the village council amendments to the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(b)  Monitor the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan; and 
(c)  Review land development regulations and changes to the official zoning district map and make recommendations to the village council as to the consistency of the regulation or change with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 2.3. - Zoning board. 
(a)  Establishment and composition. The zoning board is hereby established and shall consist of seven (7) members appointed as follows: each councilmember shall appoint one member; the village manager shall appoint one member; and the mayor shall appoint two members. The village manager's appointment and the mayor's second appointment shall be subject to ratification by a majority vote of the village council. 
1.  Terms of appointments/reappointments. Appointments shall be on a yearly basis expiring on December 31 of each calendar year, with reappointment permissible for a maximum of four terms. 
2.  Compensation. Members of the zoning board shall serve without compensation and shall not be reimbursed for travel, mileage or per diem expenses. 
3.  Qualifications. Each member of the zoning board shall be a resident of the village eligible to vote in the village who has continuously resided within the village for the six-month period immediately prior to the appointment. A member shall not be an employee of the village. Any member who ceases to reside within the village limits during the term of office shall notify the village clerk of the change of residence from the village. 
4.  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the board, the person who initially appointed such member shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy. If the person who initially made such appointment is no longer holding office or position with the village, the person who succeeds to that office or position shall make such appointment. 
5.  Removals. If a member of the board shall be absent from a duly called meeting of the board for three consecutive meetings, or if a member has three unexcused absences in a calendar year, such member shall be subject to removal as a member of the board by the village council. 
(b)  Support services. The village attorney shall serve as legal adviser to the zoning board. The village manager shall ensure that the board is supplied competent staff to render technical assistance. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The zoning board shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the Village Code and state law and shall utilize the Scott, Foresmen Robert's Rules of Order, 1990 edition, for the rules of procedure and for the conduct of meetings of the board. In addition, the board shall be governed by the following rules and may create additional rules of procedure in accordance with bylaws adopted by the board. 
1.  Officers. Members shall elect from the board's membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson each January. If both the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent, the remaining members shall select one of their members to act as chairperson pro tem for the proceeding then occurring. 
2.  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the board's business. The board shall take official action only upon the concurring majority vote of the members present at an official meeting of the board. Any tie vote shall not be considered as a negative determination. 
3.  Rescheduling. In the event of a lack of quorum, the chairperson shall immediately schedule a new meeting date and time, to be held as soon as possible. The date and time of such rescheduled meeting shall be announced at the time of the originally scheduled meeting, and shall be posted on the bulletin board in the village hall. Any such notice shall constitute sufficient notice to any persons or adjacent property owners for whom notice of the meeting was required, and it shall not be necessary that notice of the rescheduled meeting be sent to any such persons or property owners. 
4.  Deferral of action. If fewer than five members of the board are in attendance at any meeting, the applicant may request, before the commencement of the public hearing on this matter, a deferral of the matter to the next scheduled meeting. 
5.  Meetings. The board shall meet when required by the administrative official. All meetings shall be public and notification of such meetings shall be in accordance with Village Code and state law. 
6.  Record of proceedings. Minutes shall be kept by the village clerk or designee for all meetings and proceedings of the zoning board and shall include and state the vote of each member on each question. Each motion shall state the reason upon which it is made, such reason being based upon the prescribed best management principles and practices of planning and plan implementation. 
7.  Staff report and recommendation. All matters brought before the board shall be accompanied by a staff report and recommendation. 
8.  Standards of conduct. All members of the zoning board shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees as set forth in section 7.2 of the Village Charter and other applicable laws, including the Miami-Dade County Conflict of Interest and Code of Ethics Ordinance. 
(d)  Responsibilities and duties. The zoning board is authorized to perform the following responsibilities and duties: 
1.  Variances. The board is authorized to grant, deny, or grant with conditions, variances to setback lines, frontage requirements, height limitations, lot size restrictions, yard requirements, fences and walls, lot coverage, impervious surface ratio, open space, landscaping, and signs. 
2.  Advisory actions. The board is authorized to act as an advisory body on matters of planning, land development and plan implementation functions as assigned to the board by a majority vote of the village council. Examples of such advisory responsibilities may include the following: 
a.  Recommendations for amendments to the official zoning district map of the village, including zoning district classifications assigned to specific properties; 
b.  Assisting the village manager and village attorney in the study of and proposed ordinances for potential land development code amendments for consideration by the village council; and 
c.  Other planning, land development, and related plan implementation matters. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 2.4. - Administrative official. 
    The administrative official shall be the village manager or his designee, who shall provide technical support and advice for the preparation and implementation of the comprehensive master development plan and this land development code, and shall perform such other functions as requested by the village council and authorized by this land development code, and consistent with the Florida Building Code. Specifically, and without limitation, the administrative official shall have the following duties: 
(a)  Prepare and provide application forms for the development approvals authorized by this land development code, and establish procedures for the processing of all applications, including setting required application filing deadlines to meet public hearing requirements; 
(b)  Provide administrative interpretations of this land development code; 
(c)  Conduct pre-application conferences with applicants for development approval as required by this land development code or as necessary or appropriate; 
(d)  Review and approve building permits for permitted uses; 
(e)  Review and approve applications for site plan approval for permitted uses; 
(f)  Review and approve permits for moving a building or structure from one lot or premises to another; 
(g)  Issue building permits for uses that have received necessary approvals by the village council or zoning board pursuant to this land development code; 
(h)  Approve minor changes to approved site plans consistent with this land development code; 
(i)  Issue plat approval for lot splits; 
(j)  Prepare written orders of action by the zoning board regarding variance decisions; 
(k)  Appeal zoning board decisions to the village council as he determines is appropriate; 
(l)  Review and approve certificates of occupancy and certificates of use; 
(m)  Prepare as necessary the record upon which each final decision of the village council pursuant to the land development code is based, for purposes of any appeal to the circuit court of the eleventh judicial circuit in and for the county; 
(n)  Approve administrative (de minimus) variances; and 
(o)  Approve sign permits. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
ARTICLE 3. - DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES 

Div. 3.1. - Generally. 
(a)  Building permit required. A building or other structure may not be erected, demolished, moved, added to, or structurally altered, nor shall any site be cleared or graded, until the administrative official has issued a permit for such work. A building permit shall be granted only after the applicant has submitted all applications, including appropriate supportive information, plans, and fees required by the village, and after the applicant has received any development approvals required by this land development code from the zoning board or village council. Such approvals may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Conditional use permit (see division 3.3). 
2.  Site plan approval (see division 3.4). 
3.  Variance (see division 3.5). 
4.  Official zoning district map amendment (see division 3.6). 
5.  Text amendment to the land development code (see division 3.6). 
6.  Comprehensive development master plan amendment (see division 3.7). 
7.  Plat approval (see article 8). 
These land development regulations shall be supplemental to the state building code and no approval shall be granted pursuant to this land development code that is inconsistent with the building code. 
(b)  Pre-application conference. A mandatory pre-application conference with the administrative official is required prior to submitting a site plan application or application for conditional use approval. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide potential applicants an opportunity to discuss conceptual development and determine applicable public policy and regulatory procedures. A potential applicant may request a pre-application conference to discuss any other development approval and the application requirements and procedures related thereto. 
(c)  Application and fee for building permit and development approval. All applications for building permits or any other type of development approval shall be filed with the administrative official, in a form specified by the administrative official and in the number of copies as shall be required by the administrative official. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as is established from time to time by the village council to defray the cost of processing the application, including any fees for cost recovery as provided herein. 
1.  All applications shall include the following documents: 
a.  One copy of the application signed by the applicant and by the property owner, plus two copies of all necessary supportive construction drawings and documents: 
b.  Location map including geographic coordinates at a scale not less than 1? = 1000'; 
c.  Identification of key persons, including, if applicable, owner; owner's authorized agent, if any; architect and engineer; landscape architect; other representatives or professionals involved in the application, if any; 
d.  A verified statement disclosing the name of each person having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the subject property. Where the owner is a private corporation or partnership, the name of each person holding an interest in such entity shall be disclosed; where the owner is a publicly held corporation, the stock of which is traded on a nationally recognized stock exchange, the names and addresses of the corporation and principal executive officers shall be disclosed, together with the names any stockholder owning a majority of the stock; 
e.  A current certified survey, which accurately depicts site conditions in a manner acceptable to the administrative official, at a scale not less than one inch equals 30 feet, certified by a state registered land surveyor. Where a survey is more than five years old, the owner shall verify by affidavit that the survey is accurate; 
f.  Sealed elevation plans showing all four elevations (i.e., north, south, east and west), including heights, distances, and dimensions of both existing and proposed new building conditions; 
g.  Sealed floor plans of all existing buildings (cross hatched) with proposed additions. Revisions shall be clouded; 
h.  A scaled site plan as required by Division 3.4; 
i.  Copies of all applicable past variances, written orders and resolutions applicable to the site; 
j.  Copies of permits required by other agencies; 
k.  Legal description; 
l.  Such other information as required by the administrative official as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of the land development code; 
m.  In order to assure that proposed developments are developed in compliance with the provisions contained in the land development code, the administrative official shall require proof of land ownership by warranty deed or other instrument approved by the village. The administrative official may require a property owner to file supporting legal instruments as outlined below. 
  Unity of title. A unity of title, or other similar agreement or covenant, may be required to be submitted on a form approved for legal sufficiency by the village attorney, except that such unity of title or other similar agreement or covenant shall not be permitted to join parcels of land separated by a road right-of-way or water body. Non-contiguous properties separated by right-of-way or water bodies shall be considered separate parcels of land for site development purposes and shall meet all requirements of the land development regulations irrespective of the adjoining features. Within multi-family residential and commercial zoning districts, separate parcels created by a covenant in lieu of title shall not be deemed a subdivision of real property subject to the provisions of article VIII of the Land Development Regulations. 
  Maintenance of common areas and facilities. A homeowners' association, or similar association, shall be created for the entire development (total property) as a master association, which shall provide for the maintenance of all common areas, roadways, cross-easements and other amenities common to the entire parcel of land. This does not preclude individual associations for each phase in regard to maintenance of buildings and other common areas so long as said associations, or the members thereof, are made members of the master association; or, the property owner shall execute and record among the public records a covenant running with the land for the entire property providing for the maintenance of all common areas, roadways, cross-easements and other amenities common to the entire parcel of land. 
  Reciprocal rights or cross-easements. Recordable documents may be required to establish reciprocal rights or covenants in cross easements for purposes of facilitating effective provision and maintenance of infrastructure, including water and sewer lines, common parking areas, streets, driveways, entrances, exits, and similar improvements provided for the common benefit pursuant to this land development code. 
  Breach of agreements. The recording of separate mortgages on each phase subsequent to the recording of a unity of title or other similar agreement or covenant shall not be deemed as a breach of the agreement, nor shall sales of individual units in the development. 
2.  The administrative official may make a written determination to waive required documents if in his determination they are not necessary to protect the public interest or adjacent properties; or bear no relationship to the proposed project or its impacts on the environment, public facilities or adjacent land uses; or are impractical based on the characteristics of the proposed use. 
3.  Each application shall also contain documents as may be required by the specific additional development approval process that applies to the application, pursuant to the relevant sections of this land development code. 
4.  Cost recovery. To the extent that any application for review by the village under the village's land development regulations or, except as otherwise specified below, other village code provisions which require review by village contractors, agents or consultants, the actual full costs for such review shall be passed on to the applicant. Costs for the village attorney and/or any outside contractors, agents or consultants of the village shall be charged to the applicant in an amount equal to the actual cost charged to the village. Applicants shall reimburse the village for such costs within five days of receipt of an invoice for such costs. Failure to make such reimbursement when due may stay the pending application until paid. Fees charged to process building permits and other development applications on behalf of the village shall not be affected by this section. 
a.  Initial deposit. When deemed appropriate by the administrative official, the applicant shall, at the time a submittal is made, provide an initial preliminary deposit which shall be credited toward the fee charged for application review and processing, and shall pay additional deposits as may be required from time to time. 
b.  Deposit amount. The amount of the initial deposit for the different types of review requests shall be established, and from time to time amended, by resolution of the village. It is the express intent of the village in enacting this cost recovery program that the village's costs of administrative and outside fee consultant review and processing of review requests, as required or necessitated now or in the future by the village's ordinances, resolutions, policies, or procedures, shall be borne by the applicant. 
c.  Project accounts. When the applicant pays the initial deposit, a financial account for said applicant's review request (the "project account") will be opened and maintained throughout the entire review process until the person receives a certificate of occupancy, the administrative official determines that no further action is necessary for the review and processing of the review request, or the applicant voluntarily withdraws. The project account will be held in a non-interest bearing account. At any of these times the project account will be closed and any remaining funds therein shall be refunded to the applicant depositing same. The project account will be monitored on a periodic basis. Whenever the account balance is zero or negative, a supplemental deposit will be required before any further review or processing continues. Additionally, no project shall be scheduled for village council review unless there are funds in the account. The applicant making the initial deposit will be notified when a supplemental deposit will be required. The amount of the supplemental deposit will be 50 percent of the initial deposit. Several supplemental deposits may be necessary depending on the complexity of the review request. 
d.  Records of administrative work performed. The village's outside consultants who are involved in the review and processing of review requests shall maintain records of the time expended and tasks conducted regarding each such request. A debit based upon the time expended and the applicable hourly rate shall be charged against the project account. The applicable hourly rate for review and processing by the village's outside fee consultants shall equal their actual hourly charge for such review and processing. A debit against the project account shall also be made which shall reflect the costs of administering this program, which charge shall be based upon the actual effort involved for such administration. 
(d)  Review for completeness. Upon receipt of an application, the administrative official shall have ten working days to determine that the application is complete and, thereafter, accept or reject the application. The administrative official shall notify the applicant in writing of the acceptance or rejection, including written findings of non-completeness if rejected. The administrative official shall not be required to take further action on the application until the deficiencies are remedied. Once the application is determined complete, it shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this land development code. However, any modification to the application thereafter shall require an additional completeness determination pursuant to this paragraph, and may delay the processing of the application, or review and action on the requested approval. 
(e)  Administrative official review and recommendation. 
1.  Each application shall be reviewed by the administrative official and such other staff as may be designated by the administrative official based upon the type of development proposed. The administrative official may retain consultants to assist in the review of an application if the nature and content of the application requires professional expertise in one or more professions not available on the village staff. The direct costs and charges levied by the consultants shall be borne and paid by the applicant. The administrative official shall review each application for compliance with all applicable land development regulations. 
2.  Application conferences. One or more conferences between the representatives of the applicant and the administrative official and designated staff may be required in order to expedite the review of the proposed development, coordinate local review with respect to all applicable village ordinances, and to inform the village staff of the proposed plan in preparation. Prior to the submittal of a complete application and plans containing all information as required by the land development regulations, an applicant may submit partial plans for conceptual review by the administrative official at subsequent application conferences. The conferences shall be informal and focus primarily on the following: 
a.  To inform the village staff of any related development approvals in order to facilitate village planning including, but not limited to, the efficient management of issues related to public facilities and service impacts and any area-wide land use impacts. 
b.  To inform the applicant of the village's planning policies and potential issues surrounding the scale and character of the proposed development, including related land use and infrastructure concerns, as well as impacts on schools and other public services. Village staff will alert the applicant to applicable ordinances and regulations as well as specific issues regarding the site and proposed plan for its development. 
c.  To clarify and inform both the applicant and the village concerning the development approval procedure. 
3.  In cases where the administrative official must provide review and recommendation to the village zoning board or the village council, the official shall be provide a written staff report, together with recommendations for denial, approval or approval with conditions, including such conditions that the administrative official deems advisable. The administrative official shall schedule any public hearing that may be required and shall advise the applicant as to any public notice requirements for the approval. However, it shall be the applicant's obligation to provide the public notices pursuant to this land development code. 
(f)  Withdrawal or denial with prejudice. 
1.  Without prejudice. The applicant shall be entitled to a continuance or withdrawal of an application for development approval if the request is made not later than five working days before final action of the application by the decision-making body or person. Requests for a continuance or withdrawal received later than five working days before the date the decision is to be made, or the public hearing is to take place, shall be granted by the decision-making body or person only with or without prejudice. 
2.  With prejudice. Whenever any application for a development approval is withdrawn or denied with prejudice, an application for development approval for all or part of the same land shall not be considered for a period of one year after the date of denial, unless the subsequent application involves a development proposal that is materially different from the prior proposal, or unless the person or a majority of the members of the decision-making body that made the final decision on the application determines that the prior denial was based on a material mistake of fact. For the purpose of this subsection, an application for development approval shall be considered materially different if it involves a change in use, or a change in intensity of density of use of 25 percent or more. The body or person charged with the development application approval under such successive application shall resolve any questions concerning the similarity of a second application. 
(g)  Issuance of building permit. A building permit shall be issued only after the administrative official determines that the structure, building site and the proposed use thereof comply with the requirements of this land development code and all development approvals granted pursuant to this land development code. The burden of such demonstration shall rest with the applicant. The building permit shall also comply with the state building code and the applicable laws. The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed to permit any violation of this land development code or any other Code of Ordinances and applicable laws. 
(h)  Posting of bond for public improvements. The village shall require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or cash bond covering 125 percent of the cost for required improvements to protect the public interest, including, but not limited to: drainage systems, potable water systems, wastewater disposal, roadway improvements, sidewalks, or other requisite public improvements. 
(i)  Record of action. One copy of the development approval or denial and its component parts, including all application materials, shall be returned to the applicant after the administrative official has marked such copy approved or disapproved and attested to same, by the administrative official's signature on the copy. The applicant's copy shall become part of the construction plans and be kept on the premises of construction and available for review by the village. This copy of the plan shall be considered as the village's property and upon request shall be returned to the village. The other copies, similarly signed, shall remain with the village and become a public record. 
(j)  Required display of building permit. A building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the premises affected, in a conspicuous location visible from the public right-of-way and protected from the weather, whenever construction work is being performed thereon. An owner, contractor, worker or other person shall not perform any building operations of any kind unless a building permit covering such operation is displayed as required by this land development code, nor shall they perform construction operations of any kind after notification of the revocation of the building permit. 
(k)  Inspections. Where construction is proceeding or at any time during the course of the valid period of a building permit, the village staff shall be authorized to inspect the premises to determine conformity with the approved plans as well as compliance with the building code and land development code. 
(l)  Development approval expirations. If, within 12 months of the date of development approval under this chapter a building permit has not been issued, the approval becomes null and void; provided, however, that the original approving body and applicant may jointly agree to extend such period of approval. Once begun, construction of a project shall continue to completion without interruption. Interruption shall be evidenced by six months or more of inactivity on the development site or the phase under construction. Where a building permit expires, prior to considering an application for a new building permit, the village may require the filing of a new application that shall include necessary revisions to achieve compliance with the most current land development code and other applicable laws and ordinances that may have been enacted after the original approval. 
(m)  Certificate of occupancy or certificate of use. Land shall not be occupied or used and a building shall not hereafter be erected, altered, extended, used, moved, or changed in use until the administrative official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of use. The certificate shall state that the building, structure or proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of the land development code and adopted building codes. Where a certificate of occupancy is not applicable, a certificate of use shall be issued in the same manner as a certificate of occupancy. 
(n)  Permits may be revoked. Where a permit has been issued that is subsequently found to violate any local or state codes, such permit may be revoked upon notice to the applicant, unless the applicant submits a revision to correct the violation and the village accepts the revision. 
(o)  Easements not to be adversely affected by permits. Where real property is encumbered by one or more easements for drainage purposes, canal maintenance, water, sewage, gas, telephone, power lines, fire lanes, or similar purposes and the easement is of record, by deed, survey, plat, land use map, or otherwise, and is of notice to the village, no permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefore secures from the easement owner a written statement that the proposed use, building or structure, if installed in the proposed manner, will not interfere with the owner's reasonable use of the easement. 
(p)  Placement and removal of construction materials/site grading. Construction materials and equipment shall not be deposited on any premises, lot or proposed building site prior to the obtaining of a building permit as required herein. Only materials applicable to the permitted work on the site shall be placed on that site. A site shall not be graded nor shall trees be removed until a permit is issued. Surplus materials, construction debris, and construction equipment shall be removed from the premises if the job is abandoned or delayed, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-14,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-7,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2017-3,  2, 5-9-17) 
Div. 3.2. - Development approvals by the administrative official. 
(a)  Permitted use. The administrative official shall have the authority to review and act on any application for development approval for a permitted use in the zoning district in which development is proposed. Every permitted use, except as exempted below, must receive site plan approval. After reviewing all staff comments, the administrative official shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan based on the criteria for site plan approval contained in division 3.4 of this land development code. The administrative official shall provide written comments documenting any conditions of approval. If the site plan is denied, the administrative official shall specify in writing the reasons for the denial. Notwithstanding the above, the administrative official shall have the authority to require that the village council review and act upon the site plan in cases where, in his opinion, the proposed site plan has a design, intensity or scale that may produce potential area-wide impacts that should be considered in a hearing before the village council. 
(b)  Improvements exempted from site plan review. The administrative official shall have the authority to review and act on the following improvements that are exempted from site plan review: 
1.  Single-family dwellings and duplexes; 
2.  Changes in plant species, or increases to landscaped or pervious area; 
3.  Decks or walkways which do not exceed 12 inches above existing grade and do not reduce the landscaped or pervious area below the minimum requirements; 
4.  Utility sheds which shall not exceed 100 square feet, so long as each lot or contiguous area under unity of title does not exceed one shed per property; 
5.  Fences; 
6.  Flag poles; 
7.  Docks, davits and boat-lifts. 
Exemption of any items listed above shall not eliminate any of the enumerated items from the requirements of the site plan review process if the item is a part of a proposed project or improvement that is subject to site plan review. 
(c)  Minor site plan amendments. Any changes or amendments to an approved site plan shall require a re-submission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. However, if the administrative official determines that the requested site plan change is minor, the administrative official shall have the authority to review and approve the minor change with or without conditions. The administrative official shall not approve the site plan unless he finds that the changes: 
1.  Are compliant with minimum requirements of the Code; 
2.  Are compliant with concurrency requirements; and 
3.  Satisfactorily address land use compatibility, buffering, screening, and landscaping. 
Prior to the release of a certificate of occupancy, a certificate of use or a release of bond, the applicant shall file with the village an as-built site plan showing the approved changes. 
(d)  Moving of buildings and structures; bond required. No building or structure shall be moved from one lot or premises to another unless the building or structure shall thereupon be made to conform with all the provisions of this land development code. A building shall not be moved on, across or along a public street without a permit being obtained from the administrative official. The building to be moved shall be routed over public rights-of-way as directed by the administrative official. The administrative official shall require as a condition of a permit to move a building or structure from one lot or premises to another that the permit holder post a bond, either in cash or surety company bond, meeting with the approval of the administrative official. The bond may be a cash bond, not to exceed $2,500.00, deposited with the village clerk, or a surety bond, payable to the village, and shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance in all respects with the building and land development codes pertaining to the area on which such a building is to be moved. 
(e)  Administrative (de minimus) variances. When the literal or strict enforcement of the provisions of this land development code cause unusual, exceptional, unnecessary difficulties or undue hardship or injustice because of the size of the tract, parcel or lot, the topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas or the existence of other unusual physical conditions, the administrative official or his or her designee may grant a variance for setback requirements in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  A variance for a setback requirement shall be submitted to the administrative official or his or her designee in the form of a written application prepared by the village and accompanied by a fee in an amount as established by the village from time to time. 
2.  The application shall set forth the special conditions and circumstances that exist which are particular to the land involved and are not applicable to other surrounding lands and the basis for seeking to encroach into the setback requirements. 
3.  The applicant shall clearly identify how a literal interpretation of the provisions of the land development code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties located in the village and that the granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is otherwise denied other plans. 
4.  To approve a variance application, the administrative official shall find: 
a.  That the requirements of this subdivision (e) have been met; and 
b.  The reasons set forth in the application justify the administrative granting of the variance; and 
c.  That the variance is the minimal variance that would make possible the use of the land; and 
d.  That the granting of the variance would be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Code of Ordinances; and 
e.  That the variance shall not be injurious to the surrounding property owners and impair desirable general development of the neighborhood or the community as proposed in the village's comprehensive plan or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare. 
5.  The denial of an administrative variance shall be pursuant to a written development order. 
6.  An administrative variance granted under this division shall not exceed a total of 12 inches into any one setback. 
7.  After a determination by the administrative official, an applicant shall have 30 days from the issuance of an order denying an application for variance to file an appeal with the village clerk for the matter to be heard by the zoning board. The appeal shall be filed with the village clerk no later than 30 days from the date of the order. The appeal shall clearly state that the denial of the application for the variance constitutes an error by the administrative official and that the interpretation of any portion of the regulations or an interpretation of the criteria set forth in this division. Any aggrieved property owner who shall file an appeal of the denial of the administrative variance shall have the opportunity to have the matter heard before the zoning board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.3. - Conditional use approval. 
(a)  Generally. The purpose of this division is to ensure that a conditional use or expansion of an existing conditional use shall only be permitted on specific sites where the proposed use or expansion may be adequately accommodated without generating adverse impacts on properties and land uses within the immediate vicinity. This division sets forth the procedures and criteria for approval of conditional uses and expansion of existing conditional uses on specific sites. A conditional use shall be permitted only upon a finding that the proposed use satisfies the provisions of this division and the land development code. 
(b)  Review procedures. 
1.  Application and administrative official review. The application for a conditional use, or for expansion of an existing conditional use, shall follow the general procedures in division 3.1 of this land development code, as supplemented by this division. A mandatory pre-application and site plan approval is required. An application for a conditional use shall describe how the specific land use proposed meet the criteria described below, and shall include a description of any measures proposed to mitigate against possible adverse impacts of the proposed conditional use on properties in the immediate vicinity. In addition, the application shall clearly describe: 
a.  Scale and intensity of the proposed conditional use as measured by the following: 
i.  Floor area ratio and impervious surface ratio; 
ii.  Traffic generation; 
iii.  Square feet of enclosed building for each specific use; 
iv.  Proposed employment; 
v.  Proposed number and type of service vehicles; and 
vi.  Off-street parking needs. 
b.  On- or off-site improvement needs generated by the proposed conditional use and not identified on the preceding list to include the following: 
i.  Utilities; 
ii.  Accessory structures or facilities; 
iii.  Roadway or signalization improvements, or other similar improvements; 
iv.  Public facility improvements required to ensure compliance with concurrency management provisions provided in the Code; and 
v.  Other unique facilities or structures proposed as part of site improvements. 
c.  On-site amenities proposed to enhance site and planned improvements. Amenities may include mitigative techniques such as: 
i.  Open space; 
ii.  Setbacks from adjacent properties; 
iii.  Screening and buffers; 
iv.  Landscaped berms to mitigate against adverse impacts to adjacent sites; and 
v.  Mitigative techniques to abate smoke, odor, noise, and other noxious impacts. 
2.  Action by village council. Upon receipt of the administrative official's report and recommendations, and concurrent with its consideration of the site plan, the village council shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to division 3.8 of this land development code. The village council may continue a hearing for up to one month, if necessary, in order to gather additional information. No conditional use shall be acted upon until the required public hearing has been held with required notice. The village council shall conduct a quasi-judicial hearing pursuant to the Village Code of Ordinances, and shall issue a written order approving, approving with conditions, or denying the conditional use. The written order shall contain a written record of findings and any conditions of approval. 
(c)  Specific criteria for approving a conditional use. A conditional use shall be permitted upon a finding by the village council that the proposed use, application, and site plan comply with the criteria herein specified. A conditional use shall be denied if the village determines that the proposed use does not meet the criteria herein provided or is adverse to the public interest. The applicant shall demonstrate the following: 
1.  Land use compatibility. The conditional use, including its proposed scale and intensity, traffic generating characteristics, and off-site impacts shall be compatible and harmonious with adjacent land uses and shall not adversely impact land use activities in the immediate vicinity. 
2.  Sufficient site size, site specifications, and infrastructure to accommodate the proposed use. The size and shape of the site, the proposed access and internal circulation, and the urban design must be adequate to accommodate the proposed scale and intensity of conditional use requested. The site shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate screening, buffers, landscaping, open space, off-street parking, efficient internal traffic circulation, infrastructure and similar site plan improvements needed to mitigate against potential adverse impacts of the proposed use. 
3.  Compliance with the comprehensive master development plan and land development code. The conditional use and site plan shall comply with environmental, zoning and other applicable regulations of this land development code, and shall be consistent with the comprehensive development master plan. 
4.  Proper use of mitigative techniques. The conditional use and site plan shall incorporate mitigative techniques needed to prevent adverse impacts to adjacent land uses. In addition, the design scheme shall appropriately address off-site impacts to ensure that land use activities in the immediate vicinity, including community infrastructure, are not burdened with adverse impacts detrimental to the general public health, safety and welfare. 
5.  Hazardous waste. No conditional use which generates hazardous waste or uses hazardous materials shall be located in the village unless the specific location is consistent with the comprehensive development master plan, land development code, and does not adversely impact wellfields, aquifer recharge areas, or other conservation resources, as may be applicable now or in the future. The proposed use shall not generate hazardous waste or require use of hazardous materials in its operation unless the village council approves conditions requiring mitigative techniques designed to prevent any adverse impact to the general health, safety and welfare. The plan shall provide for appropriate identification of hazardous waste and hazardous material, and regulate its use, storage and transfer consistent with best management principles and practices. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-14,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 3.4. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that: 
1.  Development of individual sites is consistent with all applicable land use regulations and all other applicable standards and requirements as set forth by the village, prior to issuance of development permits; 
2.  Development approvals are based upon the provision and availability of adequate public facilities and services coincident with the impact of the development; 
3.  Development and supportive facilities and services further the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morale and general welfare; and 
4.  Development is compatible and coordinated with existing and anticipated development within the immediate area surrounding the site. 
(b)  Development and uses requiring site plan review. All permitted, conditional and accessory uses shall require site plan approval unless otherwise exempted from such approval by this land development code, or unless waived by the village council pursuant to this land development code. No structure or parking area, or part thereof, or land or water, shall be erected or used, or any change of use consummated, nor shall any building permit be issued therefore unless a site plan for such structure or use shall have been submitted, reviewed and approved pursuant to the provisions of this land development code. All buildings, building or structural alterations or remodeling, where said alterations or remodeling affect 50 percent or more of the floor area of the principal building or use, or the cost of said alterations or remodeling exceeds 50 percent of the fair market value of the improvement of the site prior to the alterations or improvements, shall require site plan approval. All land improvements, site alterations, building expansions of any nature whatsoever, shall comply with these site plan regulations. 
(c)  Waiver. The village council shall have the authority to waive site plan requirements for modifications to existing structures that are necessary in order to comply with the requirements of the village's adopted life safety code. 
(d)  Application. All site plan applications shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions herein prior to obtaining a building or other development permit. 
(e)  Exemptions from site plan review. No site plan review shall be required under this division for the following improvements: 
1.  Utility sheds which shall not exceed 100 square feet (one shed per property). 
2.  Permeable decks or walkways which do not exceed 12 inches above existing grade and do not reduce the landscaped or pervious area below the minimum requirements. 
3.  Flag poles. 
4.  Fences. 
5.  Docks, davits and boat lifts. 
6.  Change in plant species, increases to landscaped and/or pervious area. 
7.  Single-family and duplex dwellings. 
The above exemptions (excluding (7)) shall be included as part of any development project otherwise requiring site plan review. 
(f)  Pre-application. 
1.  Pre-application conference required. In order to expedite the review of site plan, coordinate its local review in respect to the provisions of all applicable village ordinances and to inform the village of a site plan in preparation, one or more pre-application conferences between the applicant and the administrative official shall be required. 
2.  Purpose. The pre-application conference(s), while informal, will serve several purposes and focus on the following items: 
a.  To inform the village of any site plans in progress together with the scale and character of the plan so that the village may recognize the proposed development in any of its physical or facility planning for the entire village. 
b.  To inform the applicant of the village's informal response as to the scale and character of the proposed development and to alert the applicant to all applicable ordinances and regulations as well as any specific areas of concern that the village may have for that specific site or proposed plan; 
c.  To clarify and inform both the applicant and the village with respect to the site plan review procedure. 
(g)  Application. 
1.  Village review. 
(a)  The village may, if in its opinion it is necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of an application for site plan review when it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Encompasses two or more acres of land within the application; 
2.  Proposes 50 or more dwelling units and/or 20,000 square feet of nonresidential building area; 
3.  Requires, by the nature and content of the application, professional expertise in one or more professions not available on the administrative staff of the village. 
(b)  The cost of retaining the consultants shall be borne by the applicant. 
2.  Submission requirements. Applications for site plan review shall be accompanied by the following information and processed by the village only after the applicant has complied with the following procedural requirements. 
(a)  Twelve copies of all site plans and required supporting documentation together with an application signed by the owner of record shall be submitted to the administrative official. Each application shall be accompanied by the application fee as specified by resolution of the village council and no application will be accepted nor a review conducted until the fee is paid to the village. 
(b)  Any portion of a site plan involving architecture, landscape architecture, engineering or surveying shall be certified by the individual responsible for the portion of the site plan and shall bear the seal, registration number, name and address of said individual. 
(c)  All site plans shall be prepared at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 40 feet and shall be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(d)  All site plans submitted for review and approval shall include the following information for all existing and proposed improvements: 
1.  Location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet, indicating state plane coordinates, if available; 
2.  Every site plan shall show the name and address of the owner and/or developer, the county, state, legal description, north arrow, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets. In addition, it shall reserve a blank space on the front page; three inches wide and five inches high for the use by the village. 
3.  A boundary survey, including legal description of the tract, at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, showing the location and type of boundary evidence. The boundary survey shall be related to the state plane coordinate system if available. 
4.  Deed, title abstract, and verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the subject property, except publicly held corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the principal, corporate officers and directors shall be included. 
5.  All existing and proposed street right-of-way reservations and easements, canals and watercourses, their names, numbers and widths; as well as the owner, existing zoning and present use of all adjoining properties. 
6.  The density or intensity of land use to be allocated to all parts of the site to be developed together, with tabulations by area and percentages thereof. Such allocations shall include, but not be limited to: 
i.  Total site area; 
ii.  Density (dwelling units per acre) or intensity (units per acre or ratio of gross floor area to total site area); 
iii.  Total floor area by floor; 
iv.  Percentage of site covered by building(s); 
v.  Pervious space and landscaped area(s); 
vi.  Vehicular circulation and parking area(s); 
vii.  Location, area and use of all other portions of the site; i.e. setbacks. 
7.  The location, size and character of any common open space, and the form of organization proposed to own and maintain any common open space. 
8.  The proposed location, general use, number of floors, height and the net and gross floor area for each building to include outside display areas, and where applicable, the number, size and type of dwellings. 
9.  Location, type and size of vehicular entrances to the site. 
10.  Location, type, size and height of fencing, walls and screen planting where required under the provisions of this land development code. 
11.  Off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating type of surface, size, angle and width of stalls and aisles, together with a schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required by the provisions of this land development code; 
12.  All proposed signs and exterior lighting; 
13.  The provisions for the disposition of open space and a landscape and irrigation plan indicating the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials including the limits or extent of tree removal or tree protection including compliance with the village's tree regulations in article 6. 
14.  All existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Water and sanitary sewer or on-site septic tank; 
ii.  Telephone, electric, gas and other utilities; 
iii.  Solid waste disposal facilities including containers or other equipment; 
15.  Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and stormwater in accordance with the adopted design criteria and standards of the village, as required in division 5.20, Table 5-10, indicating the location, size, type and grade of ditches, catch-basins and pipes and connections to the existing drainage system on site system, as well as compliance with all DERM criteria. 
16.  Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading and construction. 
17.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet, except where existing ground is on a slope of less than two percent, in which case either one-foot contours or spot elevations shall be provided where necessary, but not more than 100 feet apart in both directions. 
18.  Proposed finished grading by contours supplemented where necessary by spot elevations and in particular at those locations along lot lines. 
19.  All horizontal dimensions shown on the site plan shall be in feet and decimal fractions of a foot to the nearest one-tenth of a foot; and all bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest second. 
20.  In the case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for building permits are intended to be filed. 
21.  Any additional data, plans or specifications which the applicant believes is pertinent and will assist in clarifying the application. 
22.  All requested variances that would require approval of the village. Said variances shall be obtained prior to submittal of the site plan application. 
23.  Concurrency facilities and other utilities or services. Site plans shall satisfy concurrency management requirements of this land development code. The application shall identify demands on concurrency facilities generated by the proposed development and identify how the demands shall be accommodated through improvements. The site plan shall also list the utility providers currently serving the site, together with a description of the existing infrastructure serving the site. Include on the site plan the location, design and character of all concurrency facilities and other utilities, such as underground or overhead electric lines, gas transmission lines, or other similar facilities or services. Concurrency facilities shall include the following: 
i.  Potable water supply. Identify projected average daily potable water demands at the end of each development phase and specify the consumption rates which have been assumed for the projection. 
Provide proof of coordination with the county water and sewer department. Assess the present and projected capacity of the water supply system and the ability of such system to provide adequate water for the proposed development. 
Describe measures taken to ensure the water pressure and flow will be adequate for fire protection for the type of construction proposed. Provide sizing of distribution lines, rim and invert elevations, direction of flow and top and bottom elevations. 
Denote both planned system improvements required to establish or maintain adopted level of service and proposed funding resources to provide these improvements. 
ii.  Wastewater management. Where septic tank and waste disposal drain fields are proposed, provide proof of coordination with The county department of environmental resource management. 
Where the county sewage system is to service the site, provide projected average daily flows of wastewater generated by the development at the end of each development phase. Describe proposed treatment system, method and degree of treatment, quality of effluent, and location of effluent and sludge disposal areas. Identify method and responsibilities for operation and maintenance of facilities. Provide sizing of collection lines, rim and invert elevations, direction of flow and top and bottom elevations. 
If public facilities are to be utilized, provide proof of coordination with the county water and sewer department. Assess the present and projected capacity of the treatment and transmission facilities. 
Denote any planned system improvements required to establish or maintain adopted level of service. 
iii.  Water quality. Discuss disposal areas, septic tank drain field, urban runoff areas impervious surfaces, and construction related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of potential pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and after construction. 
Identify any wastewater disposal areas, septic tank drain field, urban runoff areas impervious surfaces, and construction related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of these potential pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and after construction. 
Describe plans for re-vegetation and landscaping of cleared sites including a completion schedule for such work. 
iv.  Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan for the site shall be provided, including: 
Design and specification to comply with concurrency management; 
Retention of runoff or discharge of such runoff into adequately sized natural vegetative filtration areas in manner approximating the natural runoff regime; 
Permanent drainage systems which make maximum use of natural drainage patterns, vegetative retention and filtration; and 
Evidence that the proposed drainage improvements shall accommodate stormwater run-off without adversely impacting natural systems or the village's adopted level of service for drainage. 
v.  Solid waste. Identify projected average daily volumes of solid waste generated by the development at the end of each phase. Indicate proposed methods of treatment and disposal, including identification of any hazardous waste and means of disposal. Provide proof of coordination with the county department of solid waste management. Assess the present and projected capacity of the solid waste treatment and disposal system and the ability of such facilities to provide adequate service to the proposed development. Provide proposed location and screening of containers or other equipment. 
vi  Roadway. Traffic studies shall be prepared by a licensed state traffic engineer. Provide a projection of the expected vehicle trip generation at the completion of each development phase. Describe in terms of external trip generation and average daily as well as peak hour traffic. Evaluate the capacity of the existing roadway network serving the development. Provide recommendations for any required improvements to the existing network required by the proposed development including additional right-of-way, roadway improvements, additional paved lanes, traffic signalization, access and egress controls, and other similar improvements. 
vii.  Recreation. Identify projected demand generated by the development and describe land and facility improvements provided to ensure the village's adopted level of service is not adversely impacted. 
viii.  Fire protection. Identify existing and proposed hydrant locations in relationship to building(s) and other fire protection systems. The applicant may be required by the county fire rescue department to provide fire wells to augment the available water supply. 
ix.  Other public facilities. Discuss provisions included in the proposed development to minimize adverse effects upon the following facilities: educational, police, fire protection, health care and disaster preparedness, telephone, electric power, gas, and other utilities. Include map of the service areas of all existing and proposed public facilities (such as sewage, water supplies, fire protection, health care) which serve the site, and a map of the transportation network impacting the site and surrounding area. 
x.  Historic and archaeological resource protection. Include a review of the project's impact on archaeological and historic resources. 
(h)  Submission and review procedures. 
1.  An application for a site plan review shall be made to the village prior to an application for a building or development permit and will only be accepted if the application complies with all other provisions of the Village Code. 
2.  Except as may otherwise be required by law or administrative procedures, all required county, regional, state or federal agency approvals shall be obtained prior to the submission of an application for site plan review. In cases where intergovernmental coordination efforts are incomplete, the applicant shall provide evidence of good faith efforts towards resolving intergovernmental coordination issues. 
3.  Upon receipt of a site plan application, the village shall have ten working days to determine its appropriateness and completeness and accept or reject the application. As soon as practical after the acceptance of the application, the administrative official shall either approve the site plan or refer the application, together with all supporting documentation and staff recommendations to the village council for its review and action. 
4.  Upon receipt of the application, the village council shall, within 120 days of the original acceptance date by the village, review said site plan and take one of the following actions together with its findings in respect to the proposed development as set forth in this division. 
(a)  Approval as submitted. 
(b)  Approval with changes and/or special conditions. 
(c)  Denial. 
(i)  Public hearing. Prior to taking action an any site plan submitted, the village council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties shall be heard. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in division 3.8. 
(j)  Findings. 
1.  The granting or granting with conditions or changes of approval or denial by written order shall include not only conclusions, but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without changes or special conditions, or the denial. The written order shall set forth with particularity in what respects the plan would or would not be in the public interest including, but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the following: 
(a)  In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the comprehensive development master plan and the purpose and intent of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  In what respects the plan is or is not in conformance with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  In what respects the plan is or is not in conformance with the village subdivision regulations and all other applicable village requirements including the design and construction of streets, utility facilities and other essential services. 
(d)  In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with good design standards in respect to all external relationships including but not limited to: 
1.  Relationship to adjoining properties. 
2.  Internal circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian. 
3.  Disposition of open space, use of screening or buffering and preservation of existing natural features including trees. 
4.  Building arrangements both between buildings in the proposed development and those adjoining the site. 
(e)  In what respects the plan is or is not in conformance with the village policy in respect to sufficiency of ownership, guarantee for completion of all required improvements and the guarantee for continued maintenance. 
(k)  The action taken by the village council shall be in the form of a written order and include the council's findings in respect to the proposed development as set forth. 
(l)  Upon the granting of approval, either as submitted or with changes and/or special conditions, the administrative official shall upon application, issue a building permit for a portion or all of the proposed development after it is found that the application is in compliance with the approved site plan, state building code, and all other village, county, state and federal requirements. 
(m)  If it shall appear, at any time, to the administrative official, that the application and accompanying plans and documentation are, in any material respect, false or misleading, or that work is being done upon the premises differing materially from that called for in the application or the approved site plan, the administrative official may revoke the building permit, consistent with the state building code. Thereupon, it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to surrender it to the administrative official. 
(n)  If, within 12 months of the date of approval of an application for site plan review, a building permit has not been applied for, the approved site plan becomes null and void provided, however, that the village council and applicant may jointly agree to extend such period of approval for a maximum period of six months. 
(o)  Any changes or amendments to an approved site plan shall require a resubmission in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(p)  Appeals. Within 30 days of rendition of the development order by the Village Clerk, the applicant may appeal the decision under division 3.9 of this land development code. 
(q)  Transferability. In the event the property receiving site plan approval shall be sold, transferred, leased, or the ownership thereof changes in any way whatsoever, the site plan approval shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-14,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.5. - Variances. 
(a)  Generally. As used in this land development code, a variance is a relaxation of the terms of the land development code, where such relaxation in term will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(b)  Permitted variances. 
1.  By zoning board. A variance is authorized to be granted by the zoning board only for setback lines; lot width; street frontage; lot depth; landscape or open space requirements; height limitations; yard regulations; fences and walls; signs, and other matters specifically permitted as variances pursuant to this land development code. 
2.  By village council. A variance may be granted, by only the village council, for off-street parking and the requirements of the flood regulations in division 6.3. 
(c)  Prohibited variances. The zoning board may not grant a variance for an unauthorized use, one that is contrary to the comprehensive development master plan or land development code, or one that is not permitted in the zoning district as either a permitted or conditional use. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district or because of prior variances granted. Similarly, a variance shall not be granted which increases or has the effect of increasing density or intensity of a use beyond that permitted by the comprehensive development master plan or this land development code. 
(d)  Application. The applicant shall submit an application for a variance pursuant to the general procedures in division 3.1. A "complete application" shall include the application form, the fee, a current survey, building elevations, a site plan, and a landscape plan where required, as well as all supplemental information required by the administrative official and necessary to render determinations related to the variance request. New or amended site plans shall not be accepted after notification has been given by mail or by publication for the public hearing on the variance. 
(e)  Quasi-judicial and public hearing. Upon receipt of a complete application for a variance, the zoning board or village council, as applicable shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing upon the application pursuant to the requirements of the Village Code. Members of the general public shall be permitted to speak at the hearing. 
(f)  Zoning board or village council action and criteria for approval. After the hearing, the zoning board or village council as applicable shall adopt a motion granting, granting with conditions, or denying the variance which shall be memorialized in a written order. 
1.  Criteria. In order to authorize any variance from the terms of this land development code, the zoning board or village council, as applicable, shall find all of the following: 
a.  Variance consistent with authorized powers. That the variance is in fact a variance as set forth in the land development code and within the province of the board or village council, as applicable, based upon the opinion of the village attorney. 
b.  Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
c.  Conditions not created by applicant. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
d.  Special privileges not conferred. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this land development code to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district. 
e.  Hardship conditions exist. That literal interpretation of the provisions of this land development code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of the land development code and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant. 
f.  Only the minimum variance granted. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
g.  Not injurious to public welfare or intent of the land development code. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the comprehensive development master plan and this land development code and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
2.  Conditions and safeguards may be imposed. In granting any variance, the zoning board or village council, as applicable may prescribe appropriate conditions to mitigate the proposed variance and to ensure safeguards in conformity with the comprehensive development master plan and this Code or any other duly enacted ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the land development code and shall nullify the variance. 
3.  Time limit shall be imposed. The zoning board or village council, as applicable shall prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall begin, and such time shall not exceed six months from the date of the written order unless an application for development permit has been filed. 
(g)  Written order. Action by the zoning board or village council upon the variance shall be announced by the chairperson or mayor, as applicable, immediately following the vote determining such action and shall thereafter be embodied in a written order prepared by the administrative official and executed by the village clerk. The applicant shall record the written order of approval in the public records of the clerk of the circuit and county court and shall return the original order to the village clerk. 
(h)  Effect and limitation of variance. A written order granting a variance shall be deemed applicable to the development for which it is granted and not to the individual applicant, provided that no written order granting a variance shall be deemed valid with respect to any use of the premises other than the use specified in the application for a variance. Any variance not exercised within a period of six months shall be deemed withdrawn and invalidated. 
(i)  Re-application. Re-application for the same or similar piece of property requesting the same or similar variance cannot be made within one year from the date the application was originally denied by the board. Upon the applicant's submittal of the same, the administrative official shall determine if the changed conditions exist. If the administrative official determines that a hearing should be held on the applicant's request, the village clerk shall provide due public notice of the scheduled public hearing in the same manner as required for the original variance request. If no hearing is deemed appropriate, the application shall be resubmitted no sooner than one year following the date of the public hearing on the original variance application. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-14,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.6. - Amendment to the official zoning map or the text of the land development code. 
(a)  Application. Application for an amendment to the text of this land development code or to the official zoning map shall follow the general procedures of division 3.1, except that the village or its representatives shall not be required to submit an application. The application shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  A statement identifying the text or map area proposed to be amended. 
2.  An explanation of the text of the amendment desired. 
3.  An explanation of the need and justification for the proposed change. 
4.  For an amendment to the official zoning map, the application shall also include the following information: 
a.  A legal description and a description by street address of the property whose zoning designation is proposed to be changed. 
b.  Current and proposed comprehensive development master plan land use map designation for the subject property. 
c.  The existing and proposed zoning designation for the subject property. 
d.  The existing and proposed use of the subject property, if applicable. 
e.  A verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property upon which the amendment is sought. In the case of publicly held corporations, the names and addresses of the principal corporate officers, directors and any shareholder owning more than ten percent of the interest in the corporation shall be disclosed. 
(b)  Process and criteria for review. All proposed amendments, regardless of the source, shall be evaluated by the administrative official, the local planning agency and the village council. In evaluating proposed amendments, the village council shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive development master plan, including the adopted infrastructure minimum levels of service standards and the concurrency management program. 
2.  Whether the proposal is in conformance with all applicable requirements of the Code of Ordinances, including the land development code. 
3.  Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development conditions have changed since the effective date of the existing regulations, and whether such changes support or work against the proposed change in land use policy. 
4.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved, the impact on adjacent or neighboring properties, consistency with existing development, as well as compatibility with existing and proposed land use. 
5.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in demands on transportation systems, public facilities and services, exceeding the capacity of such facilities and services, existing or programmed, including transportation, water and wastewater services, solid waste disposal, drainage, recreation, education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities and services. 
6.  Whether, and to the extent to which, the proposal would result in adverse impacts on the natural environment, including consideration of wetland protection, preservation of groundwater aquifer, wildlife habitats, and vegetative communities. 
7.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect the property values in the affected area, or adversely affect the general welfare. 
8.  Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and compatible land use pattern. Any positive and negative effects on such pattern shall be identified. 
9.  Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this land development code. 
10.  Other matters which the local planning agency or the village council in its legislative discretion may deem appropriate. 
(c)  Final action by the village council. The applicant shall be advised of the time and place of the village council hearings. The notice and hearings on the proposed amendment shall be provided pursuant to this land development code and the Florida Statutes. After the necessary public hearing(s), the village council shall take action to deny or approve the application, or approve it with modifications or conditions. The village council shall issue a written development order if the proposed amendment is denied. If denied, the applicant may resubmit the application after a period of one year from the denial. 
(d)  Official zoning map. Each amendment to zoning district boundaries or other zoning requirement as portrayed on the official zoning map shall be entered promptly on the official zoning map after the amendment has been approved by the village council. The administrative official shall be responsible for assuring that the physical updating and amendment of the official zoning district map is carried out in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.7. - Amendment to the comprehensive master development plan. 
(a)  Application. An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive master development plan or to the future land use map of the plan shall follow the general procedures of division 3.1(a)-(f), except that the village or its representatives shall not be required to submit an application. 
1.  The application shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  A statement identifying the section proposed to be amended. 
b.  An explanation of the text of the amendment desired. 
c.  An explanation of the need and justification for the proposed change, including the data and analysis that supports the amendment. 
d.  An explanation of the how the proposed amendment meets the requirements of F.S.  163.3161 et seq., "The Community Planning Act." 
2.  For an amendment to the future land use map, the application shall also include the following information: 
a.  A legal description and a description by street address of the property whose land use designation is proposed to be changed. 
b.  Current and proposed future land use map designation for the subject property. 
c.  The existing and proposed zoning designation for the subject property. 
d.  The existing and proposed use of the subject property, if applicable. 
e.  A verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property upon which the amendment is sought. In the case of publicly held corporations, the names and addresses of the principal corporate officers, directors and any shareholder owning more than ten percent of the interest in the corporation shall be disclosed. 
(b)  Process and criteria for review. All proposed amendments, regardless of the source, shall be evaluated by the administrative official, the local planning agency and the village council. If the amendment is proposed by the village, the administrative official shall prepare the necessary information for the amendment to be reviewed pursuant to the requirements of ch. 163.3161 et seq., "The Community Planning Act." In evaluating proposed amendments, the village council shall exercise its legislative discretion and may consider the following: 
1.  Whether the proposal is internally consistent with the comprehensive development master plan, including the adopted infrastructure minimum levels of service standards and the concurrency management program. 
2.  Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development conditions have changed since the effective date of the existing comprehensive development master plan, and whether such changes support or work against the proposed amendment. 
3.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved, the impact on adjacent or neighboring properties, consistency with existing development, as well as compatibility with existing and proposed neighboring property land use. 
4.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect the property values in the affected area, or adversely affect the general welfare. 
5.  Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and compatible land use pattern. 
6.  Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and interest of the comprehensive development master plan. 
7.  Whether the proposed amendment meets the requirements of F.S.  163.3161 et seq. 
8.  Other matters which the local planning agency or the village council, in its legislative discretion, may deem appropriate. 
(c)  Final action by the village council. The applicant shall be advised of the time and place of the village council hearings. The notice and hearings on the proposed amendment shall be provided pursuant to Florida Statutes. After the necessary public hearing(s), the village council shall take action to deny or approve the application, or approve it with modifications or conditions for purposes of transmittal to the state department of community affairs pursuant to the Florida Statutes. 
1.  If denied, the applicant may resubmit the application after a period of one year from the denial. 
2.  If approved for purposes of transmittal, the village shall thereafter provide the necessary administrative support for the state review process required under F.S.  163.3161 et seq., "The Community Planning Act." The village council shall have the legislative discretion to adopt, adopt with conditions, or not adopt the amendment once the state review process has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.8. - Public hearing and notice. 
(a)  Generally. When an application for development approval is subject to a public hearing, the administrative official shall ensure that the necessary public hearing is scheduled for the decision-making body reviewing the application and that proper notice of the public hearing is provided, as set forth herein. All notices for public hearings shall include the following information: 
1.  Identify the applicant, if other than the village. 
2.  Indicate the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
3.  Describe the property involved by street address or by legal description, and area of the subject property. A map may be substituted for the legal description or as required by state law. 
4.  Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the proposal being noticed. 
5.  Identify the village department(s) where the public may inspect the application, staff report and related materials during normal business hours. 
6.  Include a statement that affected parties may appear at the public hearing, be heard and submit evidence with respect to the application. 
7.  Include other information as may be required by law. 
(b)  Mailed notice. When the provisions of this land development code require that mailed notice be provided, the village clerk shall prepare the written notice and provide the list of property owners to be notified, and the village shall be responsible for mailing the notice. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, properly addressed, and postage paid. The applicant shall pay the cost of postage to the village prior to deposit of the notices in the United States mail. Notice by mailing is a courtesy only and no action taken by the village shall be voided by the failure of any individual property owner to receive such notice. The property owners required to be provided notice by this division shall be determined from a certified copy of the most recent county tax roll. 
(c)  Published notice. When the provisions of this land development code require that notice be published, the applicant shall be responsible for the cost of village staff preparing the content of the notice and publishing the notice in the non-legal section of the local newspaper of general circulation that has been selected by the village. This notice shall be published at least 30 days prior to the required public hearing, except where provided otherwise in this land development code. 
(d)  Posted notice. When the provisions of this land development code require that notice be posted on the property subject to the application, the administrative official shall be responsible for posting the property, and shall: 
1.  Place the signs on the property that is the subject of the application for at least 30 days prior to a required or requested hearing. 
2.  Place the signs along each street that is adjacent to or runs through the subject property at intervals of not more than 200 feet in a manner that makes them clearly visible to adjacent residents and passers-by. 
3.  Place the signs no more than 25 feet from the street so that the lettering is visible from the street. Where the land does not have frontage on a street, signs shall be erected on the nearest street, with an attached notation indicating generally the direction and distance to the property subject to the application. 
(e)  Affidavit of notice; re-noticing. An affidavit and photographic evidence shall be provided by the applicant before the public hearing demonstrating that the applicant has complied with the applicable notice requirements set forth in this division. Failure to comply with the applicable notice requirements shall result in the postponement and re-noticing of the public hearing. All costs of re-noticing the public hearing shall be borne by the party failing to comply with the applicable notice requirements. 
(f)  Comprehensive development master plan. Notice for public hearings on applications for amendments to the comprehensive development master plan shall be noticed as follows: 
1.  Text or map amendments initiated by the village shall be noticed by publication in accordance with the provisions of F.S.  163.3184. In addition, property owners of record within a 2,500-foot radius of the property subject to map amendments shall be provided mailed notice. 
2.  Text or map amendments initiated by a property owner or governmental agency other than the village, shall be noticed by publication in accordance with the provisions of F.S.  163.3184, and by posting of the property subject to the application. In addition, property owners of record within a 2,500-foot radius of the property subject to map amendments shall be provided mailed notice. 
(g)  Land development code. Notice for public hearings on applications for amendments to the land development code and the official zoning district map shall be noticed as follows: 
1.  Text or map amendments initiated by the village shall be noticed by publication in accordance with the provisions of F.S.  166.041. In addition, property owners of record within a 2,500-foot radius of the property subject to map amendments shall be provided mailed notice. 
2.  Text or map amendments initiated by a property owner or governmental agency other than the village shall be noticed by publication in accordance with the provisions of F.S.  166.041, and by posting of the property subject to the application. In addition, property owners of record within a 2,500-foot radius of the property subject to map amendments shall be provided mailed notice. 
(h)  Other development. Public hearings on applications for development permit approvals other than rezoning, including, but not limited to variances, conditional uses, site plans for conditional uses, and plats shall be noticed as follows: 
1.  Posting of the property subject to the application. 
2.  Mailed notice to the property owners or record within a 1,000-foot radius of the property which is the subject of the application. 
3.  Courtesy publication in the non-legal section of the local newspaper of general circulation that has been selected by the village. 
(i)  Appeals of action by the administrative official. An applicant seeking an appeal of the action by the administrative official to the village council shall be responsible for providing notice of the appeal by mailed notice to property owners of record within a 1,000-foot radius of the property subject to the application, and by posting required signs on the subject property. 
(j)  Appeals of action by the zoning board. An applicant seeking an appeal of the action by the zoning board to the village council shall be responsible for notice of the appeal by mailed notice to the property owners of record within a 1,000-foot radius and posting of the property subject to the application. 
(k)  Applicant bears burden of cost. All costs of publication, mailing and posting shall be borne by the applicant. 
(l)  Provisions of Florida Statutes to prevail. Where provisions of the Florida Statutes conflict with provisions of the land development code, the Florida Statutes shall prevail. 
TABLE 3-1 
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 
Permit Notice 
Section Posted Published Mailed Appeal of administrative official 3.8(i) 30 days prior to hearing 30 days prior to hearing 1000 feet radius Appeal of zoning board 3.8(j) 30 days prior to hearing 30 days prior to hearing 1000 feet radius Variance 3.8(h) 30 days prior to hearing 30 days prior to hearing 1000 feet radius Other development permit (i.e., site plan) 3.8(h) 30 days prior to hearing 30 days prior to hearing 1000 feet radius Comprehensive development master plan - Village 3.8(f)1. No 163.3184, F.S. 2500 feet radius for map amendment. Comprehensive development master plan - Owner 3.8(f)2. 30 days prior to hearing for map amendment 163.3184, F.S. 2500 feet radius for map amendment. Land development code - Village 3.8(g)1. No 166.041, F.S. 2500 feet radius for map amendment. Land development code - Owner 3.8(g)2. 30 days prior to hearing for map amendment 166.041, F.S. 2500 feet radius for map amendment.  
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 3.9. - Appeals. 
(a)  Exhaustion of remedies required; rendition of development appeals. No person aggrieved by any decision of the administrative official, the zoning board or the village council pursuant relative to administration of the land development regulations may apply to the court for relief unless that person has first exhausted the remedies provided for in the land development code. Appeals of a final decision shall be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Copy of the record. For the purposes of review by the court, the administrative official shall make available for public inspection and copying the record upon which each final decision of the village council is based. Prior to certifying a copy of any record or portion thereof, the administrative official shall make all necessary corrections in order that the copy is a true and correct copy of the record. The administrative official may make a reasonable charge commensurate with the cost of furnishing the record or any portion thereof. 
(c)  Regulatory takings; vested right. It is the intent of the village council that no decision under this land development code shall constitute a temporary or permanent regulatory taking of private property ("taking") or an abrogation of vested rights ("vested rights abrogation"). 
1.  In the event that any court shall determine that a decision of the village council under this land development code constitutes a taking or vested rights abrogation, such decision of the village council is declared to be non-final and the court is hereby requested to remand the matter to the village council, which shall reconsider the matter in a properly noticed public hearing. 
2.  In the event that a court fails to remand a matter to the village council after finding that a taking or vested rights abrogation has occurred, the administrative official is instructed to forthwith file an application to remedy such taking or vested rights abrogation, which application shall be heard directly by the village council in a properly noticed public hearing. 
3.  The village council may elect to request that any remand or administrative official's application be deferred until a later point in the litigation, including the completion of any judicial appeals. 
(d)  Appeals from decisions of the zoning board. 
1.  An appeal from any decision of the zoning board may be taken to the village council by any person who is aggrieved by such decision. Any person desiring to appeal a decision of the zoning board shall, within 14 days from the date of such decision, file a written notice of appeal with the village clerk, whose duty it shall then become to send written notice of such appeal to all persons previously notified by the zoning board. The matter shall then be heard by the village council at its next meeting, provided at least ten days has intervened between the time of the filing of the notice of appeal and the date of such meeting; if ten days shall not intervene between the time of the filing of the notice and the date of the next meeting, then the appeal shall be heard at the next following regular meeting of the village council. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from until the final disposition of the appeal by the village council. 
2.  Upon the taking of an appeal, the village council shall conduct a de novo hearing and shall consider why the decision of the zoning board should or should not be sustained and/or modified. By resolution, the village council shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the zoning board by a majority vote of all members present. 
3.  An appeal from any decision of the village council, after the final disposition of an appeal from the zoning board, shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-14,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15) 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See definitions, div. 9.2. 

Div. 4.1. - Purpose. 
    This division describes the purpose and intent of each zoning district; identifies permitted, conditional, and prohibited uses by zoning district; and presents size and dimensional regulations for each zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 4.2. - Residential districts. 
(a)  Purpose and densities. The purpose of the residential districts is to help implement comprehensive development master plan residential development objectives and policies. The residential districts established herein designate the maximum residential density that may be developed within the respective residential districts based upon the plan. 
1.  Low density residential districts. 
a.  Low density residential districts shall allow the following density: 
TABLE 4.1 
Low Density Residential Districts Maximum Density Allowed Residential estate: EU-1C One unit per two and one-half gross acres Residential estate: EU-1 One unit per gross acre Residential suburban estate: EU-S One unit per 25,000 gross square feet. Residential modified estate: EU-M One unit per 15,000 net square feet. Residential single-family: RU-1 One unit per 7,500 net square feet. Residential duplex: RU-2 One two-family structure per 7,500 net square feet.  
  
b.  The intent of the low density residential districts is to: Protect the quality and character of residential estates and single-family neighborhoods from encroachment by incompatible development; preserve open space; achieve and maintain densities that are compatible with existing and future developments; promote compatibility with natural features of the land; and minimize burdens on public services and facilities. 
2.  Multi-family residential districts. 
a.  Multi-family residential districts shall allow the following net density: 
TABLE 4.2 
Multi-Family Residential Designations Maximum Net Density Allowed Residential multi-family low density; RU-3 9.3 units per net acre Residential multi-family moderate density: RU-3M 12.9 units per net acre Residential multi-family low-medium density: RU-4L 23 units per net acre Residential multi-family medium-high density: RU-4M 36 units per net acre Residential multi-family high density: RU-4 50 units per net acre  
b.  The intent of the multi-family residential districts is to: Provide opportunities for multiple family development at a density consistent with the needs and values of the village population; reserve open space; achieve and maintain densities that are compatible with existing and anticipated future developments; promote compatibility with natural features of the land; and minimize burden on supportive public services and facilities within the area. 
(b)  Residential estate (EU-1C) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an EU-1C district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the EU-1C district the following uses shall be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the EU-1C district the administrative official may approve the following uses but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory units. An affidavit stating the limited purpose of the unit shall be signed and the owner shall certify that the accessory unit shall remain compliant with the land development code; 
b.  Accessory structures; 
c.  Limited livestock; 
d.  Sale of homegrown produce limited to production and sale of produce grown on the premises; and 
e.  Bee keeping. 
f.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 20 percent of the floor area ratio of the first story of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Lots in the EU-1C district shall contain a minimum of 2.5 gross acres in area, including one-half of the rights-of-way adjacent to the site. 
b.  Maximum density: One principal dwelling unit per 2.5 acres. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet to the top of the parapet. If the roof of the one story structure has a pitch of at least 3/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height, provided the height to the top of the tie beam does not exceed 24 feet. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 35 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof, or sloped roof concealed by a parapet, shall not exceed 27 feet to the top of the roof or parapet. 
Maximum height of the wall: 27 feet. Extensions or encroachments above the exterior wall(s) shall be limited to the roof, chimneys, and vents. 
Maximum height of truss heel: 1 foot. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings that are detached or not physically and permanently attached to the principal building with a structurally interconnected roof that provides interconnectivity between the principal and accessory uses shall not exceed 14 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 15 feet and shall not exceed 18 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 20 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage (applied to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way): 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 20 percent for two-story structures; 25 percent for one-story structures. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 45 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 55 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 150 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 250 feet. The measurement shall be from the centerline of the abutting front right-of-way. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the EU-1C district: 
TABLE 4.3 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in EU-1C District (8) Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Maximum 1st Floor Maximum 2nd Floor Principal one-story structure 50 25 N/A 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 0.25 N/A Principal two-story structure 50 25 N/A 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 0.20 0.10 Accessory-General (2) 15/20 (7) 10 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 5 percent (4) N/A Accessory-Sheds (5) (2) 5 10 5 30 (6) 5 percent N/A  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) See accessory use regulations. 
       (3) Lots whose frontage is less than 135 feet in width shall have an interior side yard setback on each side of 15 percent of the width with a setback of not less than 15 feet. 
       (4) Uncovered swimming pools, pool patios and hard-surfaced tennis courts shall be excluded from F.A.R. calculations but shall be calculated as impervious surface. 
       (5) Less than 100 square feet and less than eight feet in height. 
       (6) Lots whose frontage is less than 150 feet in width shall have a side street setback of 25 feet. 
       (7) Detached accessory structures that are 14 feet or less in height shall be setback a minimum 15 feet from the rear property line; detached accessory structures that are more than 14 feet in height, and no more than the maximum permitted height of 18 feet, shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line. 
       (8) Required setbacks and floor area ratio shall apply to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 2,000 square feet. 
i.  Grandfather clause. Existing structures in EU-1C zoning districts which conform to the Miami-Dade County Code as of March 12, 1996, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the village clerk, shall conform to that Code for setback lines for building additions. 
(c)  Residential estate (EU-1) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an EU-1 district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the EU-1 district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities. 
b.  Cluster developments, subject to the conditional use standards in division 3.3 and division 5.24. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the EU-1 district the administrative official may approve the following uses as an accessory use, and shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory units. An affidavit stating the limited purpose of the unit shall be signed and the owner shall certify that the accessory unit shall remain compliant with the land development code; 
b.  Accessory structures; 
c.  Limited livestock; 
d.  Sale of homegrown produce limited to production and sale of produce grown on the premises; and 
e.  Bee keeping; 
f.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 20 percent of the floor area ratio of the first story of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area: One acre, including one-half of the rights-of-way adjacent to the site. 
b.  Maximum density: One principal dwelling unit per one gross acre. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet to the top of the parapet. If the roof of the one story structure has a pitch of at least 3/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height, provided the height to the top of the tie beam does not exceed 24 feet. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 35 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof, or sloped roof concealed by a parapet, shall not exceed 27 feet to the top of the roof or parapet. 
Maximum height of the wall: 27 feet. Extensions or encroachments above the exterior wall(s) shall be limited to the roof, chimneys, and vents. 
Maximum height of truss heel: 1 foot. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings that are detached or not physically and permanently attached to the principal building with a structurally interconnected roof that provides interconnectivity between the principal and accessory uses shall not exceed 14 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 15 feet and shall not exceed 18 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 20 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage (applied to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way): 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 20 percent for two-story structures; 25 percent for one-story structures. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 45 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 55 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 125 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 200 feet. The measurement shall be from the centerline of the abutting front right-of-way. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the EU-1 district: 
TABLE 4.4 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in EU-1 District (8) Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Maximum 1st Floor Maximum 2nd floor Principal one-story structure 50 25 N/A 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 0.25 N/A Principal two-story structure 50 25 N/A 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 0.20 0.10 Accessory-General (2) 15/20 (7) 10 20 (3) 30 (1)(6) 5 percent (4) N/A Accessory-Sheds (5) (2) 5 10 5 30 (6) 5 percent N/A  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) See accessory use regulations. 
       (3) Lots whose street frontage is less than 135 feet in width shall have an interior side yard setback on each side of 15 percent of the width with a setback of not less than 15 feet. 
       (4) Uncovered swimming pools, pool patios and hard-surfaced tennis courts shall be excluded from F.A.R. calculations but shall be calculated as impervious surface. 
       (5) Less than 100 square feet and less than eight feet in height. 
       (6) Lots whose frontage is less than 125 feet in width shall have a side street setback of 25 feet. 
       (7) Detached accessory structures that are 14 feet or less in height shall be setback a minimum 15 feet from the rear property line; detached accessory structures that are more than 14 feet in height, and no more than the maximum permitted height of 18 feet, shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line. 
       (8) Required setbacks and floor area ratio shall apply to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 1,800 square feet. 
i.  Grandfather clause. Existing structures in EU-1 zoning districts which conform to the Miami-Dade County Code as of March 12, 1996, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village clerk, shall conform to that Code for setback lines for building additions. 
(d)  Residential suburban estate (EU-S) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within the EU-S district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Foster care and group homes with less than seven residents; and 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the EU-S district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the EU-S district administrative official may approve the following uses, but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory units. An affidavit stating the limited purpose of the unit shall be signed and the owner shall certify that the accessory unit shall remain compliant with the land development code; 
b.  Accessory structures; and 
c.  Other accessory uses. Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent out of the total of 30 percent of the floor area ratio of the property for a one-story. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot size: Lots in the EU-S district shall contain a minimum of 25,000 gross square feet in area, including one-half of the rights-of-way adjacent to the site. 
b.  Maximum density: One principal unit per 25,000 square feet in area. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet to the top of the parapet. If the roof of the one story structure has a pitch of at least 3/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height, provided the height to the top of the tie beam does not exceed 24 feet. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 35 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof, or sloped roof concealed by a parapet, shall not exceed 27 feet to the top of the roof or parapet. 
Maximum height of the wall: 27 feet. Extensions or encroachments above the exterior wall(s) shall be limited to the roof, chimneys, and vents. 
Maximum height of truss heel: 1 foot. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings that are detached or not physically and permanently attached to the principal building with a structurally interconnected roof that provides interconnectivity between the principal and accessory uses shall not exceed 14 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 15 feet and shall not exceed 18 feet in height at a minimum required setback of 20 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage (applied to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way): 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 125 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 135 feet. The measurement shall be from the centerline of the abutting front right-of-way. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the EU-S district: 
TABLE 4.5 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in EU-S district (7) Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Maximum 1st Floor Maximum 2nd Floor Principal one-story structure 35 25 N/A 20 (3) 25 (1) 0.30 N/A Principal two-story structure 35 25 N/A 20 (3) 25 (1) 0.30 0.30 Accessory-General (2) 15/20 (6) 10 20 (3) 25 (1) 5 percent (4) N/A Accessory-Sheds (5) (2) 5 10 5 25 (1) 5 percent N/A  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) See accessory use regulations. 
       (3) Lots whose street frontage is less than 135 feet in width shall have an interior side yard setback on each side of 15 percent of the width with a setback of not less than 15 feet. 
       (4) Uncovered swimming pools, pool patios and hard-surfaced tennis courts shall be excluded from F.A.R. calculations but shall be calculated as impervious surface. 
       (5) Less than 100 square feet and less than eight feet in height. 
       (6) Detached accessory structures that are 14 feet or less in height shall be setback a minimum 15 feet from the rear property line; detached accessory structures that are more than 14 feet in height, and no more than the maximum permitted height of 18 feet, shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line. 
       (7) Required setbacks and floor area ratio shall apply to the net lot area, exclusive of public rights-of-way. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 1,500 square feet. 
i.  Grandfather clause. Existing structures in EU-S zoning districts which conform to the Miami-Dade County Code as of March 12, 1996, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village clerk, shall conform to that code for setback lines for building additions. 
(e)  Residential modified estate (EU-M) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an EU-M district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the EU-M district the following uses only may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the EU-M district the following uses shall but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory units. An affidavit stating the limited purpose of the unit shall be signed and the owner shall certify that the accessory unit shall remain compliant with the land development code; 
b.  Accessory structures; and 
c.  Other accessory uses. 
d.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures may occupy no more than an additional five percent of the total 30 percent of the floor area ratio of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Lots in the EU-M district shall contain a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density: One principal unit per 15,000 net square feet (i.e., shall not include any rights-of-way). 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet. If the roof of the structure has a pitch of at least 6/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 35 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof, or sloped roof concealed by a parapet, shall not exceed 27 feet to the top of the roof or parapet. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings that are detached or not physically and permanently attached to the principal building with a structurally interconnected roof that provides interconnectivity between the principal and accessory uses shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 120 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 115 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the EU-M district: 
TABLE 4.6 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in EU-M District. Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street Maximum 1st Floor Maximum 
2nd Floor Principal 25 25 N/A 15 25 (1) 0.30 0.30 Accessory-General (2) 7.5 10 20 30 (1) 5 percent (3) N/A Accessory-Sheds (4) (2) 5 10 5 25 (1) 5 percent N/A  
Notes: 
       (1)  See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2)  See accessory use regulations. 
       (3)  Uncovered swimming pools, pool patios and hard-surfaced tennis courts shall be excluded from F.A.R. calculations but shall be calculated as impervious surface. 
       (4)  Less than 100 square feet and less than eight feet in height. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 1,200 square feet. 
(f)  Single-family residential (RU-1) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-1 district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-1 district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-1 district the administrative official may approve the following uses but only as an accessory use and shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structures; and 
b.  Other accessory uses not involving an additional dwelling unit. 
c.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent out of the total of 35 percent of the floor area ratio of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Lots in the RU-1 district shall contain a minimum of 7,500 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density: One principal unit per 7,500 net square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet. If the roof of the structure has a pitch of at least 6/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 32 feet. Maximum height of the wall: 26 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof shall not exceed 24 feet including the parapet. 
Wall height at side setback: 20 feet. The maximum wall height may increase by one foot for each additional one foot of side setback provided beyond the minimum side setback requirement up to the maximum permitted height. 
Maximum height of truss heel height: 1 foot. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 75 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply with the RU-1 district: 
TABLE 4.7 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-1 District. Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street Maximum 
1st Floor Maximum 
2nd Floor Principal 25 25 N/A 10 percent of the width of the lot or a minimum of 5 15 (1) 0.35 0.35 Accessory-General (2) 5 10 5 Principal +5 (1) (2) (2) Accessory-Sheds (3) (2) 5 10 5 Principal +5 (1) 5 percent N/A  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) See accessory use regulations. 
       (3) Less than 100 square feet and less than eight feet in height. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 1,000 square feet. 
(g)  Single-family residential (RU-2) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-2 district: 
a.  Single-family residential dwellings; 
b.  Two-family residential dwellings; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with less than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-2 district the following uses may be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Public utilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-2 district the administrative official may approve the following uses but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structures; and 
b.  Other accessory uses not involving an additional dwelling unit. Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Accessory structures uses may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 35 percent of the floor area ratio of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Lots containing one or two dwellings shall contain a minimum of 7,500 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density: Two principal units per 7,500 net square feet in area. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet. If the roof of the structure has a pitch of at least 6/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height. 
Two-story structure or portion of the structure that is two stories: 32 feet. Maximum height of the wall: 26 feet. However, any portion of the building or structure with a flat roof shall not exceed 24 feet including the parapet. 
Wall height at side setback: 20 feet. The maximum wall height may increase by one foot for each additional one foot of side setback provided beyond the minimum side setback requirement up to the maximum permitted height. 
Maximum height of truss heel height: 1 foot. 
ii.  Accessory use: Accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 35 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 75 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratios: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-2 district: 
TABLE 4.8 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-2 District. Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street Maximum 
1st Floor Maximum 
2nd Floor Principal 25 25 N/A 10 percent of the width of the lot or a minimum of 5 15 (1) 0.35 0.35 Accessory (2)5 10 5 Principal + 5 (1) (2) (2) Shed (2) 5 10 5 Principal + 5 (1) (2) (2)  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) See accessory use regulations. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 1,000 square feet. 
(g.1)  Residential multi-family low density (RU-3). 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-3 district following Village Council approval of a site plan. 
a.  Multiple family residential structures: 
b.  Town houses; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-3 district the following uses may be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult congregate living facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents: and 
d.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-3 district the administrative official may approve the following uses but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
a.  Accessory structures; accessory structures may extend above the height of screen walls, Division 5.1 of the Land Development Regulations notwithstanding, provided that no accessory structure may exceed a maximum height of 15 feet five inches; and 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
c.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Lots in the RU-3 district accommodating multi-family structures shall contain a minimum of 1.94 net acres in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be 9.3 dwelling units per net acre. 
c.  Maximum height. 
i.  Principal use: Four stories not exceeding 45 feet where adjacent to or across the street from commercially zoned property. Three stories not exceeding 35 feet where adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
ii.  Accessory use: 15 feet and five inches. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 26 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 40 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 280 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 265 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-3 district: 
TABLE 4.8.1 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-3 District. Minimum Setbacks Maximum Floor Area Ratios (FAR.) Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street One-Story Bldg. Two-Story Bldg. Three Story Bldg. Four Story Bldg. Principal 25 30 10 20 15 (1) 0.26 0.49 0.73 0.79 Accessory (2) 10 10 20 Principal +5 (1) (3) (3) (3) (3)  
Notes: 
(1)  See lot corner (division 9.2). 
(2)  Twenty feet except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
(3)  See accessory use regulations. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 600 square feet. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
i.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided green space equal to at least 40 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well-maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery. 
ii.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with article 6 of this land development code. 
(h)  Residential multi-family moderate density (RU-3M) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-3M district following village council approval of a site plan. 
a.  Multiple family residential structures; 
b.  Townhouses compliant with criteria in the land development code; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-3M district the following uses may be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult congregate living facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents; and 
d.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-3M district the administrative official may approve the following uses but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structures; and 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
c.  Accessory uses other than garages shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 30 percent of the floor area ratio of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Lots in the RU-3M district accommodating multi-family structures shall contain a minimum of 16,900 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be a 12.9 dwelling unit per net acre. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: 2 stories not exceeding 35 feet. 
ii.  Accessory use: 14 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-3M district: 
TABLE 4.9 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-3M District. Minimum Setbacks Maximum Floor Area Ratios (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street One-Story Building Two-Story Building Principal 25 25 10 25 15 (1) 0.30 0.50 Accessory (3) 10 10 20 Principal + 5 (1) (3) (3)  
Notes: 
       (1)  See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3)  See accessory use regulations. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 600 square feet. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
i.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
ii.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with article 6 of this land development code. 
(i)  Residential multi-family low-medium density (RU-4L) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-4L district following village council approval of a site plan. 
a.  Multiple family residential structures; 
b.  Townhouses compliant with criteria in the land development code; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-4L district the following uses may be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult congregate care facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents; and 
d.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-4L district the administrative official may approve the following accessory uses but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structures; and 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
c.  Accessory uses shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. Accessory structures may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 30 percent floor area ratio (FAR) of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Lots in the RU-4L district accommodating multi-family structures shall contain a minimum of 10,000 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be 23 dwelling units per net acre. 
c.  Maximum height: 
Principal use: Three stories not exceeding 35 feet. 
Accessory use: 14 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio (FAR): All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-4L district: 
TABLE 4.10 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-4L District. Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street One-Story Building Two-Story Building Three-Story Building Principal 25 25 20 (2) 2 Story 15 (2) 
>2 story 20 (2) 25 (1) 0.30 0.50 0.62 Accessory (3) 10 20 20 (2) 25 (1) (3) (3) (3)  
Notes: 
       (1)  See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3)  See accessory use regulations. 
h.  Minimum square footage: 600 square feet. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
b.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with article 6 of the land development code. 
(j)  Residential multi-family medium high density (RU-4M) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-4M district following village council approval of a site plan the: 
a.  Multiple-family residential structures; 
b.  Townhouses compliant with criteria presented in the land development code; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-4M district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult congregate care facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents; and 
d.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-4M district the administrative official may approve the following but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structure; and 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
c.  Accessory uses shall be located behind the rear wall or column of the principal structure or within an open courtyard screened from public view. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. Accessory uses may occupy no more than five percent of the total of 30 percent of the floor area ratio of the property. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Lots in the RU-4M district accommodating multi-family structures shall contain a minimum 10,000 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be 36 dwelling units per net acre. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: Three stories not exceeding 35 feet. 
ii.  Accessory use: 14 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-4M district: 
TABLE 4.11 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-4M District. Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street One-Story Building Two-Story Building Three-Story Building Principal 25 25 20 (2) Two-story 15 (2) 
>2 story 20 (2) 25 (1) 0.40 0.51 0.62 Accessory (3) 10 20 20 (2) 25 (1) (3) (3) (3)  
Notes: 
       (1) See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2) Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3) See accessory use regulations. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 600 square feet. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
b.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided pursuant to provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(k)  Residential multi-family high density (RU-4) district. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-4 district following village council approval of a site plan: 
a.  Multiple-family residential structures; 
b.  Townhouses that are compliant with criteria in the land development code; 
c.  Foster care and group homes with fewer than seven residents; and 
d.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-4 district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult congregate living facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for fewer than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents; and 
d.  Public utilities. 
3.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-4 district the village council may approve the following as an accessory use and with a site plan, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Accessory structures; and 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
4.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein. 
5.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. Lots in the RU-4 district accommodating multi-family structures shall contain a minimum 10,000 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be 50 dwelling units. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: four stories not exceeding 45 feet. 
ii.  Accessory use: 14 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage: 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-4 district: 
TABLE 4.12 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-4 District Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side Side 
Street One-story Building Two-Story Building Three-Story Building Four-Story Building Principal: Up to 35' in height 25 25 20 (3) 20 30 (1) 0.40 0.51 0.62 N/A Over 35' in height 30 30 20 (3) 20 30 (1) 0.40 0.51 0.62 0.73 Accessory (2) 10 20 20 30 (1) N/A N/A N/A N/A  
Notes: 
       (1)  See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (2)  See accessory use regulations. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. 
       (3)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
h.  Minimum size living area: 600 square feet. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
b.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided pursuant to provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2004-7,  2, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2009-2,  1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2011-7,  2, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-1; Ord. No. 2016-4,  2, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 4.3. - Commercial districts. 
(a)  General purpose of commercial districts. The overall purpose of the commercial districts is to help implement comprehensive development master plan commercial development objectives and policies. The location and distribution of specific types of commercial activities shall be determined based on the following considerations: 
1.  Existing and desired future trends in commercial land development within the village and its environs; 
2.  Require that commercial development be consistent with the comprehensive development master plan and the land development code; 
3.  Maintain the existing compact linear commercial core that serves the village; 
4.  Protect environmentally sensitive natural systems, especially water resources, including storm water management policies designed to preserve water quality in the man-made canals east of the commercial area; 
5.  Provide and maintain transportation and infrastructure system improvements and manage impacts of future development; 
6.  Establish a basis for regulating the location, intensity, scale, and design of commercial development; 
7.  Ensure that future commercial development shall not encroach eastward into established residential areas; 
8.  Consider trip generation characteristics, including impact on transportation facilities and off-street parking systems; 
9.  Consider location and site requirements based on specific needs of respective commercial activities, their market area, anticipated employment generation and floor area requirements; 
10.  Provide compatibility with and impact on the quiet enjoyment of nearby residential areas and of other surrounding commercial activities; and 
11.  Provide open space, landscaping and natural vegetative buffers and screening between residential and nonresidential developments as well as developments of varying intensity such as single-family and multiple-family residential uses. Manmade walls should only be used in cases where necessary to abate noise impacts. 
(b)  Generally. The BU districts shall not accommodate permanent or transient residential units, including hotels or motels. The commercial land use districts herein established are as follows: 
TABLE 4.13 
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
Office District: RU-5  Restricted Business District: BU-1  General Business District: BU-1A  Special Business District: BU-2  Intensive Business District: BU-3  
(c)  Office development (RU-5) districts. 
1.  Intent. The RU-5 district is principally intended to accommodate office development and provide a buffer between more intense commercial (BU) districts on the east side of US 1 and west of the established residential EU and RU land use districts. 
2.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an RU-5 district following village council approval of a site plan pursuant to the procedures established in the Code: 
a.  Business and professional offices; 
b.  Financial institutions without drive-in teller facilities; 
c.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
d.  Medical services; 
e.  Mixed office and residential use. If sufficient lot area is available, an office building may contain an apartment(s) or other multi-family dwelling units. Similarly, if sufficient lot area is available, an office unit may have an accompanying residential use in connection therewith. 
f.  Multiple family residential; 
g.  Municipal parking lots and facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
h.  Townhouses; and 
i.  Foster care and group homes. 
3.  Conditional uses. Within the RU-5 district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Drive-thru banking facilities; 
b.  Child and family day care services for less than seven persons; 
c.  Community residential home with seven to 14 residents; and 
d.  Public utilities. 
4.  Accessory uses. Within the RU-5 district the following uses may be approved by the administrative official, but only as an accessory use, pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property: 
a.  Recreational accessory uses; 
b.  Other accessory uses. 
5.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein, including, medical marijuana retail centers, are prohibited. Multiple-family residential structures: The following properties shall not be developed for freestanding residential use, as each specific parcel was previously zoned RU-5A by the county prior to the enactment of this land development code. The previously applicable RU-5A County zoning policy did not allow residential use within the RU-5A district unless the residential use is in connection with an office use (i.e., mixed use as opposed to a free-standing residential structure). The intent of the village is to not change land use policies previously applicable to RU-5A properties under the county code. 
a.  Two RU-5 parcels abutting the eastside of SW 69th Court, 200 feet  south of SW 88th Street (Kendall Drive); 
b.  One parcel abutting the north side of SW 104th Street, 313 feet  east of US 1; 
c.  One parcel abutting the south side of SW 104th Street, 129 feet  east of US 1; and 
d.  One parcel abutting the southwest corner of SW 104th Street and SW 77th Avenue. 
6.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot or building site. The minimum lot or building site shall be 10,000 net square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be 50 dwelling units. 
c.  Maximum height: 
i.  Principal use: Two stories not exceeding 35 feet. 
ii.  Accessory use: 14 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface: Ratio 75 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 25 percent. 
e.  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 100 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
g.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands stated in the Code. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply within the RU-5 district: 
TABLE 4.14 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in RU-5 District Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side 
Street One-Story 
Building Two-Story 
Building Principal 25 25 20 (2) 15 0.40 0.51 Accessory (3) 10 20 20 N/A N/A  
Notes: 
       (1)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then a minimum clear distance shall be provided of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (2)  See lot, corner (division 9.2). 
       (3)  See accessory use regulations. 
7.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 25 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
b.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided pursuant to article 6 of the land development code. 
(d)  Restricted business development (BU-1) district. 
1.  Intent. Businesses within the BU-1 district are located within the US 1 linear corridor and are intended to service neighborhood residential markets within the immediate vicinity, as opposed to village-wide or regional markets. Such businesses are also intended to cater to specialized markets with customized market demands. The BU-1 district is not intended to accommodate large-scale retail sales and trade activities generally serving a citywide or regional market. Such stores generally require a larger floor area, carry a relatively larger inventory, and require a substantially greater off-street parking area. For instance, the BU-1 district is not intended to accommodate the following: large scale discount stores or supermarkets; department stores; mini-storage, outside storage, wholesale or warehousing activities; sales, service or repair of motor vehicles, machine equipment or accessory parts, including tire and battery shops; automotive services centers; and drive through facilities. 
2.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within a BU-1 district following village council approval of a site plan: 
a.  Bakeries, retail only; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning off-premises); 
d.  Financial institutions without drive-through facilities; 
e.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
f.  General retail sales and services provided any retail sales and service establishment on a lot or parcel that is 1.25 acres (54,450 square feet) or larger shall contain a mixture of two or more permitted uses; 
g.  Medical services; 
h.  Personal services; 
i.  Plant and garden sales and services; 
j.  Restaurants without drive-through facilities; 
k.  Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels; and 
l.  Retail sales of used merchandise, provided establishments offering such merchandise contain not more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; and 
m.  Other similar uses as determined by the village council. 
3.  Conditional uses. Within the BU-1 district the following uses may be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
b.  Clubs and lodges; 
c.  Child and family day care services; 
d.  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes; and 
e.  Public utilities. 
4.  Accessory uses. Within the BU-1 district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
5.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein including medical marijuana retail centers, are prohibited. Any use not within a fully enclosed building is strictly prohibited, except that this restriction shall not apply to maintenance services typically provided by itinerant service companies and their employees. Similarly, the sale or distribution of material or merchandise, fruit or other commodities from trucks, wagons or other vehicles parked on or along public or private streets or from open stands or vacant lots, or from outside any permanent duly approved enclosed building is prohibited. 
6.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Lots within the BU-1 district shall have a minimum lot frontage and lot width of not less than 50 feet and shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except on corner lots. Corner lots shall have a frontage of not less than 75 feet on a designated arterial or collector street and not less than 7,500 square feet in area. Conditional uses may require larger lot area to meet conditional use standards of this Code. 
b.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure shall be two stories and shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
c.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 82-88 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 12-18 percent. 
iv.  Minimum setbacks and maximum floor area ratio: All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands stated in the Code. Also, the following setbacks and floor area ratios shall apply in BU-1 districts. The floor area ratio shall not exceed the following, provided, however, that structure parking shall not count as a part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height, lot coverage, and number of stories. 
TABLE 4.15 
Structure Required Setbacks and F.A.R. in BU-1 District Setbacks Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) Front Rear Between 
Buildings Side 
Street Side Maximum 
1st Floor Maximum 
2nd Floor Principal 20 (3),(7) 5/20 (4),(6) 20 (2) 15 (5),(6) 0.40 0.51 Accessory (1),(7) 10 (6) 20 15 (5),(6) N/A N/A  
Notes: 
       (1) See accessory use regulations. 
       (2) Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3) Twenty feet, except where an RU or EU lot abuts a BU-1 lot, then the street setback shall be 25 feet for the entire street frontage. 
       (4) Five feet from a business district boundary, where any openings are provided in the wall of the proposed structure, adjacent to the rear lot line. Twenty feet from residential district boundary. 
       (5) Zero feet where the adjacent property is designated BU and where the use of the building is limited exclusively to business use. The wall along the side property line shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Building Code: Five feet where the wall does not meet unpierced four-hour fire resistant construction standards. 
       (6) Except where RU or EU abuts, it shall be 15 feet. 
       (7) Principal and accessory structure may be located up to ten feet from the front property line by site plan approval. 
7.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. The minimum landscaped green space at one story shall be in accordance with the following table. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. The minimum landscaped green space shall be increased by one and one-half percent for each additional story or part thereof up to a maximum of four stories exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. For the purpose of computing the amount of required landscaped green space where the building height varies, the number of stories shall be determined by that portion of the building with the highest story exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. 
TABLE 4.16 
LANDSCAPED GREEN SPACE FOR THE BU-1 DISTRICT 
Size of the Total Lot Area Percent of the Total Lot Area Up to one acre 18% More than one acre and up to five acres 16% More than five acres and up to 25 acres 14% More than 25 acres 12%  
b.  Water area. In BU districts water areas may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such water areas do not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaped green space. 
c.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(e)  General business (BU-1A) district. 
1.  Intent. Businesses within the BU-1A district are located within the US 1 linear commercial corridor and are intended to accommodate retail sales and services, including highway-oriented sales and services to residents and motorists along the US 1 corridor. The BU-1A district is not intended to accommodate manufacturing of goods or other activities which may generate nuisance impacts, including glare, smoke or other air pollutants, noise, vibration or major fire hazards, or other impacts generally associated with more intensive industrial uses. The BU-1A district is not intended to accommodate large-scale retail sales and trade activities generally serving a citywide or regional market, such as regional retail or wholesale trade and service centers, nor is it intended to attract warehousing, mini-storage, outside storage or light manufacturing activities. 
2.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within a BU-1A district following village council approval of a site plan: 
a.  Bakeries, retail only; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Commercial recreation (excluding adult uses); 
d.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning off premises); 
e.  Financial institutions with or without drive-through; 
f.  Funeral home and mortuary; 
g.  General retail sales and services provided any retail sales and service establishment on a lot or parcel that is 1.25 acres (54,450 square feet) or larger shall contain a mixture of permitted uses; 
h.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
i.  Medical services; 
j.  Package stores; 
k.  Personal services; 
l.  Plant and garden center sales; 
m.  Restaurants, with or without drive-through; 
n.  Veterinary medical services with or without outside kennels; 
o.  Retail sales of used merchandise, provided establishments offering such merchandise contain not more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; and 
p.  And other similar uses as determined by the village council. 
3.  Conditional uses. Within the BU-1A district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
b.  Clubs and lodges; 
c.  Child and family day care services; 
d.  Cultural/civic activities, private; 
e.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning on premises); 
f.  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes; 
g.  Parking garages when developed in conjunction with business and professional offices, general retail sales and services and/or restaurant uses on the ground floor; 
h.  Public utilities; 
i.  Vehicular sales and service center; 
j.  Vehicular service station, including gasoline sales, electrical vehicle charging stations, and vehicle battery exchange facilities. 
4.  Accessory uses. Within the BU-1A district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
5.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein including medical marijuana retail centers are prohibited. Any use not within a fully enclosed building is strictly prohibited, except that this restriction shall not apply to maintenance services typically provided by itinerant service companies and their employees. Similarly, the sale or distribution of material or merchandise, fruit or other commodities from trucks, wagons or other vehicles parked on or along public or private streets or from open stands or vacant lots, or from outside any permanent duly approved enclosed building is prohibited. 
6.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Lots within the BU-1A district shall have a minimum lot frontage and lot width of not less than 50 feet and shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except on corner lots. Corner lots shall have a frontage of not less than 75 feet on a designated arterial or collector street and not less than 7,500 square feet in area. Conditional uses may require larger lot area to meet conditional use standards of this Code. 
b.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure within the BU-1A district shall be four stories and shall not exceed 45 feet in height. 
c.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 77.5-88 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 12-22.5 percent. 
d.  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed the following, provided, however, that structure parking shall not count as a part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height, lot coverage, and number of stones: 
TABLE 4.17 
Height of Building in BU-1A District Maximum Floor Area Ratio 1 story 0.40 2 stories 0.51 3 stories 0.62 4 stories 0.73  
e.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the BU-1A district: 
TABLE 4.18 
Structure Required Setbacks in BU-1A district Setbacks Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Principal 20 (3) 5/20 (4),(6) 20 (2) (5),(6) 15 Accessory (1),(7) 10 (6) 20 (5),(6) 15  
Notes: 
       (1)  See accessory use regulations. 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3)  Twenty feet, except where a RU or EU lot abuts a BU-1A lot, then the street setback shall be 25 feet for the entire street frontage. 
       (4)  Five feet from a business district boundary, where any openings are provided in the wall of the proposed structure, adjacent to the rear lot line; 20 feet from residential district boundary. 
       (5)  Zero feet where the adjacent property is designated BU and where the use of the building is limited exclusively to business use. The wall along the side property line shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the state building code. 
       (6)  Except where RU or EU abuts it shall be 15 feet. 
       (7)  Principal and accessory structure may be located up to ten feet from the front property line by site plan approval. 
7.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. The minimum landscaped green space at one story shall be in accordance with the following table. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. The minimum landscaped green space shall be increased by one and one-half percent for each additional story or part thereof up to a maximum of four stories exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. For the purpose of computing the amount of required landscaped green space where the building height varies, the number of stories shall be determined by that portion of the building with the highest story exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. 
TABLE 4.19 
LANDSCAPED GREEN SPACE FOR THE BU-1A DISTRICT 
Size of the Total Lot Area Percent of the Total Lot Area Up to one acre 18 percent More than one acre and up to five acres 16 percent More than five acres and up to 25 acres 14 percent More than 25 acres 12 percent  
b.  Water area. In BU districts water areas may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such water areas do not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaped green space. 
c.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with article 6 of the land development code. 
(f)  Special business (BU-2) district. 
1.  Intent. Businesses within the BU-2 district are intended to accommodate retail sales and services, including highway oriented sales and service, to village residents and motorists along the US 1 corridor. In addition, the BU-2 district is intended to accommodate larger scale retail, discount, and regional facilities serving home and office markets within an area larger than the village. The BU-2 district also includes a land use regulatory program for managing the site location process for night clubs, lounges serving alcoholic beverages, and related facilities, excluding adult uses as defined herein. The BU-2 district is not intended to accommodate manufacturing of goods or other activities, which may generate nuisance impacts, including glare, smoke or other air pollutants, noise, vibration or major fire hazards, or other impacts generally associated with more intensive industrial uses. Similarly, the BU-2 district is not intended to accommodate warehousing, mini-storage, outside storage or light manufacturing activities. 
2.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within a BU-2 district following village council approval of a site plan pursuant to the procedures established in the Code: 
a.  Bakeries, retail only; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Commercial recreation (excluding adult uses); 
d.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning off premises); 
e.  Financial institutions with or without drive-through; 
f.  Funeral home and mortuary; 
g.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
h.  General retail sales and services provided any retail sales and service establishment on a lot or parcel that is 1.25 acres (54,450 square feet) or larger shall contain a mixture of permitted uses; 
i.  Medical services; 
j.  Package stores; 
k.  Personal services; 
l.  Plant and garden center sales; 
m.  Restaurants, with or without drive-through; 
n.  Veterinary medical services with or without outside kennels; and 
o.  Retail sales of used merchandise, provided establishments offering such merchandise contain not more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; and 
p.  And other similar uses as determined by the village council. 
3.  Conditional uses. Within the BU-2 district the following uses may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
b.  Child care and family day care; 
c.  Clubs and lodges; 
d.  Cultural/civic activities, private; 
e.  Commercial recreation (excluding adult uses); 
f.  Clubs and lodges; 
g.  Cultural/civic activities, including assembly halls; 
h.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning on premises); 
i.  Hospitals and emergency care; 
j.  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes; 
k.  Parking garages when developed in conjunction with business and professional offices, general retail sales and services and/or restaurant uses on the ground floor; 
l.  Public utilities; 
m.  Vehicular sales and service center; and 
n.  Vehicular service station, including gasoline sales, electrical vehicle charging stations, and vehicle battery exchange facilities. 
4.  Accessory uses. Within the BU-2 district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
5.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein including, medical marijuana retail centers are prohibited. Any use not within a fully enclosed building is strictly prohibited, except that this restriction shall not apply to maintenance services typically provided by itinerant service companies and their employees. Similarly, sale or distribution of material or merchandise, fruit or other commodities from trucks, wagons or other vehicles parked on or along public or private streets, from open stands or vacant lots, or from outside any permanent duly approved enclosed building is prohibited. 
6.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Lots within the BU-2 district shall have a minimum lot frontage and lot width of not less than 50 feet and shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except on corner lots. Corner lots shall have a frontage of not less than 75 feet on a designated arterial or collector street and not less than 7,500 square feet in area. Conditional uses may require larger lot area to mitigate issues specified in this Code. 
b.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure shall be four stories and shall not exceed 45 feet in height. 
c.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 77.5-80 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 12-22.5 percent. 
d.  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed the following, provided, however, that structure parking shall not count as a part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height, lot coverage, and number of stories: 
TABLE 4.20 
Height of Building in BU-2 District Maximum Floor Area Ratio 1 story 0.40 2 stories 0.51 3 stories 0.62 4 stories 0.73  
e.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the BU-2 district: 
TABLE 4.21 
Structure Required Setbacks in BU-2 district Setbacks Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Principal 20 (3) 5/20 (4),(6) 20 (2) (5),(6) 15 Accessory (1),(7) 10 (6) 20 (5),(6) 15  
Notes: 
       (1)  See accessory use regulations. 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a motel or hotel unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3)  Twenty-five feet, except where an RU or EU lot abuts a BU-2 lot, then the street setback shall be 25 feet for the entire street frontage. 
       (4) Five feet from a business district boundary, where any openings are provided in the wall of the proposed structure, adjacent to the rear lot line. Twenty feet from residential district boundary. 
       (5) Zero feet where the adjacent property is designated BU and where the use of the building is limited exclusively to business use. The wall along the side property line shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the state building code. Five feet where the wall does not meet unpierced four-hour fire resistant construction standards. 
       (6) Except where RU or EU abuts it shall be 15 feet. 
       (7) Principal and accessory structure may be located up to ten feet from the front property line by site plan approval. 
7.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. The minimum landscaped green space at one story shall be in accordance with the following table. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. The minimum landscaped green space shall be increased by one and one-half percent for each additional story or part thereof up to a maximum of four stories exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. For the purpose of computing the amount of required landscaped green space where the building height varies, the number of stories shall be determined by that portion of the building with the highest story exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. 
TABLE 4.22 
LANDSCAPED GREEN SPACE FOR THE BU-2 DISTRICT 
Size of the Total Lot Area Percent of the Total Lot Area Up to one acre 18 percent More than one acre and up to five acres 16 percent More than five acres and up to 25 acres 14 percent More than 25 acres 12 percent  
b.  Water areas. Water areas may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such water areas do not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaped green space. 
c.  Malls. The specific areas within enclosed or non-enclosed malls which are landscaped with grass, trees and/or shrubbery, water areas therein, and areas therein with permanent art display may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such areas do not exceed ten percent of the required landscaped green space. 
d.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided pursuant to provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(g)  Intensive business (BU-3) district. 
1.  Intent. Businesses within the BU-3 district are within the US 1 commercial corridor and are intended to accommodate retail sales and services, including highway oriented sales and service to residents and motorists along the US 1 corridor. In addition, the BU-3 district is intended to accommodate larger scale retail, discount, and regional facilities serving home and office markets within an area larger than the village. The BU-3 district also includes a land use regulatory program for managing the site location process for night clubs, lounges serving alcoholic beverages, and related facilities, including adult uses as defined herein. The BU-3 district is not intended to accommodate manufacturing of goods or other activities, which may generate nuisance impacts, including glare, smoke or other air pollutants, noise, vibration or major fire hazards, or other impacts generally associated with more intensive industrial uses. The BU-3 district can accommodate limited storage activities within enclosed buildings, including mini-storage, limited warehousing also within an enclosed building. The BU-3 district is not intended to accommodate outside storage or light manufacturing activities. 
2.  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within a BU-3 district following village council approval of a site plan and compliance with the procedures established in the Code: 
a.  Bakeries, retail only; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Commercial recreation (excluding adult uses); 
d.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning off premises); 
e.  Financial institutions with or without drive-through; 
f.  Funeral home and mortuary; 
g.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
h.  General retail sales and services; 
i.  Medical services; 
j.  Package stores; 
k.  Personal services; 
l.  Plant and garden center sales; 
m.  Restaurants, with or without drive-through; 
n.  Veterinary medical services with or without outside kennels; 
o.  Retail sales of used merchandise, provided establishments offering such merchandise contain not more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; and 
p.  Other similar uses as permitted by the village council. 
3.  Conditional uses. Within the BU-3 district the following may be approved by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
a.  Adult uses; 
b.  Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
c.  Child care and family day care; 
d.  Clubs and lodges; 
e.  Cultural/civic activities, private; 
f.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning on premises); 
g.  Electrical and mechanical repair of appliances and household goods; 
h.  Hospitals and emergency care; 
i.  Limited storage within enclosed building; 
j.  Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes; 
k.  Parking garages when developed in conjunction with business and professional offices, general retail sales and services and/or restaurant uses on the ground floor; 
l.  Public utilities; 
m.  Vehicular, major repair, paint and body work; 
n.  Vehicular sales and service center; and 
o.  Vehicular service station, including gasoline sales, electrical vehicle charging stations, and vehicle battery exchange facilities. 
4.  Accessory uses. Within the BU-3 district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use shall only be approved as an accessory use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
5.  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein including medical marijuana retail centers are prohibited. Any use not within a fully enclosed building is strictly prohibited, except that this restriction shall not apply to maintenance services typically provided by itinerant service companies and their employees. Similarly, sale or distribution of material or merchandise, fruit or other commodities from trucks, wagons or other vehicles parked on or along public or private streets or from open stands or vacant lots, or from outside any permanent duly approved enclosed building is prohibited. 
6.  Dimensional regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Lots within the BU-3 district shall have a minimum lot frontage and lot width of not less than 50 feet and shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except on corner lots. Corner lots shall have a frontage of not less than 75 feet on a designated arterial or collector street and not less than 7,500 square feet in area. Conditional uses may require larger lot area to mitigate issues specified in this Code. 
b.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure shall be four stories and shall not exceed 45 feet in height. 
c.  Maximum lot coverage: 
i.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 40 percent. 
ii.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 77.5-88 percent. 
iii.  Minimum green space: 12-22.5 percent. 
d.  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed the following, provided, however, that structure parking shall not count as a part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height, lot coverage, and number of stories: 
TABLE 4.23 
Height of Building in BU-3 District Maximum Floor Area Ratio 1 story 0.40 2 stories 0.51 3 stories 0.62 4 stories 0.73  
e.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the BU-3 district: 
TABLE 4.24 
Structure Required Setbacks in BU-3 district Setbacks Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Principal 20 (3) 5/20 (4)(6) 20 (2) (5)(6) 15 Accessory (1) 10 (6) 20 (5)(6) 15  
Notes 
       (1)  See accessory use regulations. 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a motel or hotel unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
       (3)  Twenty feet, except where a RU or EU lot abuts a BU-3 lot, then the setback shall be 25 feet on any part of the commercial structure located within 25 feet of the residential district boundary. 
       (4)  Five feet from a business district boundary, where any openings are provided in the wall of the proposed structure, adjacent to the rear lot line. Twenty feet from residential district boundary except that credit shall be given for full width of dedicated alleys in computing this setback. 
       (5)  Zero feet where the adjacent property is designated BU and where the use of the building is limited exclusively to business use. The wall along the side property line shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the state building code. Five feet where the wall is not does not meet unpierced four-hour fire resistant construction standards. Ten feet for any portions of a business structure accommodating a residential use. 
       (6)  Except where RU and EU abut it shall be 15 feet. 
7.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. The minimum landscaped green space at one story shall be in accordance with the following table. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. The minimum landscaped green space shall be increased by one and one-half percent for each additional story or part thereof up to a maximum of four stories exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. For the purpose of computing the amount of required landscaped green space where the building height varies, the number of stories shall be determined by that portion of the building with the highest story exclusive of penthouse and mezzanine. 
TABLE 4.25 
LANDSCAPED GREEN SPACE FOR THE BU-3 DISTRICT 
Size of the Total Lot Area Percent of the Total Lot Area Up to one acre 18 percent More than one acre and up to five acres 16 percent More than five acres and up to 25 acres 14 percent More than 25 acres 12 percent  
b.  Water areas. In the BU-3 districts water areas may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such water areas do not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaped green space. 
c.  Malls. The specific areas within enclosed or non-enclosed malls which are landscaped with grass, trees and/or shrubbery, water areas therein, and areas therein with permanent art display may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such areas do not exceed ten percent of the required landscaped green space. 
d.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided pursuant to provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2009-5,  1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2015-7,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2017-6,  2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2018-1,  4, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 4.4. - Public and semi-public services (PS) district. 
(a)  Purpose. The overall purpose of the public and semi-public services (PS) district is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive development master plan development objectives and policies for existing and future public and semi-public services. The location and distribution of specific types of public and semi-public services shall be determined based on the following considerations: 
1.  Accommodating the land needs of existing public and semi-public land uses within the village; 
2.  Provision, maintenance, and conservation of quality public services required to meet the needs of existing and projected future population magnitude, distribution, and characteristics; 
3.  Protecting established residential areas from encroachment by nonresidential development; 
4.  Ensuring compatibility with adjacent land uses to the greatest practical extent by providing landscaping and buffer areas to protect adjacent residential development from the off-site impacts of public and semi-public land uses; and 
5.  Providing and maintaining of transportation and infrastructure system improvements. 
6.  The public and semi-public service (PS) zoning district is intended to accommodate existing public and semi-public services including: governmental administration buildings; public schools and not-for-profit educational institutions; arts and cultural or civic facilities; essential public services, facilities, and utilities; fire and emergency operation facilities; places of worship; and accessory facilities; and other similar activities as identified in the land development code. 
(b)  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within an PS district following village council approval of a site plan pursuant to the procedures established in the Code. 
1.  Public golf course facilities; 
2.  Governmental facilities; and 
3.  Municipal parking lots and facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Within the PS district the following uses be approved by the village council, but only as a conditional use: 
1.  Cultural and civic activities, private; 
2.  Educational institutions, nonpublic; 
3.  Places of worship; and 
4.  Public utilities. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Within the PS district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. The sale of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises, and the sale of other items ancillary and accessory to uses permitted within the district, shall be permitted as accessory uses when determined to be incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
(e)  Prohibited. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein are prohibited, except that maintenance services provided by itinerant service companies and their employees may be permitted. 
(f)  Dimensional regulations. 
1.  Minimum lot area. Development plans for sites within the PS district shall provide sufficient acreage and open space and be properly screened and buffered in order to minimize potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The required acreage shall be consistent with best management principles and practices for specific public and semi-public services. 
2.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure shall be two stories and shall not exceed 35 feet in height unless the height is approved as a conditional use and found to meet all standards governing land use and intensity within this Code. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
c.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
4.  Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for any land use within the PS district shall be as shown below: 
TABLE 4.26 
Height of Building Floor Area Ratio 1 story 0.40 2 stories 0.51  
5.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the PS district: 
TABLE 4.27 
Structure Required Setbacks in PS district Setbacks Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Principal 25 25 20 (2) 20 30 Accessory (1) 10 20 20 30  
Notes: 
       (1)  See accessory use regulations. 
       (2)  Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
6.  Green space and landscaping. 
a.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
b.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-1,  4, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 4.5. - Public and private parks and recreation facilities (PR) district. 
(a)  Purpose. The overall purpose of the public and private parks and recreation facilities (PR) district is to provide a management framework for implementing comprehensive development master plan development objectives and policies for existing and future public and private parks and recreation facilities. The location and distribution of specific types of public and private parks and recreation facilities shall be determined based on the following considerations: 
1.  Accommodating the land needs of existing public and private parks and recreation facilities, including open space systems; 
2.  Provision, maintenance, and conservation of quality parks and recreation facilities required to meet the needs of existing and future population magnitude, distribution, and characteristics; 
3.  Preserving unique natural resources and areas of historic significance; 
4.  Protecting established residential areas from encroachment by nonresidential development; 
5.  Ensuring compatibility with adjacent land uses to the greatest practical extent by providing landscaping and buffer areas to protect adjacent residential development from the off-site impacts of parks and recreation facilities; and 
6.  Providing and maintaining transportation and infrastructure system improvements. 
(b)  Uses permitted. The following uses may be allowed within a PR district following village council site plan approval pursuant to procedures established in the Code: 
1.  Golf course facilities, public; 
2.  Governmental facilities; and 
3.  Municipal parking lots and facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Within the PR district the following uses may be by the village council but only as a conditional use. 
1.  Private golf course facilities; 
2.  Private parks; and 
3.  Public utilities. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Within the PR district the administrative official may approve as an accessory use only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. The sale of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises, and the sale of other items ancillary and accessory to uses permitted within the district, shall be permitted as accessory uses when determined to be incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein are prohibited, except that maintenance services provided by itinerant service companies and their employees may be permitted. 
(f)  Dimensional regulations. 
1.  Minimum lot area. Development plans for sites within the PR district shall provide sufficient acreage and open space and be properly screened and buffered in order to minimize potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The required acreage shall be consistent with best management principles and practices for specific park and recreation activities and other uses herein approved. 
2.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure shall be two stories and shall not exceed 35 feet in height unless the height is approved as a conditional use and found to meet all standards governing land use and intensity within this Code. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 30 percent. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
c.  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
4.  Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for any land use within the PR district shall be as shown below: 
TABLE 4.28 
Height of Building Floor Area Ratio 1 story 0.40 2 stories 0.51  
5.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the PR district: 
TABLE 4.29 
Structure Required Setbacks in PR District Setbacks Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Principal 25 25 20 (2) 20 30 Accessory (1) 10 20 20 30  
Notes: 
       (1) See accessory use regulations. 
       (2) Twenty feet, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. 
(g)  Green space and landscaping. 
1.  Green space. On each lot there shall be provided a green space equal to at least 35 percent of the total lot area. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida-friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. 
2.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with provisions of article 6 of the land development code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 4.6. - Summary tables. 
    The following tables present a composite overview of the use, size and dimension regulations which shall be applicable within each respective zoning district. Where the district regulations are more specific than the following tables or an apparent conflict exist, the full text shall prevail. 
TABLE 4.30: LAND USES BY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Residential Land Uses EU-1C EU-1 EU-S EU-M RU-1 RU-2 RU-3M RU-4L RU-4M RU-4 RU-5 Accessory units A A A A Accessory uses, other A A A A A A A A A A A Accessory uses, recreational A A A A A A A A A A A ACLF C C C C Bee keeping A A Community residential facility with seven to 14 residents C C C C C Child and family day care for less than sevenpersons C C C C C C C Foster care with less than seven residents P P P P P P P P P P P Governmental facilities P P P P P P P P P P P Group homes with less than seven residents P P P P P P P P P P P Limited livestock A A Multiple-family residential structures P P P P P Public utilities C C C C C C C C C C C Sale of homegrown produce A A Single-family residential dwellings P P P P P P Townhouse houses P P P P P Two-family residential dwellings P  
Notes: 
P  = Allowed as a permitted use. 
C  = Allowed as a conditional use. 
A  = Accessory use. 
TABLE 4.31: LAND USES BY NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Nonresidential Land Uses RU-5 BU-1 BU-1A BU-2 BU-3 PS PR Adult entertainment C Bakeries, retail only P P P P Business and professional offices P P P P P Clubs and lodges C C C C Commercial recreation (excluding adult uses defined herein) P P P Customary accessory uses A A A A A A A Cultural/civic activities, private C C C C Dry cleaning (with cleaning off-premises) P P P P Dry cleaning (with cleaning on premises) C C C Educational institutions, nonpublic C Child and family day care services C C C C Electrical and mechanical repair of small appliances and small durable goods C Financial institutions with drive-through C P P P Financial institutions without drive-through facilities P P P P P Funeral home and mortuary P P P Foster care and group home P General retail sales and services P P P P Golf course facilities, public P (2) P (2) Golf course facilities, private C Governmental facilities P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) Hospitals and extensive care C C Limited storage within enclosed building C Maintenance services provided by itinerant service companies P P P P P P P Medical services P P P P P Mixed office and residential use P Municipal parking lots and facilities P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) P (2) Nursing homes, rest homes and convalescent homes C C C C Package stores P P P Parking garages less than four stories C C C Personal services P P P P Places of worship C Plant and garden center sales P P P P Private parks C Public utilities C C C C C C C Public parks and recreation activities P Restaurants, with or without drive-through P P P Restaurants without drive-through facilities P P P P Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises C C C C Sale of used merchandise P (1) P (1) P (1) P (1) Vehicular, major repair, paint, and body work C Vehicular sales and service center C C C Vehicular service station, including gasoline sales, electrical vehicle charging stations, and vehicle battery exchange facilities C C C Veterinary medical services, without outside kennels P P P P Veterinary medical services with outside kennels P P P  
Note: 
1.  Limited to 4,000 square feet gross. 
2.  Following public hearing conducted by the village council. 
P  = Permitted use. 
C  = Conditional use. 
A  = Accessory use. 
TABLE 4.32: SETBACKS BY DISTRICT 
District Setbacks for Principal Building Setbacks for Accessory Structures Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street Front Rear Between Buildings Side Side Street EU-1C 50 25 NA 20 (3) 30 (1) (11) (2) 15/20 (13) 10 20 (3) 30 (1) (11) EU-1 50 25 NA 20 (3) 30 (1) (12) (2) 15/20 (13) 10 20 (3) 30 (1) (12) EU-S 35 25 NA 20 (3) 25 (1) (2) 15/20 (13) 10 20 (3) 25 (1) EU-M 25 25 NA 15 25 (1) (2) 7.5 10 20 30 (1) RU-1 25 25 N/A 10% lot or 5' min. 15 (1) (2) 5 10 5 Principal + 5 RU-2 25 25 N/A 10% lot or 5' min. 15 (1) (2) 5 10 5 Principal + 5 (1) RU-3 25 30 10 20 15 (4) 10 10 20 Principal + 5 1 RU-3M 25 25 20 (4) 25 15 (1) (5) 10 10 20 Principal + 5 (1) RU-4L 25 25 20 (4) 2-story 15 (4) 
>2-story 20 (4) 25 (1) (5) 10 20 20 (4) 25 (1) RU-4M 25 25 20 (4) 2-story 15 (4) 
>2-story 20 (4) 25 (1) (5) 10 20 20 (4) 25 (1) RU-4 Up to 35' ht. 25 25 20 (4) 20 30 (1) (6) 10 20 20 30 (1) Over 35' ht. 30 30 20 (4) 20 30 (1) RU-5 25 25 20 (4) 15 15 (2) 10 20 20 All BU districts 20 (7) 5/20 (8) 20 (9) 15 (2) 10 (10) 20 (9) 15 PS and PR districts 25 25 20 (4) 20 30 (2) 10 20 20 30  
(1) See "Lots, corner" (division 9.2). (2) See accessory use regulations. (3) Lots whose frontage is less than 135 feet in width shall have an interior side yard setback on each side of 15 percent of the width with a setback of not less than 15 feet. (4) 20 feet between buildings, except where doors, windows or other openings in the building wall of a living unit face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another building on the same site, then there shall be provided a minimum clear distance of not less than 30 feet. Said distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall. (5) See accessory use regulations. (6) See accessory use regulations. Administrative offices, clubhouses, parking structures and similar structures serving only the residents of the building site and their guests shall comply with setbacks for the principal structure. (7) Front setback is 20 feet, except where an RU or EU lot abuts a BU lot, then the front street setback shall be 25 feet on any part of the commercial structure along the street of the residential district boundary. (8) Rear setback is five feet from a business district boundary, where any openings are provided in the wall of the proposed structure, adjacent to the rear lot line. Twenty feet from residential district boundary except that credit shall be given for full width of dedicated alleys in computing this setback. (9) Zero feet where the adjacent property is designated BU and where the use of the building is limited exclusively to business use. The wall along the side property line shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Building Code. Five feet where the wall does not meet unpierced four-hour fire resistant construction standards. Fifteen feet where the adjacent property is zoned RU or EU. (10) Fifteen feet next to the RU or EU districts. (11) Lots whose frontage is less than 150 feet in width shall have a street side setback of 25 feet. (12) Lots whose frontage is less than 125 feet in width shall have a street side setback of 25 feet. (13) Detached accessory structures that are 14 feet or less in height shall be setback a minimum 15 feet from the rear property line; detached accessory structures that are more than 14 feet in height, and no more than the maximum permitted height of 18 feet, shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line.  
TABLE 4.33: LOT SIZE HEIGHT AND COVERAGE BY DISTRICT 
District Minimum Lot Area Maximum Height of Building Lot Coverage Lot Width Lot Depth Principal Accessory Maximum Building Coverage Maximum ISR Minimum Green Space 1 Story 2 Story EU-1C 2.5 gross acre (1) 35' 14'/18' (5) 20% (two-story structure ); 25% (one-story structure) 45% 55% 150' 250' EU-1 1 gross acre (1) 35' 14'/18' (5) 20% (two-story structure ); 25% (one-story structure) 45% 55% 125' 200' EU-S 25,000 gross sq. ft. (1) 35' 14'/18' (5) 30% 65% 35% 125' 135' EU-M 15,000 net sq. ft. (1) 35' 14' 30% 65% 35% 120' 115' RU-1 7,500 net sq. ft. (1) 32' 14' 30% 65% 35% 75' 100' RU-2 1- or 2-family unit on 7,500 sq. ft. (1) 32' 14' 35% 65% 35% 75' 100' RUI-3 1.94 acres 4 stories not exceeding 45 feet where adjacent to commercially zoned property; 3 stories not exceeding 35 feet where adjacent to residentially zoned property 15', 5? 26% 60% 40% 280' 265' RU-3M 16,900 net sq. ft. 2 stories not exceeding 35' 14' 30% 65% 35% 100' 100' RU-4L 10,000 net sq. ft. 3 stories not exceeding 35' 14' 30% 65% 35% 100' 100' RU-4M 10,000 net sq. ft. 3 stories not exceeding 35' 14' 40% 65% 35% 100' 100' RU-4 10,000 net sq. ft. 4 stories not exceeding 45' 14' 40% 65% 35% 100' 100' RU-5 10,000 net sq. ft. 2 stories not exceeding 35' 14' 40% 75% 25% 100' 100' BU-1 5,000 sq. ft., except corner lots: 7,500 sq. ft. 2 stories not exceeding 35' 40% 82 to 88% 12 to 18% 50', corner lots: 75' none BU-1A 5,000 sq. ft., except corner lots: 7,500 sq. ft. 4 stories not exceeding 45' 40% 77.5 to 88% 12 to 22.5% 50', corner lots: 75' none BU-2 5,000 sq. ft., except corner lots: 7,500 sq. ft. 4 stories not exceeding 45' 40% 77.5 to 88% 12 to 22.5% 50', corner lots: 75' none BU-3 5,000 sq. ft., except corner lots: 7,500 sq. ft. 4 stories not exceeding 45' 40% 77.5 to 88% 12 to 22.5% 50', corner lots: 75' none PS (2) (3) 2 stories not exceeding 35' 30% 65% 35% none none PR (4) 2 stories not exceeding 35' 30% 65% 35% none none  
(1) One-story structure or portion of the structure that is one story: 24 feet to the top of the parapet. If the roof of the one story structure has a pitch of at least 3/12, then the peak of such roof may be 28 feet in height, provided the height to the top of the tie beam does not exceed 24 feet. (2) Public services include quasi-public services and institutions. (3) Acreage consistent with best management principles and practices for specific public and semi-public services. (4) Regulatory provisions governing size and dimension regulations for public and private parks and recreation facilities. (5) Detached accessory structures that are setback a minimum 15 feet from the rear property line shall not exceed 14 feet in height; detached accessory structures that are setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line shall not exceed 18 feet in height.  
TABLE 4.34: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIOS BY DISTRICT 
District Floor Area Ratios by Story Maximum FAR for 1st Story Maximum FAR for 2nd Story EU-1C 0.20 (two-story structure); 0.25 (one-story structure) 0.10 EU-1 0.20 (two-story structure); 0.25 (one-story structure) 0.10 EU-S 0.30 0.30 EU-M 0.30 0.30 RU-1 0.35 0.35 RU-2 0.35 0.35  
District Cumulative Floor Area Ratio by Number of Stories 1 Story Building 2 Story Building 3 Story Building 4 Story Building RU-3 0.26 0.49 0.73 0.79 RU-3M 0.30 0.50 N/A N/A RU-4L 0.30 0.50 0.62 N/A RU-4M 0.40 0.51 0.62 N/A RU-4 0.40 0.51 0.62 0.73 RU-5 0.40 0.51 N/A N/A BU-1 0.40 0.51 N/A N/A BU-1A 0.40 0.51 0.62 0.73 BU-2 0.40 0.51 0.62 0.73 BU-3 0.40 0.51 0.62 0.73 PS 0.40 0.51 N/A N/A PR 0.40 0.51 N/A N/A  
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2009-2,  2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2009-5,  2, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 4.7. - North Pinecrest Business Alternative District (NPBAD). 

NPBAD Location Map 
1.  Purpose: The purpose of the North Pinecrest Business Alternative District (NPBAD) is to provide an alternate regulatory framework for implementing the Comprehensive Development Master Plan Future Land Use Map designation for the US-1 (a/k/a South Dixie Highway) commercial corridor. Under the NPBAD, a developer may choose to develop the property based on either the underlying zoning categories, or based on the provisions of the "alternative" district. 
New development within the NPBAD district is intended to encourage a sense of defined space which includes a mix of uses including office, retail, personal services, restaurants, and residential. Due to the proximity to the Metro Rail Station, development should result in improved use of rail transit, increased pedestrian activity, and reduced automobile reliance. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be allowed within the NPBAD district following approval of a site plan pursuant to the procedures in the Code: 
1.  Bakeries, retail only; 
2.  Business and professional offices; 
3.  Dry cleaning (with cleaning off premises); 
4.  General retail sales and services; 
5.  Government facilities following a public hearing conducted by the village council; 
6.  Medical services; 
7.  Personal services; 
8.  Financial institutions without a drive-through; and 
9.  Restaurants, without drive-through. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall only be permitted as a conditional use upon a finding by the village council after a public hearing that the use complies with criteria governing the conditional use performance standards of the Code: 
1.  Alcohol consumption on premises; 
2.  Parking garages (buildings/structures shall follow architectural design guidelines established by the village); 
3.  Public utilities; 
4.  All permitted uses incorporating a mix of residential, commercial or offices uses; and 
5.  All permitted uses projects utilizing height, lot coverage, or FAR, as set forth in this section. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Only uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal permitted or conditional use shall only be approved as an accessory use. Such accessory uses shall be reviewed pursuant to procedures set forth in this Code for the principal use of the property (see use, accessory definition in article 9 of this land development code). 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically or provisionally provided for herein, including, medical marijuana retail centers, are prohibited. Any use not within a fully enclosed building is strictly prohibited. Similarly, the sale or distribution of material or merchandise, fruit or other commodities from trucks, wagons or other vehicles parked on or along public or private streets, or from open stands or vacant lots, or from outside any permanent duly approved enclosed building is prohibited. 
(e)  Dimensional regulations. 
1.  Mandatory development conditions. 
a.  All new development must have a minimum of 75 percent of ground floor occupied by office, restaurants, institutional, covered parking, and/or retail and personal service uses; 
b.  Ingress and egress from off street parking shall be designed so that all access is from or to US-1 unless otherwise determined by the village council. 
2.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Lots within the NPBAD district shall have a minimum lot frontage of not less than 100 feet, and a lot depth of no less than 150 feet; with a minimum net lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet. Conditional uses may require larger lot area to mitigate the issues specified in article 6 (Environmental Regulations). 
3.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a structure as a matter of right within the NPBAD district shall be four (4) stories maximum for all situations and shall not exceed 45 feet above the finished floor elevation (underground level parking will not be considered in the height calculations). 
1 story Parking garage 1 and/or underground parking areas 1 story Office and retail 2 stories Mixed use (residential use, with retail and office); residential uses shall not occupy more than 25 percent of total floor area.  
1 Parking garages that face or abut residential districts must be heavily screened with landscaping and/or concrete wall(s) to completely block view and/or noise. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
Maximum building coverage 40% Maximum impervious surface ratio 82% Minimum green space 12-18% 
(depending on lot size -see landscape subsection below)  
5.  Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio as a matter of right shall not exceed 0.40 (based on a typical 100-foot by 150-foot lot). New development which incorporates the design criteria specified in this district may accumulate a maximum FAR of 0.73. A parking structure shall not count as part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height (except underground level parking), lot coverage, and number of stories (see table below). 
6.  Residential density. Maximum residential density shall be 12 units per acre. 
7.  Residential unit size. The average square foot size of all residential units must be a minimum of 600 sq. ft. 
8.  Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with setbacks for wetlands and waterways established in the Code. In addition, the following setbacks shall apply within the NPBAD district: 
NPBAD District Required Setbacks and FAR 
Structure Front Rear Side Side Street FAR 1 story 5 2 /20 ft 30 ft 15 ft. 15 ft 3 0.40 2 story 20 ft. 40 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 0.51 3 story 20 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 0.62 4 story 20 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 0.73  
2  Five-foot front yard setback permitted only if property is developed with an open parking lot behind building(s), screened from the view of passing vehicles or if parking is enclosed within a structure. 
3  Any portion of the property facing or abutting a residential district shall maintain a 30-foot setback. 

Setbacks 
(f)  Green space and landscaping. 
1.  Green space. The minimum landscaped green space at one (1) story shall be in accordance with the following table. The required green space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, ground cover included within the "Florida friendly plant database," trees and shrubbery, except that ten percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of open cell unit pavers (turf block) and two percent of any driveway or parking area constructed of brick pavers with a sand and/or gravel sub base or underlayment may be counted as green space. The minimum green space requirements set forth below may be reduced by the amount of landscape cover within a public plaza provided as a design element incentive. 
Landscaped Open Space for the NPBAD District 
Size of Total Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Percent of the Total Lot Area 15,000-20,000 18% 20,001-30,000 16% 30,001-50,000 14% 50,001+ 12%  
The minimum landscaped green space shall be increased by 1.5 percent for an additional story or part thereof up to a maximum of four stories. For the purpose of computing the amount of required landscaped green space where the building height varies, the number of stories shall be determined by that portion of the building with the highest story exclusive of the penthouse and the mezzanine. 
2.  Water area. In the NPBAD water areas (lakes, ponds, canals) may be used as part of the required landscaped green space provided such water areas do not exceed 20 percent of the required landscaped green space. 
3.  Landscaping and tree protection. Landscaping and tree maintenance shall be provided in accordance with article 6 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3,  1, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-9,  3, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-1,  4, 1-9-18) 
Div. 4.8. - Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Corridor alternative development standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the Pinecrest Parkway Corridor alternative development standards is to provide procedures and standards within a planned development framework to encourage implementation of the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Vision Plan, adopted by the village council on October 9, 2012, in accordance with the planning and development objectives of the village under this Code and the comprehensive development master plan. All land development regulations and standards of the village's commercial zoning districts shall apply to a subject property pursuant to the provisions of the commercial zoning districts in which they are located with the exception of the following applicable alternative standards. 
The applicable Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Corridor planning area is shown and depicted in the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Vision Plan, approved and adopted by the village council pursuant to Resolution 2012-61 on October 9, 2012. 
(b)  Exception. Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Corridor alternative development standards shall not be applicable to properties located within the North Pinecrest Business Alternative District (NPABD). 
(c)  Uses permitted, conditional uses, accessory uses, prohibited uses. Uses permitted, conditional uses, accessory uses, and prohibited uses shall continue to be permitted or prohibited pursuant to the regulations of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(d)  Dimensional regulations. 
1.  Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width. Minimum lot area, lot frontage, and lot width dimensions shall continue to apply pursuant to the dimensional requirements of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
2.  Maximum height. The maximum height restrictions applicable to any building shall continue to apply pursuant to the maximum permitted height restrictions of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Maximum building coverage shall continue to apply pursuant to the maximum permitted building coverage restrictions of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
b.  Maximum impervious surface ratio may be increased by five percent. 
c.  Minimum green space may be decreased by five percent. 
4.  Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area applicable to the subject property shall continue to apply pursuant to the floor area restrictions of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
5.  Minimum setbacks. All required front, side, and rear building setbacks requirements applicable to any building shall continue to apply pursuant to the minimum permitted setback requirements of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(e)  Site development standards and amenities. 
1.  Green space. Minimum landscaped green space requirements applicable to the subject property pursuant to the minimum green space requirements of the commercial zoning district in which the subject property is located may be reduced by a maximum of five percent. 
2.  Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer shall be provided adjacent to Pinecrest Parkway that is a minimum of eight feet in width. 
3.  Pedestrian and bicycle connectivity; hardscape. Pedestrian sidewalks, "village walks," and other hardscape areas shall be incorporated into site plans for the redevelopment of a subject property as shown and recommended for specific properties as described in the village's Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. Walkways and hardscape features shall incorporate colors and textured patterns. Pedestrian and bicycle connections shall be provided pursuant to the goals and recommendations of the village's bicycle plan and Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. Walkways shall be provided as necessary to internally connect a redevelopment project with adjoining commercial properties. 
4.  Architectural building style and color palette. Buildings shall be designed to incorporate Key West, Old Florida, or Caribbean Colonial architectural styles and vernaculars as described in the village's Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. 
5.  Street furniture. Benches, planters, bike racks, trash and recycling receptacles, and other amenities shall be incorporated into proposed redevelopment plans as described and illustrated in the village's Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. 
6.  Lighting. Pedestrian scale lighting oriented downwards, decorative lighting, and accent lighting shall be incorporated into site plans for the redevelopment of a subject property adjacent to pedestrian walks and gathering spaces as described and illustrated in the village's Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. 
7.  Landscaping. Landscaping required by the land development regulations shall incorporate landscaping schemes to include Dade County slash pine trees; shade trees such as the Florida Live Oak; drought tolerant plantings, and native plantings that require reduced maintenance. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged in a manner that enhances environmental sustainability through reduction in paved, impervious coverage and enhancement of green, open space and pervious natural area. 
8.  Signage. Signage mounted on buildings and monument signs that are visible from Pinecrest Parkway shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural style of the building existing or proposed for development on the subject property, consistent with required architectural styles of the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. 
9.  Gathering spaces. Nooks, pocket parks, plazas, and other open space areas shall be incorporated into site plans for the redevelopment of a subject property as illustrated and recommended in the village's Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. 
10.  Parking surface. Parking spaces shall be hard surfaced, except that 15 percent of the parking spaces provided shall be constructed of porous pavement materials ("pave drain" or equivalent) or open cell unit pavers ("turf block" or equivalent). 
11.  Transitional buffers. Buffer walls and landscaped buffers at the rear of commercial redevelopment projects adjacent to residentially zoned districts shall be provided as required pursuant to the land development regulations and shall be further supplemented with decorative vertical plantings and green walls that shall be installed on the rear walls of commercial buildings. 
12.  Electric vehicle charging station. A minimum of one level 2, 240-volt electric vehicle charging station shall be provided within a parking space designated for electric vehicles. 
(f)  Application for Pinecrest Parkway alternative site plan. Applicants seeking approval of a site plan utilizing alternative development standards for redevelopment or remodeling adjacent to Pinecrest Parkway shall make the submittals as required under the provisions of the land development regulations required for site plan review and shall be required to comply with all required alternative standards. An applicant may apply either the standard provisions of the zoning district in which the commercial property is located or the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) alternative development standards but may not selectively choose to apply regulations from both the standard and alternative provisions. 
(g)  Expedited permitting/fast track development review. Development services, including the review of site plans and applications for building permits submitted for review, which are in compliance with the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) Corridor alternative development standards shall be given priority by all village departments reviewing such applications. 
(h)  Procedure for review of a Pinecrest Parkway alternative development plan. The administrative official shall review the application and required exhibits submitted pursuant to this division and all other applicable requirements of the land development regulations and shall determine that the documents are adequate as to form and informational content. The administrative official shall then review the submittal with the appropriate village departments for their comments. Subsequent to the review, comments and discussion of the submittal, and of such modifications as the developer may make to it, the administrative official shall prepare a recommendation and present it and the applicant's petition to the village council for consideration at a public hearing, which has been advertised as required. 
(i)  Effect of development order . Upon approval of a Pinecrest Parkway alternative site plan, the approved development plan, along with such requirements, safeguards, modifications or stipulations as may have been included by the village council in its consideration and action, shall be substantially complied with relative to the issuance of building permits, and certificates of occupancy by the village. Deviation from the approved development plan or failure to comply with any requirement, safeguard, modification or stipulation imposed by the village at the time of development approval shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
ARTICLE 5. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- Please refer to the definitions article of the Land Development Code. 

Div. 5.1. - Lots. 
(a)  Minimum lot areas, frontage and yards. 
1.  RU districts lot area exceptions. Every residential lot in any RU district shall meet the minimum frontage lot of land area requirements of the applicable district regulations, except that a lot of record conveyed prior to August 2, 1938, or platted by an un-revoked subdivision recorded prior to August 2, 1938, may be permitted for residential use as follows: 
a.  For single-family residential use, providing the lot is zoned either RU-1 or RU-2 and: 
i.  The lot is less than 75 feet in width, but not less than 50 feet in width, and has a total square foot area of not less than 5,000 square feet, or is a combination of two or more lots totaling the same in width and in square foot area; or 
ii.  The lot is less than 50 feet in width, and has a total square foot area of not less than 3,750 square feet; provided it is at least the same width and depth as the other lots in use in the same subdivision; and provided further, the residence does not exceed the minimum height requirement within the applicable district and does not cover more than 30 percent of the total lot area. Two or more lots may be combined to provide such a lot, subject to the same provisions. 
b.  For duplex use (two-family residential dwelling), provided the lot is zoned RU-2 and the lot is at least 50 feet in width and contains at least 5,550 square feet of lot area. 
2.  Business lots in new subdivisions. BU zoned lots in subdivisions created after November 27, 2000 shall have a width of not less than 50 feet, except that corner lots shall have a frontage of not less than 75 feet on each street and not less than 7,500 square feet of area. Lots having an area of less than 7,500 square feet shall be plat and deed restricted against residential use. 
3.  Lots of record less than minimum size. 
a.  Grandfathering. Any use on a legally platted lot of record which does not meet lot area or width requirements of this chapter may continue provided the use was legally established. This provision shall not be construed to permit the establishment of more than one dwelling unit on a lot that does not meet lot area requirements. 
b.  No further reduction of minimum lot dimensions. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter, except as provided in this chapter, if already less than the minimum required by this chapter, such area or dimension may be continued, but shall not be further reduced. 
(b)  Lot width in RU-1, EU-M, EU-S and EU-1. In the RU-1, EU-M, EU-S and EU-1 districts, the minimum width of lots in new subdivisions may be decreased from the width otherwise required under this chapter, provided the lots meet the following conditions: 
1.  The decrease shall be applicable to lots containing a portion of their frontage along the curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs where development has been platted and approved. 
2.  The minimum lot frontage as defined elsewhere for the various districts must be provided at the minimum building setback line of curvilinear lots. 
3.  The minimum frontage requirement at street right-of-way line and the radius requirements of exterior street right-of-way line along curvilinear streets and culs-de-sac shall meet the following requirements: 
TABLE 5-1 
Zoning Districts Minimum Frontage (feet) RU-1 50 EU-M 80 EU-S 85 EU-1 85  
4.  Lot area must comply with all other minimum requirements of the land development code. 
5.  The design of the streets where the lot frontage occurs must conform to standards adopted by the village. 
(c)  Buildings on through lots. Where a lot extends through from one street to another, the setback requirement for each such street shall be complied with and any building shall have dual facing. Lots which have an approved decorative wall along the rear property line as required by plat shall not be considered through lots. No accessory building or other structure shall be placed in the front yard setback. 
(d)  Unity of title. Unity of title or other similar agreement or covenant shall not be permitted to join parcels of land separated by a road right-of-way or water body. Non-contiguous properties separated by right-of-way or water bodies shall be considered separate parcels of land for site development purposes and shall each meet all requirements of the land development regulations irrespective of the adjoining features. Within multi-family residential and commercial zoning districts, separate parcels created by a covenant in lieu of title shall not be deemed a subdivision of real property subject to the provisions of article VIII of the Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2015-7,  2, 9-8-15) 
Div. 5.2. - Yard regulations and setbacks. 
(a)  Yard to be unobstructed; exceptions. Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of steps, sills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental features projecting not more than four inches from the building wall. Where yard regulations within this division may conflict with setback requirements, the regulation requiring the largest yard shall be applicable. The following exceptions shall be permitted: 
1.  Roof overhangs up to 60 inches or one-half of the required yard, whichever is less. 
2.  Flag poles having a maximum height of 30 feet (one per site). 
3.  Planters not exceeding 30 inches in height or having a cross section of 18 inches or less. 
4.  Freestanding lamp posts having a maximum height of six feet (two per driveway or a maximum of four on any one site). 
(b)  Nonresidential district transition yard requirements. 
1.  Front yard. Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district, the nonresidential district front yard shall be at least equal in depth to that required in the residential district, for a distance of 50 feet from the district boundary line along the same street. 
2.  Side or rear yard. Where the side or rear yard in a residential district abuts a side or rear yard in a nonresidential district, the side or rear yard along the abutting line or lines shall be at least equal in depth to that required in the residential district. In no case, however, shall the abutting side yard or abutting rear yard of the nonresidential district be less than 15 feet. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the nonresidential yard, shall include a landscaped hedge. Where a wall or wood fence exists, landscaping shall be installed to prevent graffiti or climbing and shall include hedges or bushes at least two feet in height at the time of planting. 
(c)  Water-front yard requirements. Every lot which abuts a waterway shall have a waterfront yard. The waterfront yard shall not be utilized for any purpose other than specifically permitted in this land development code. 
(d)  Street and road setbacks. Where right-of-way lines are established for streets, roads or highways, the front yards of lots and side yards of corner lots shall be measured from said right-of-way lines, effective the date such right-of-way lines are officially established. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.3. - Pump islands at service stations; light poles. 
(a)  Pump islands setback. Front setbacks for gasoline service pump islands shall be only 15 feet. 
(b)  Freestanding pump island canopies. Detached, freestanding canopies to cover pump islands at gasoline service stations shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The nearest edge of the detached canopy must be set back a minimum of 17 feet from the front property line (measured to the official right-of-way line). 
2.  The nearest edge of the detached canopy must be set back a minimum of 12 feet from the side street property line (measured to the official right-of-way line). 
3.  No minimum setback or spacing need be provided between the inner edge of the canopy and the gasoline service station building. 
(c)  Light standards. Light standards (poles) in BU districts shall meet the setback requirements for detached signs. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.4. - Amateur radio station antennae. 
    Poles, masts and towers for supporting antennae used in the operation of amateur radio stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(a)  Location on property. All poles, masts and towers shall be placed no closer than five feet to an official right-of-way line or to property under different ownership, or no closer than one foot to an easement. If beam (array) type of antenna is installed, any element or part of such beam type (array) antenna shall extend no closer than five feet to an official right-of-way line or the property under different ownership or no closer than one foot to an easement. 
(b)  Permits. Permits shall be required for installation of any poles, masts or towers over 20 feet above the roof of any structure to which they may be attached, and for any installation over 35 feet in height when erected on natural ground. Permits shall be obtained from the administrative official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing all dimensions, size and kind of members, footings and guy wires, if any; locations, depth and type of guy anchors and footings, if any; and the type and weight of antennae, apparatus or structure to be attached to or supported by the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.5. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
(a)  Placement within property lines. All walls, fences and hedges must be placed within the property lines unless approved by the administrative official or the village council. Access to overhead electrical and utility line easements shall be provided and maintained where practical, by means of a gate or other means of access, subject to review and approval of the administrative official. 
(b)  Exterior finish of walls and fences. Each side of a concrete block and stucco wall shall be completely finished with stucco and paint. Each side of a decorative masonry wall shall be completely painted. The finished side of all fences shall face outward. If a wall or fence is to be placed on a shared property line, consent for access must be obtained from the adjoining property owner(s) prior to finishing the opposite side of the wall or fence. If such consent cannot be obtained, the property owner erecting the wall or fence must present proof that a request for access approval was mailed to every adjacent property owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing addresses as listed in the most current county tax roll, and the mailing was returned undeliverable or the adjacent property owner(s) failed to respond to the request within 30 days after receipt. Upon such a showing, the property owner erecting the wall or fence shall not be required to finish the opposite side of the wall or fence. All fences shall be maintained in good condition free of rot and mildew. Permanent chain link fences, walls, and other permitted fences, shall not be covered or draped with fabric, mesh, plastic, or other material, except that chain link gates installed within permitted chain link fences may be covered. 
(c)  Visibility triangle. All driveway/roadway entrances and exits shall be constructed and maintained so that vehicles can enter, exit and travel along the roadways without posing danger to occupants, pedestrians or other vehicles. To this end, structures and landscaping shall not obscure the visibility triangle and shall not exceed 2.5 feet in height within the triangle of visibility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, one concrete column may be erected within the triangle next to the driveway but it may not be taller than eight feet or wider than 19 inches by 19 inches, including any finishing materials. 
(d)  Measuring height of wall, fence or hedge. The height of a wall; hedge or fence shall be the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished building site to the top of the wall, hedge or fence. The average elevation shall be measured along both sides of the wall, hedge or fence line. Existing grade may not be increased or decreased to affect the permitted (or required) height of a wall, hedge or fence, unless the entire building site is graded to even out the level of the site or to increase it to the required flood criteria elevation. Average elevation shall be determined by taking elevations along both sides of the wall, hedge or fence line at five-foot intervals, totaling the elevations, and then dividing the total by the number of stations at which the elevations were taken. 
(e)  Fences, walls or hedges abutting two distinct residential districts. Where a residential district abuts another differently zoned residential district, the height of a fence, wall or hedge that may be erected or maintained on the common property line shall be the tallest height permitted in either district. 
(f)  Fences for tennis courts; fences and walls for other recreational uses. Fences for tennis courts may be erected up to 14 feet in height if they conform to accessory use setbacks. The height of fences and walls in connection with other permitted recreational uses, such as baseball backstops, handball courts, and the like, shall be permitted as necessary for the particular use, but required accessory use setbacks must be observed. 
(g)  Wire fences, barbed wire and electrically charged fences. Wire fences shall not be permitted in the front of a property but may be permitted adjacent to the sides and rear. Where a chain link fence is permitted adjacent to a street, shrubs shall be planted adjacent to either side of the fence, planted 24 inches on center, at a minimum height of 30 inches at time of planting. Barbed wire fences and fences charged with electricity shall be permitted only in BU districts if approved by the village council as a conditional use. In BU districts, barbed wire fences are not permitted at in the front of the property, and must be placed on an angle extension of not more than 16 inches on top of walls or fences at least six feet in height. This extension shall contain no more than three strands of barbed wire and shall not extend over official rights-of-way or over property under different ownership. 
(h)  Height in RU and EU districts. The height of any wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height. However, walls and fences along streets, roads, and rights-of-way, and walls or fences on a side property line within the required front yard setback shall be restricted to a maximum of 36 inches of solid construction with an additional 36 inches of open non-masonry fencing, pickets, or other decorative features above, excluding columns which shall be spaced a minimum of eight feet apart. 
The open, non-masonry portion of the fence shall consist of unobstructed openings that shall measure no less than 3.5 inches in width and solid structural elements that are no wider than the unobstructed openings such that a minimum of 50 percent openness is achieved. Alternative designs that are in substantial compliance with this requirement and allow a minimum of 50 percent openness may be permitted if approved by the administrative official. 
(i)  Height of hedges in all districts. The height of any hedges shall be a maximum of 14 feet. 
(j)  Heights of walls and fences in BU and PS districts. In the BU and PS districts, any wire fence shall not exceed eight feet in height when located within the required front or side street setback areas. When located between the building line and other property lines, a wire fence shall not exceed eight feet in height. Walls and hedges, when located within the required front or side street setback areas, shall not exceed four feet in height; when located between the building line and other property lines, walls and hedges shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(k)  Height of gates and columns. The height of any gate or column shall not exceed eight feet in any district. However, gates adjacent to streets, roads, rights-of-way, etc. shall be restricted to a maximum of 48 inches of solid construction with an additional 48 inches of open non-masonry fencing, pickets, or other decorative features. 
The open, non-masonry portion of the gate shall consist of unobstructed openings that shall measure no less than 3.5 inches in width and solid structural elements that are no wider than the unobstructed openings such that a minimum of 50 percent openness is achieved. Alternative designs that are in substantial compliance with this requirement and allow a minimum of 50 percent openness may be permitted if approved by the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-4,  2, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.6. - Fences and safety barriers for swimming pools. 
(a)  Required for final inspection of pool. The administrative official shall not grant final inspection or approval for a swimming pool unless a safety barrier has been erected as hereinafter provided. No pool shall be filled with water unless a final inspection has been made and approved, except that testing may be approved by the administrative official. 
(b)  Types permitted. The safety barrier shall take the form of a screened-in patio, a wooden fence, a wire fence, a rock wall, a concrete block wall or other materials, so as to enable the owner to blend the same with the style of architecture planned or in existence on the property. 
(c)  Height. The minimum height of the safety barrier shall be not less than four feet. 
(d)  Location of barrier. The safety barrier shall be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises, or a portion thereof, on which the swimming pool is erected. In either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area. Pools located in enclosed structures or on the roofs of buildings shall not require the installation of barriers. 
(e)  Gates. Gates shall be of the spring lock type and shall automatically be in a closed and fastened position at all times. Gates relying on electric closures with battery backup systems shall not be permitted for enclosure of swimming pools. Gates shall also be equipped with a safe lock and shall be locked when the swimming pool is not in use. Boards, pickets, louvers, or other such members be spaced, constructed, and erected so as to make the gate non-climbable and impenetrable. When horizontal pickets are used for a private or residential pool barrier, the horizontal pickets shall not have any gaps, openings, indentations or protrusions. 
(f)  Wooden fences. For wooden fences, the boards, pickets, louvers, or other such members shall be spaced, constructed, and erected so as to make the fence non-climbable and impenetrable. When horizontal pickets are used for a private or residential pool barrier, the horizontal pickets shall not have any gaps, openings, indentations or protrusions. 
(g)  Walls. Walls, whether of the rock or block type, shall be so erected to make them non-climbable. 
(h)  Wire fences. Wire fences shall be the two-inch chain link or diamond weave non-climbable type, or of an approved equal, quality. Wire fences shall be constructed with a top rail, and shall be of a heavy, galvanized material. 
(i)  Refusal of permit. The administrative official shall have discretion to refuse approval of a safety barrier which, in the official's opinion, does not furnish the safety requirements of this division, i.e., that is high enough and so constructed to keep the children of preschool age from getting over or through it. 
(j)  Continued maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and occupant of the premises upon which the swimming pool is erected to maintain and keep it in proper and safe condition. 
(k)  Statutory requirements. The requirements of this division shall be supplementary to the requirements of F.S.  757.12, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.7. - Accessory buildings and structures; utility sheds; swimming pools; boat storage; recreation and camping equipment; tents; awnings and canopies. 
(a)  Accessory buildings, prior construction and use thereof. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal use has been completed, unless construction of the principal and accessory buildings is concurrent. No accessory building shall be used unless the principal building exists on the front portion of the same lot. No permit shall be issued for an accessory building unless the principal building is in use, or unless a permit is obtained simultaneously for both buildings and construction progresses concurrently. Accessory buildings/structures or uses shall conform to the same setbacks as the principal structures except as follows: 
1.  Utility sheds, not larger than 100 square feet and not exceeding eight feet in height. Utility sheds, not larger than 100 square feet, not exceeding eight feet in height and incidental to an existing single-family or townhouse residential use shall comply with the following setback requirements: 
TABLE 5-2 
Location of Setback Setback in Feet Rear yard 5 Interior side yard 5 Setback from house and other structures 10  
2.  Utility sheds larger than 100 square feet. Utility sheds larger than 100 square feet shall comply with the setbacks of the accessory structure as referenced in the district regulations of article 4. 
3.  Accessory buildings in a townhouse development. No accessory buildings, including sheds, shall be permitted in unwalled areas on sites containing a townhouse. Where an accessory building is located within an area enclosed with walls, it shall not extend above the height of the walls. In addition, the site of all utility sheds within a townhouse development shall provide a perpetual four feet wall-maintenance easement on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line, and with the exception of walls and/or fences, shall be kept clear of structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property. The wall shall be maintained in its original color and treatment unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two affected lot owners. Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of 24 inches but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling placed on the lot line is limited to the easement area. Building footings may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of eight inches. 
4.  Building code. All utility sheds shall comply with the state building code or be approved by the state. 
(b)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools in all districts shall be constructed no closer than 7.5 feet to any building foundation, unless both the design and construction are approved by the administrative official as safe and will not result in a weakening of or damage to the building foundation. In no event shall pools be closer than 18 inches to any wall or any enclosure. 
(c)  Screen enclosures. Roofed screen enclosures shall be included in lot coverage calculations. Screen enclosures attached to the principal building shall be permitted in the rear and side yards provided that: 
1.  The screen enclosure is not visible from the street and does not exceed the height of the principal building; 
2.  The screen enclosure is not closer to the front property line or the side street property line than is the principal building; 
3.  The screen enclosure meets required setbacks for the principal building. 
4.  Screen enclosures not attached to the principal building shall meet setback requirements for accessory buildings. When used for enclosing swimming pools, screen enclosures shall meet the following setback requirements: 
TABLE 5-3 
District Front Side Rear RU-1, 
RU-2 Behind principal building and not visible from street 10' 15' All other RU Behind principal building and inside of building cluster 20' 15' EU-1, 
EU-1C Behind front wall of principal building and not visible from street 20' 15' EU-M, 
EU-S Behind front wall of principal building and not visible from street 20' 15'  
(d)  Boat and personal watercraft storage. A boat of less than 26 feet in length, not more than 96 inches in width and 13 feet six 6 inches in height, and two personal watercrafts may be stored in the RU and EU districts, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Storage shall be to the rear of the front building line and behind the side street building line, in each case the building line referred to being that portion furthest from the street. 
2.  No more than one boat may be stored on any one premise. 
3.  Boats and place of storage shall be kept in clean, neat and presentable condition. 
4.  No major repairs or overhaul work shall be made or performed on the premises. 
5.  The boats shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters, and shall be placed on and secured to a transporting trailer. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in the form of a travel and camping trailer, truck trailer and motor travel home, designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use; and off-road motor vehicles designed or intended for off-road or track racing use, unlicensed for on-road use (i.e. "Monster Trucks") may be parked on properties containing a single-family, or duplex residence, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No more than one such vehicle shall be parked on such site. 
2.  Parking shall be limited to vehicle owned or leased by the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned, or owned or leased by a bona fide house guest of the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned. The parking of a vehicle by a guest shall not exceed 14 days. 
3.  The location for parked vehicle shall be in either the rear yard or the side yard to the rear of a line established by the front building line farthest from the street and setback to at least the rear building line wherever possible. In no event shall the vehicle be parked in front of such front building line. The vehicle shall be setback from side property lines at least a distance equivalent to the required side setback for the principal building and shall be set back from the rear property line at least ten feet. 
4.  The vehicle and the area of parking shall be maintained in a clean, neat and presentable manner and the vehicle shall be in a usable condition at all times. 
5.  The vehicle shall, at all times, have attached a current vehicle registration license plate. 
6.  No major repairs or overhaul work on the vehicle shall be made or performed on the site, or any other work performed thereon which would constitute a nuisance under existing ordinances. 
7.  When parked on the site, the vehicle shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters, or for housekeeping or storage purposes, and shall not have attached thereto any service connections lines, except where a catastrophic event or an Act of God has rendered the permitted principal residence on the property unsafe as determined by the Building Official and except as may periodically be required to maintain the vehicle and appliances. In the event that the permitted principal residence has been determined to be unsafe by the Building Official, the vehicle may be used for living or sleeping quarters for no more than 30 days unless additional time, up to 90 days, is approved by the Building Official. If time in excess of 120 days is needed, an application must be made to the Village Council for additional time, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the 120-day period. The applicant may continue to use the vehicle until the Village Council has made a decision on the request. 
8.  The vehicle shall not exceed the maximum length, width, height and weight permitted under applicable provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the state; provided, however, the maximum length shall not exceed 30 feet and the maximum height shall not exceed ten feet. 
9.  The vehicle shall be so secured so that it will not be a hazard or menace during high winds or hurricane. 
10.  Any dealer or individual offering such new or used vehicle for sale must furnish and attach to such vehicle a true copy of these regulations. 
11.  Except as otherwise provided herein, recreational vehicles, trailers, and campers shall not be parked or stored overnight, or used for living purposes anywhere in the Village of Pinecrest. 
(f)  Tents. Tents less than 400 square feet, with or without electricity may be permitted by building permit by the administrative official for special uses such as weddings, birthdays, etc., in residential zones, for up to three consecutive days, two times per year, per property. Tents in nonresidential areas shall not be permitted. 
(g)  Awnings/canopies. Landscaped and paved areas that are covered by awnings or canopies shall be counted as part of the lot coverage for the site. Awnings or canopies may project up to five feet into the required setbacks. 
(h)  Little free libraries. One "little free library", defined as a small accessory structure designed to accommodate and facilitate a "take a book, return a book" free book exchange, typically sponsored by an individual or family, and housed in a small structure on the owner's lawn where neighbors and visitors may take a book or leave books for others to read may be allowed in residential zoning districts with a no-fee permit subject to the following requirements: 
  Must be located on private property 
  May not be located within the public road right-of-way 
  Must be set back ten feet from the front property line 
  May not interfere with or obstruct the view or free passage of pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicle traffic 
  May not obstruct any fire hydrant 
  Exterior dimensions be approximately 20" wide, 22" high, and 16" deep 
  Must be mounted on a sturdy post or secure base 
  Shall not exceed six feet in height 
  The number of libraries permitted shall be limited to one per property 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2010-3,  1, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.8. - Commercial vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  Tow trucks in residential districts are prohibited unless they are on the property or on the public right-of-way abutting the property and are for the purpose of delivery or retrieval of a vehicle either owned or leased by the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned, or owned or leased by a bona-fide house guest of the occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of the site concerned. 
(b)  Outside storage of commercial equipment, supplies or materials are prohibited in all zoning districts, except at construction sites where building permits have been issued. 
(c)  Storage of commercial containers, temporary storage containers, tractor-trailers, trucks, semi-trailers, trailers, steel containers, or portable dwelling units shall not be permitted to be stored in any zoning district except that one storage container or trailer may be temporarily located on a construction site within the commercial zoning districts to allow for the temporary storage of materials and supplies during construction. The storage container or trailer shall be permitted in conjunction with issuance of a building permit and shall be removed upon completion of construction and prior to issuance to a certificate of occupancy. Tractor-trailers may be permitted for purposes of loading and unloading. The administrative official may approve use of a construction trailer for development of subdivisions in residential districts and all commercial districts, provided the trailer is connected to a sanitary disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.9. - Approval of government uses. 
    The village council may authorize the location, construction and operation of a governmental facility without regard to the zoning district of any particular site or location subject to the following: 
(a)  Public hearing. The village council may only authorize the erection, construction and operation of governmental facilities on a particular property by resolution following public hearing which has been noticed as follows: 
1.  Required notice. The public hearing shall be held only following publication of notice at least 30 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and shall include information regarding the time and place of the public hearing. 
2.  Courtesy notice. A courtesy notice containing general information as to the date, time, and place of the hearing, the property location and general nature of the application may be mailed to the property owners of record within a radius of 1,000 feet of the property, or such greater distance as the administrative official may prescribe failure to mail or receive such courtesy notice shall not affect any action or proceeding taken hereunder. 
3.  Posting of property. To provide additional notice to the public, the property shall be posted by a sign or signs indicating the proposed action and the time and place of the public hearing thereon. Failure to post such property shall not affect any action taken hereunder. 
(b)  Village council decision. At the public hearing the village council shall consider, among other factors: 
1.  The type of function involved and the public need therefore; 
2.  The existing land use pattern in the area; 
3.  Alternative locations for the facility; and 
4.  The nature of the impact of the facility on the surrounding property. 
After considering these factors, the village council shall take such action as is necessary to provide for and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the village. 
(c)  District requirements. Government uses shall comply with the standards of the district in which they are listed as a permitted use; otherwise, in all other districts government uses shall comply with the standards and regulations of the RU-5 district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.10. - Educational and child care facilities, nonpublic. 
(a)  Applicability and definitions. 
1.  This division shall apply to private schools, nonpublic educational facilities, child care or family care facilities. As used in this division, the term "private school" or "nonpublic educational facility" shall mean an institution which provides instruction from kindergarten level through the college level and which does not come under the direct operation and administration of the county school board or the state. Such uses intended to be controlled by this division include, but are not limited to, the following. 
a.  Kindergarten. Child care and preschool programs for children ages four through six. 
b.  Private college/university. An institution of higher learning beyond the high school level. 
c.  Private school. Any private institution providing child care or instruction at any level from infants through the college. 
d.  Elementary, middle and senior high schools. References to these schools are to be loosely interpreted to encompass any schools, graded or ungraded, whose students are within the age ranges typically found at these school levels. 
2.  As used in this division the term "child care" or "family care" shall include, but is not limited to, the following when they do not come under the direct operation and administration of the county school board or the state. 
a.  After school care. Child care and recreation for children above the age of five when no formal schooling program is conducted and where the care provided is generally after school, on weekends, school holidays and vacations. 
b.  Babysitting service for shoppers. Child care for limited time periods [i.e., maximum three hours], provided within a shopping center solely for the convenience of the patrons, and limited to not more than 40 children at any one time. 
c.  Day nurseries. Child care for infants and children up to and including age six. 
d.  Family day care homes. Child care and recreation with a maximum of five children including the day care operator's own children. 
(b)  Religious activities. This division shall not apply to facilities used principally for weekend or intermittent nonacademic religious instruction or for the care of children whose parents or guardians are attending religious services or meetings on the premises. 
(c)  District requirements for certain uses. All day nurseries, after-school centers, kindergartens and private schools shall meet the requirements included herein and the requirements of the particular district in which they are located if that district is one in which the facility is a permitted use; facilities in other districts shall meet RU-3 requirements. 
(d)  Bonus provisions for offices providing child care facilities in commercial districts. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, office developments in the commercial districts shall be eligible for a floor area bonus of three square feet for each square foot of floor area dedicated to child care use if the development meets the following criteria: (i) it contains a platted lot of not less than five acres net approved under one site plan and under one ownership with a recorded unity of title agreement; and (ii) includes day nursery, kindergarten or after school care space. However, such facilities shall be required to comply with the following requirements and entitlements: 
1.  Physical standards for the licensed child care facility shall be as provided in this Code. 
2.  The outdoor area provided in connection with any licensed childcare facility qualifying under this division shall be included in the calculation of open space required to be provided in the district in which the facility is located. As a condition of qualifying for inclusion in the calculation of total required open space, the outdoor area shall be shown in the required site plan. The required site plan shall establish: 1) Direct proximity or protected access between the child care facility and the open area; 2) Adequate provisions for safety in the outdoor area; and 3) Reasonable provisions for integrating use and enjoyment of the outdoor area both for child care and for other uses at the site. 
3.  For each square foot of floor area dedicated to child care use under this division, an additional three square feet of floor area for uses other than the child care use at the site shall be allowed in calculating the maximum floor area ratio permitted As a condition of site plan approval, the administrative official shall require a recorded covenant establishing the following: 
a.  The calculations and conditions upon which the additional square footage has been permitted; and 
b.  Restricting the area designated for child care to child care use only. 
(e)  Private colleges and universities. Private colleges and universities with sites of 30 acres or less shall meet the minimum standards established herein for high school facilities. In addition to said minimum standards, facilities with sites exceed 30 acres shall be subject to intensive review by the village council utilizing the study entitled "Physical Standards for Proposed Private Educational Facilities in Unincorporated Dade County," adopted pursuant to county Resolution No. R-63377. 
(f)  Required information for site plan approval. In addition to site plan information required pursuant the Code, all nonpublic educational facilities, shall submit the following information as part of the site plan application: 
1.  Total size of the site; 
2.  Maximum number of students to be served; 
3.  Number of teachers and administrative and clerical personnel; 
4.  Number of classrooms and total square footage of classroom space; 
5.  Total square footage of non-classroom space; 
6.  Amount of exterior recreational/play area in square footage; 
7.  Number and type of vehicles that will be used in conjunction with the operation of the facility; 
8.  Number of parking spaces provided for staff, visitors, and transportation vehicles, 
9.  Grades or age groups that will be served; 
10.  Days and hours of operations; and 
11.  Means of compliance with requirements by the county fire and rescue department, the county department of public health, the state department of health and rehabilitative services, and any federal guidelines applicable to the specific application. 
(g)  Calculation of physical space requirements for multiple-use facilities. Where a private educational facility is to be operated in a structure simultaneously used as a residence, church or other facility, the area which will be specifically used for a private school or child care facility during the hours of operation shall be clearly defined. The area so delineated shall be used as the basis for determining physical space requirements as provided in this article. No physical space credit will be given for interior or exterior areas that are not restricted to the school or child care use during the hours of operation of said facility. 
(h)  Combination of residential and nonpublic educational facilities. No combination of residential use and nonpublic educational facility will be permitted on the same property except as follows: 
1.  A single-family residential use will be permitted in the same building with a nursery or kindergarten use, where the same is used only by the nursery-kindergarten operator. 
2.  In connection with day nursery and kindergarten facilities, a residential unit for a caretaker may be permitted only when the facility operator does not reside on said premises. 
3.  A residential unit will be permitted for a caretaker on the site of an elementary, middle or senior high school. 
4.  An existing multifamily apartment building or complex may incorporate a day nursery or kindergarten for the accommodation of residents only, provided that such facility will not be contrary to any site plans previously approved at a public hearing. 
5.  Nonpublic educational facilities may be incorporated into a proposed apartment building or complex, provided that said schools are included in the plans submitted for approval at public hearing (in case of an apartment complex), or for permit (in case of an apartment building). 
(i)  Physical standards. 
1.  Minimum site sizes. The following are the minimum site sizes that shall be required, based on the proposed maximum number of children who will use the facility at any one time. All calculations for the number of children/students shall be based on the total proposed maximum enrollment. When the number of children permitted results in a fractional number, any such fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall be rounded off to the next highest whole number. When grade levels overlap, the more restrictive standard shall be used. 
a.  Minimum site size for day nurseries, preschool and after school care. The maximum number of children for day nurseries, preschool and after school care shall not exceed the following: 
TABLE 5-4 
MINIMUM SITE SIZE FOR DAY NURSERIES, PRESCHOOL AND AFTER SCHOOL CARE 
Square Feet of Site Area Maximum Number of Children Less than or equal to 7,500 One child for each 300 square feet 7,500-15,000 One additional child per each 600 sq. ft. of the site over 7,500 sq. ft. to 15,000 sq. ft. Greater than 15,000 One additional child per each 900 sq. ft. of the site over 15,000 sq. ft.  
b.  Minimum site size for grades kindergarten through the sixth grade. The maximum number of children for kindergarten through the sixth grade shall not exceed sixty (60) children per acre. 
c.  Minimum site size for grades seven through 12. The maximum number of students for seventh through twelfth grades shall not exceed the following: 
TABLE 5-5 
MINIMUM SITE SIZE FOR GRADES SEVEN THROUGH TWELVE 
Square Feet of Site Area Maximum Number of Students From zero acres to two acres inclusive 45 students per acre From more than two acres up to four acres inclusive 50 students per acre From more than four acres up to six acres inclusive 55 students per acre From more than six acres up to eight acres inclusive 60 students per acre From more than eight acres up to ten acres inclusive 65 students per acre From more than ten acres 67 students per acre  
2.  Outdoor areas. Outdoor recreation/play areas shall meet with the following minimum standards, calculated in terms of the proposed maximum number of children for attendance at the school at any one time, unless otherwise indicated. Where there are category combinations, each classification shall be calculated individually. 
TABLE 5-6 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION AREAS 
Type School Required Square Footage Day nursery/kindergarten and preschool and afterschool care 45 sq. ft. per child calculated in terms of half of the proposed maximum number of children for attendance at the school at one time Elementary school (grades 1-6) 500 sq. ft. per student for the first 30 students; thereafter, 300 sq. ft. per student 800 sq. ft. perstudent for the first 30 students Middle and senior high school (grades 7-12) 300 sq. ft. per student for the next 300 students; thereafter, 150 sq. ft. per student  
3.  Signs. Signs shall comply with district regulations as contained in the Code; provided, however, that the total square footage of all freestanding signs in any residential district shall not exceed six square feet in size. 
4.  Auto stacking. Stacking space, defined as that space in which pickup and delivery of children can take place, shall be provided for a minimum of two (2) automobiles for schools with 20 to 40 children; schools with 40 to 60 children shall provide four spaces; thereafter there shall be provided a space sufficient to stack five automobiles. 
5.  Parking requirements. Parking requirements shall be as provided in the Code. 
6.  Classroom size. All spaces shall be calculated on the effective net area usable for instruction or general care of the group to be housed. This space shall not include kitchen areas, bathrooms, and hallways. The minimum classroom space shall be determined by multiplying the maximum proposed number of pupils for attendance at any one time by the minimum square footage, as provided in table 5-7 below. Where a private educational facility is non-graded, calculations shall be based on the age level that corresponds to the grade level in the public school system. Where a school includes more than one of the following categories, each category shall be individually computed: 
TABLE 5-7 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CLASSROOM AREA 
Type School Required Square Feet Day nursery/kindergarten, preschool and afterschool care 35 sq. ft. per pupil Elementary grades (1-6) 30 sq. ft. per pupil Middle high and senior high grades 25 sq. ft. per pupil Baby sitting service 22 sq. ft. of room area per child  
7.  Structure height. The structure height shall not exceed the height permitted for that site by the existing regulations. 
8.  Trees. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with the Code. 
9.  Exemptions. Baby-sitting services are exempted from the requirements of outdoor areas, auto stacking, parking requirements and trees of this division. Schools permitted within existing multifamily structures pursuant to subsection (h)(4) of this division are exempted from the requirements of auto stacking and parking requirements of this division, provided such schools are limited to the occupants of the subject multifamily structures. 
10.  Prohibited locations for child care facilities. Child care facilities as described in this division shall be prohibited from operating on property abutting or containing a water body such as a pond, lake, canal, irrigation well, or other body of water unless a safety barrier is provided which totally encloses or affords complete separation from such water hazards. Swimming pools and permanent wading pools in excess of 18 inches in depth shall be totally enclosed and separated from the balance of the property so as to prevent unrestricted admittance. All such barriers shall be a minimum of 48 inches in height and shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Gates. Gates shall be of the spring back type so that they shall automatically be in a closed and fastened position at all times. Gates shall also be equipped with a safe lock and shall be locked when the area is without adult supervision. 
b.  Safety barriers. All safety barriers shall be constructed in accordance with the standards established in this Code, except that screen enclosures shall not constitute a safety barrier for these purposes. 
(j)  Additional site plan review standards. In addition to site plan review as required by this Code, the following review standards shall be utilized by the village: 
1.  Study guide. The study entitled "Physical Standards for Proposed Private Educational Facilities in Unincorporated Dade County," dated 1977, shall be used as a general guide in the review of proposed nonpublic educational facilities; provided, however, that in no case shall the educational philosophy of a school be considered in the evaluation of the application. 
2.  Planning and neighborhood studies. Planning and neighborhood studies accepted or approved by the village council that include recommendations relevant to the facility site shall be used in the review process. 
3.  Scale. Scale of proposed nonpublic educational facilities shall be compatible with surrounding proposed or existing uses and shall be made compatible by the use of buffering elements. 
4.  Compatibility. The design of the nonpublic educational facilities shall be compatible with the design, kind and intensity of uses and scale of the surrounding area. 
5.  Buffers. Buffering elements shall be utilized for visual screening and substantial reduction of noise levels at all property lines where necessary. 
6.  Landscape. Landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as is practicable by minimizing the removal of trees or the alteration of favorable characteristics of the site. Landscaping and trees shall be provided in accordance with this Code. 
7.  Circulation. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation shall be separated insofar as is practicable, and all circulation systems shall adequately serve the needs of the facility and be compatible and functional with circulation systems outside the facility. 
8.  Noise. Where noise from such sources as automobile traffic is a problem, effective measures shall be provided to reduce such noise to acceptable levels. 
9.  Service areas. Wherever service areas are provided they shall be screened and so located as not to interfere with the livability of the adjacent residential properties. 
10.  Parking areas. Parking areas shall be screened and so located as not to interfere with the livability of the adjacent residential properties. 
11.  Operating time. The operational hours of a nonpublic educational facility shall be such that the impact upon the immediate residential neighborhood is minimized. 
12.  Commercial impacts. Where schools are permitted in commercial areas it shall be clearly demonstrated in graphic form how the impact of the commercial area has been minimized by design techniques. 
13.  Fences and walls. Recreation and/or play areas shall be enclosed with fences and/or walls. 
(k)  Certificate of use and occupancy. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be automatically renewable annually by the village upon compliance with all terms and conditions of, and including maintenance of the facility in accordance with the approved plan. 
(l)  Grandfather clause. It is not the intention of this division to require any changes in any nonpublic educational facilities already in existence as of the November 27, 2000, so long as said uses have been legally established in accordance with prior applicable existing regulations. With the exceptions noted above, all nonpublic educational facilities shall comply with the requirements of this article. Any proposed minor changes to existing schools that were approved prior to the adoption of this division may be approved by the administrative official, provided that such modifications do not violate the approved site plan and any conditions affixed thereto. Such minor changes shall include, but not be limited to, enlargement of the play area, and additions such as storage areas, additional restrooms, and expansion of kitchen facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.11. - Townhouses. 
(a)  Sites and lots containing townhouse units. 
1.  Size of development site. The minimum size of the site to be developed for townhouses shall be one-half acre. 
2.  Lot area for each unit. No townhouse lot shall contain an area of less than 1,250 square feet. The average size lot for a townhouse in a group of three or more townhouses shall not be less than 1,500 square feet. The foundation of each unit shall be on an individual site, except where the units are separated by a common party wall in which event the foundation may be installed equidistant on each side of the lot line for the length of the party wall and its extension along the offset of the townhouses on abutting lots. 
(b)  Location and groupings of townhouses. A townhouse unit shall be a one-family dwelling unit located within a group of three or more such units separated by a common party fire wall; provided, however, that up to ten percent of the total number of units on any individual site plan may be developed in two-unit groupings. A grouping of townhouses shall not exceed 240 feet in length. Each townhouse site must have a clear, direct frontage on public streets or to accessways complying with Village specifications for private streets. 
(c)  Common party fire wall. The common party fire wall shall extend to the roof line or above the roof of units which it serves and shall have no openings therein. Where units are offset from one another and a common party wall is use, the wall may be placed equidistant on each side of the lot line, but not exceeding the length of the offset. 
(d)  Siting on platted lot; roof line. Each townhouse unit shall be constructed upon a separate platted lot; provided, however, that the roof lines may overhang onto adjacent lots or common areas a maximum of 24 inches, subject to the approval of and determination by the administrative official that the roof or drainage system is designed so that runoff of water from the roof does not adversely affect adjacent units or lots. Each townhouse unit shall be serviced with separate utilities and other facilities and shall otherwise be independent of one another; provided, however, that the electrical lines or telephone lines or cables which service a particular unit may be placed through other lots where approved by the administrative official. The administrative official's approval shall be based upon his finding that the placement of said lines or cables will not adversely affect the lots through which they are placed. 
(e)  Design and facility criteria. 
1.  Utilities and services. Each townhouse shall be independently served by separate heating, air conditioning, sewer, water, electric power, gas, and other facility and utility services, wherever such utilities and services are provided, and no townhouse shall be in any way dependent upon such services or utility lines located within another unit or on or in another townhouse or townhouse site, except as may be installed in public easements. All townhouses must be connected to water and sewer lines and all electrical and telephone lines in a townhouse development site shall be placed underground. Proper and adequate access for firefighting purposes, and access to service areas to provide garbage and waste collection, and for other necessary services shall be provided. 
2.  Parking/setback for parking. Where parking spaces are provided in front of townhouse buildings, the required front setback of the building shall be 25 feet from the property line. Where garages are provided, the garage portion of the structure shall be set back 20 feet from the property line. Any portion of the townhouse building that is not located directly in front of parking spaces shall be set back 15 feet from the property line. 
3.  Street right-of-way width and improvements. The right-of-way width of streets serving a group of townhouses and the improvements therein shall conform to all applicable minimum Village standards and requirements for such streets. 
4.  Walls. All patio and outdoor living areas on each townhouse site shall be enclosed by a wall affording complete screening, except in cases where a natural feature of the site such as a lake or golf course would suggest that complete screening would not be required. Such determination shall be made as a result of the site plan review process as provided herein. Walls shall be of masonry or other material and shall be six feet in height. A walled-in patio may include a screen roof. All rear yard areas used for service, such as drying areas, shall be completely screened from view from the street and from adjoining lots by walls or landscaping. 
5.  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be permitted in unwalled areas on sites containing a townhouse. Accessory buildings located within an area enclosed with walls shall not extend above the height of the walls. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.12. - Special facilities/homes-community residential facilities, group homes and foster care facilities. 
    Community residential facilities having seven to 14 residents may be located in those districts where such facilities are listed as a conditional use within the provisions of article 4 of the land development code. However, such facilities must meet all of the following standards in order to be approved by the village council: 
(a)  Shall be licensed by the state. 
(b)  Shall not be located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another duly licensed and operational community residential home within a multiple family residential district. The home shall not be located within a distance of 500 feet of a single-family residential district. This distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest portion of the existing structure to the nearest portion of the proposed home, excepting that in the case of the 500 feet requirement, the distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the single-family district to the nearest point of the proposed home. 
(c)  Shall conform to the land development regulations applicable to other multi-family development. 
(d)  The sponsoring agency shall notify the administrative official in writing of its intent to establish said facility. Such notice shall contain the address and legal description of the site, the number of resident clients, and a statement from the state department of children and family services indicating the licensing status of the proposed facility. 
(e)  Nothing under this regulation shall permit persons to occupy a community residential home who would constitute a threat to the health and safety of other persons or whose residency would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(f)  Consistent with F.S. ch. 419, group homes of six or fewer residents licensed as community residential homes by the state department of children and family services shall be deemed a single-family unit and shall be allowed in single-family or multi-family districts provided that such homes shall not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another existing duly licensed group home of six or fewer residents. Similarly, foster care facilities duly licensed by the state shall be allowed in both single-family and multi-family districts. 
(g)  All sites for foster care and group care facilities shall contain requisite infrastructure including: potable water; adequate surface water management; and approved system of wastewater disposal; and an adequate system for solid waste collection and disposal. The sites shall also be free of safety hazards and all structures shall comply with village ordinances and applicable state laws including applicable state licensing and program requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.13. - Historic or archaeological sites. 
    Development which impacts a historic or archaeological site or structure identified in the adopted comprehensive development master plan shall include a site plan which mitigates any potential adverse impacts. This site plan shall address the following: 
(a)  Adverse impacts from destruction or alteration of all or part of such site; 
(b)  Adverse impacts resulting from isolation from, or alteration of, the surrounding environment; 
(c)  Adverse impacts resulting from introduction of visual, audible, or atmospheric elements out of character with a property or alter its setting; 
(d)  Vegetation removal shall not be permitted on a historic or archaeological site unless the vegetation to be removed is a part of a duly authorized scientific excavation, or is a part of an approved development plan; and 
(e)  Adverse impacts from other forms of neglect resulting in resource deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.14. - Public telephones. 
(a)  Application, including waiver of objections. Certificates of use and occupancy must be secured for each public telephone erected. The application for a certificate must be accompanied by a location sketch, and a waiver of objection from the abutting property owners within 150 feet on each side of the location site, and from the property owner on the opposite side of any street abutting from the site location. 
(b)  Fees. A fee, as set by resolution of the village council and as amended from time to time, shall be paid for each certificate issued. 
(c)  Location and design. Public telephones shall be permitted on a permanent basis in all BU, PS, or PR districts and approved hotel and office developments, so long as they do not constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance. The public telephone must be erected on private property, conform to regular setback requirements and the location must be approved by the administrative official. Each public telephone shall be properly fastened to the ground so that it shall not become a wind hazard. All public telephones shall be properly maintained and painted so that they shall not become unsightly or an eyesore. The conventional type of strip telephone signs will be permitted providing they are placed on the booth in the usual and conventional manner. Signs shall not be erected independent of the booth structure. In addition to the usual booth signs, the standard public telephone plaque signs shall be permitted. The location of signs shall meet the approval of the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.15. - Open air cafe in conjunction with a restaurant. 
    An open-air cafe is permitted only as an accessory use to a restaurant in a Business District (BU-1, BU-1A, BU-2, BU-3). The open air cafe shall comply with all code requirements and the following additional conditions and restrictions: 
(a)  Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared and submitted to the village for approval pursuant to requirements of the land development code. In addition to requirements of site plan review, such plan shall include the floor plan of the existing restaurant, including tables, chairs and restrooms, and the proposed open-air cafe. The plan shall also show the existing parking; any proposed landscaping; location of refuse containers; proposed lighting; layout of all tables, chairs, benches, and other furniture; and pedestrian ingress and egress. An open-air cafe located on sidewalks must remain at the elevation of the existing sidewalk. In the case of a lease or sublease, the site plan must be accompanied by a written statement from the landlord and owner consenting to the use of the real property as an open-air cafe. 
(b)  Location, design and operation. The operation of such open-air cafe shall not be conducted in such a way as to become a public nuisance and the operation of such business shall not interfere with the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the adjoining streets, alleys or sidewalks. A minimum space of 40 inches shall be allowed for pedestrian circulation. The space for such use shall not extend beyond the interior wall, which is perpendicular to the front or rear wall. In addition, the open-air cafe shall comply with the following: 
1.  Type of service. The service of patrons of the open-air cafe shall be at tables only and no-counter service, self-service or pass through window shall be permitted. 
2.  Space occupied. The open-air cafe shall not occupy an area of more than 30 percent of the total area of the primary restaurant operation. 
3.  Enclosure restricted. An open-air cafe shall be open, except that it may be covered with a canvas or structural canopy of a building's arcade, loggia or overhang as may be permitted by the Code. 
4.  Kitchen equipment. All kitchen equipment used to service the open-air cafe shall be located within the kitchen of the primary restaurant. 
5.  Appearance. The open-air cafe shall be kept in a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. After the close of business, all tables and chairs shall be removed from the premises unless they are properly secured. 
6.  Signage. No additional signage shall be permitted in the open-air cafe area. 
7.  Noise generation. No outdoor speaker, stereo system, live bands, or outdoor entertainment shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.16. - Regulations of obstructions to visibility. 
(a)  Intersection visibility triangle. There shall be no structures or planting which materially obstructs traffic and traffic visibility. At all street intersections and at the intersection of any street, or alley, no obstruction to vision between 30 inches and seven feet in height above the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the intersection visibility triangle. The intersection visibility triangle for purposes of this paragraph is formed by the street or alley frontage of such lot and a line drawn between the points along such street or alley frontage 50 feet distant from their point of street intersection. Existing trees must be cleared between 30 inches and seven feet. The triangle may include existing buildings posts or tree trunks with a maximum diameter of 12 inches, or existing buildings. 
(b)  Corner lots. In any district where a corner or front yard setback is required, no structure, fence, planting or sign shall be located so as to interfere with traffic visibility across a corner between a height of 21/2 and ten feet above the average grade within the intersection visibility triangle. For purposes of this paragraph, the intersection visibility triangle shall be bounded by the curb lines adjacent to the corner lot lines and a straight line drawn between points on each such curb line 20 feet from the intersection of said curb lines or extension thereof. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. There shall be no structure or planting on public right-of-way without prior approval of the administrative official, and then only after due consideration is given to the type, height and size of such structure and planting. If violations to this division are identified, the administrative official shall provide notice that the owner shall remove the obstruction. If the owner fails to remove the obstruction, the village shall remove the obstruction and assess the property owner for costs incurred. 
(d)  Vision clearance. Notwithstanding any part of this division or any permit granted, or variance granted by the village, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, planting, vegetation, sign or fence or any type of obstacle or any portion thereof shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct vision clearance at corners or curb cuts in any district. 
(e)  Intersection visibility triangle criteria. On corners and at street intersections, the following minimum criteria for determining the required area of cross visibility shall apply: 
TABLE 5-8 
INTERSECTION VISIBILITY TRIANGLE TABLE 
Functional Classification of Through Street Left 
(feet) 1 Right 
(feet) 1 Depth 
(feet) 2 Local (50' or less right-of-way) 0 3 0 3 0 3 Collector (60'-70' right-of-way) 190 40 7 Arterial (80' or greater right-of-way) 260 40 7  
       (1) Visibility distances measured from centerline of minor street, along right-of-way line of through street. 
       (2) Depth visibility on minor street measured from right-of-way line of through street, along center line of minor street. 
       (3) Visibility triangle lies within the public right-of-way. 
(f)  Triangle of visibility criteria. All driveway/roadway entrances and exits shall be constructed and maintained so that vehicles can enter, exit and travel along the roadways without posing a danger to occupants, pedestrians or other vehicles. To this end, structures and landscaping shall not obscure the visibility triangle as shown in the following exhibit: 

Triangle of Visibility 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-4,  2, 4-12-16) 
Div. 5.17. - Telecommunications towers and antennae. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations and requirements set forth herein are intended to accomplish the following purposes: 
1.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennae within municipal limits. 
2.  Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers and antennae through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative techniques of camouflage. 
3.  Encourage collocation or shared use to reduce the number of communication towers needed within municipal limits. 
4.  Protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. 
5.  Enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to do so through an efficient and timely application process. 
(b)  Considerations in site approval. In furtherance of these goals, the village shall at all times give due consideration to the comprehensive development master plan, including the future land use map; implementing ordinances; existing land uses; and environmentally sensitive areas, including hurricane preparedness areas, in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(c)  Criteria for site locations. 
1.  Antennae. Rooftop or building-mounted antennae and stealth facilities may be permitted in the following districts, and shall not exceed more than 15 feet above the highest point of the roof, including mechanical rooms. 
a.  Commercial districts, limited to BU-1, BU-IA, BU-2, and BU-3 districts. 
b.  Residential districts, limited to RU-4, RU-4M, RU-4L, and RU-3M districts. 
c.  Governmental facilities in the PS district. 
d.  Public service (PS) district, provided that stealth facilities shall be limited to 50 feet in height. 
2.  Communication towers. Communication towers may be permitted in the following districts. 
a.  Commercial districts, limited to: BU-1A, BU-2, BU-3 districts. 
b.  Residential districts, limited to: RU-4, RU-4M, RU-4L, and RU-3M districts. 
c.  Governmental facilities in the PS district. 
(d)  Antennae. 
1.  Minimum standards. All building-mounted or rooftop antennae shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Antennae, and related equipment buildings, shall be located or screened to minimize the visual impact of the antenna upon adjacent properties and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure upon which it is situated. 
b.  No commercial advertising or logo shall be allowed on an antenna, tower or related equipment buildings. 
c.  No signals, light, or illumination shall be permitted on an antenna, tower, or related equipment buildings, unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
2.  Dimensions. 
a.  Whip and omni-directional antennas and their supports must not exceed 15 feet in height and 13 inches in diameter and must be made of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building. 
b.  Microwave dish antennas located below 65 feet above the ground may not exceed six feet in diameter. Microwave dish antennas located 65 feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight feet in diameter. Ground-mounted dish antennae must be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
3.  Limitations. No more than four dish antennae shall be installed on a monopole tower. 
(e)  Communication towers. 
1.  All building-mounted or rooftop antennae shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Height. The height of a communication tower shall not exceed 150 feet, provided that all antennae and supplemental safety appurtenances shall not exceed an additional ten feet in height. Tower height shall be measured from the crown of the road of the nearest public street. 
b.  Type. All communication towers shall be designed and constructed with the capability of supporting a minimum of two co-location connections. 
c.  Aircraft hazard. Communication towers or antennas shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Miami-Dade County Aviation Authority or other appropriate agency prior to issuance of a building permit by the village. 
d.  FCC emissions standards. All proposed communication towers shall comply with current radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission. 
e.  Landscaping. All communication tower sites must comply with the landscaping requirements of the Land Development Code and Manuals, as amended. 
i.  Landscaping, consistent with the above referenced criteria, as amended, shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the fence or wall. Additional landscaping may be required around the perimeter of the fence or wall and around any or all anchors or supports if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. The administrative official, upon site plan review, may require landscaping in excess of the above requirements as is deemed reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the perimeter wall. 
ii.  Landscaping, consistent with the requirements of the village landscaping code and manuals, as amended, shall be installed around any accessory buildings or structures, 
iii.  A row of shade trees, at least eight feet in height, at a maximum distance of ten feet apart, shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence. 
iv.  A continuous hedge at least 30 inches in height at planting and capable of growing to a height of 36 inches within 18 months shall be planted on the outside of the perimeter fence and tree line. 
f.  Warning signs for high voltage and trespassing. 
i.  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the communication tower or any accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE-DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
ii.  "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than forty feet apart. 
iii.  The height of the lettering of the warning signs shall be at least 12 inches in height. The warning signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade. 
iv.  The warning signs may be attached to free-standing poles if the content of the signs may be obstructed by landscaping. 
v.  Apart from warning signs, no signs, including commercial advertisement or logo and political signs or banners posted temporarily shall be allowed on any part of an antenna or tower. 
vi.  Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the communication tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
2.  Minimum setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall conform to the districts where the towers are situated. Notwithstanding the above, the minimum setback requirements for property zoned industrial shall be 25 feet for the rear yard and front yard and 15 feet for the side yards, as measured from base of the tower or from the guy wire anchor, whichever is the closest to the property line or right-of-way. 
3.  Minimum distance separations. 
a.  All communication towers shall be located no closer than 200 percent of the height of the tower from residential areas or districts, as measured on a straight line from the two closest points between the nearest residential district line and the nearest point of the proposed tower structure, provided however, if such towers are located within the commercial districts, then and in that event, this limitation shall not apply. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all structures shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for such structures in a commercial district. 
b.  The minimum distance separation between an existing tower and a proposed tower within the corporate boundaries of the village shall be as follows: 
TABLE 5-9 
MINIMUM DISTANCE SEPARATION BETWEEN TOWERS 
Height of Existing Tower Height of Proposed Tower Minimum Separation Up to 150 feet Less than 50 feet 300 feet Up to 150 feet 50 feet to 100 feet 600 feet Up to 150 feet 100 feet to 150 feet 1,000 feet  
4.  Shared use of communication antennae/stealth facilities/microcel PCS. To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of communication towers, the village may deny an application for a new single-use communication tower if an available collocation is feasible. 
a.  Pursuant to the intent of this chapter, co-location of telecommunication antennas by more than one provider on an existing or new telecommunication tower shall take precedence over construction of new single use telecommunication towers. Accordingly, each application for telecommunication tower shall include a certified, written evaluation of the feasibility of sharing a telecommunication tower, if an appropriate telecommunication tower is available in accordance with sections of this Code. 
b.  Stealth facilities shall also be encouraged and given priority as to antenna types in order to carry out the intent of this division to minimize adverse visual impacts. 
c.  Cable based "Microcel PCS" which uses cable systems and no towers to provide telecommunication services shall also be encouraged and given priority. 
(f)  Aesthetics. Towers and antennae shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the F.A.A., be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness, except as set forth below. 
2.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding building s to minimize the visual impact. All tower sites must comply with any landscaping requirements of the Code and requirements of the village, and the village may require landscaping in excess of any written requirements as is deemed reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses. All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and viability at the owners expense. Well-designed stealth facilities are encouraged. 
(g)  Unmanned communication buildings. 
1.  Minimum setbacks. Unmanned communication buildings shall comply with the setback requirements of the district where such buildings are situated. 
2.  Size limitations. An unmanned communication building shall be a permanent structure not to exceed 500 square feet in floor area. More than one unmanned communication building may be permitted on a site; provided, however, that the total square footage of such buildings, added together, do not exceed 1,000 square feet. If the site contains more than one building, the required distance separation between the buildings may be excused. 
(h)  Permits. 
1.  Fees. A nonrefundable fee in the amount of $1,500 to reimburse the village for its review and processing of the application shall be required. Additionally, in connection with the issuance of a building permit for the installation of antennae and communication towers, a fee shall also be charged for construction inspections to insure compliance with all applicable codes. 
2.  Factors considered in granting permits for towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of permit applications pursuant to the Code, including the land development code, the village shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a permit, although the village may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the goals of this division are better served thereby: 
a.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures; 
b.  Height of the proposed tower; 
c.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
d.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
e.  Surrounding topography; 
f.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
g.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
h.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
3.  Permit applications. A permit application shall be fully completed and accompanied by the following: 
a.  Current survey of the property. 
b.  Description of the telecommunications services currently provided and will be provided in the future by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities. 
c.  Two copies of engineering plans and specifications of the facilities in sufficient detail to identify: 
i.  Location of the proposed facilities. 
ii.  Location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities. 
iii.  Trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
d.  A certified written evaluation of the feasibility for sharing a telecommunication tower, if an appropriate telecommunication tower is available. The evaluation shall analyze all of the following considerations: 
i.  Structural capacity of the tower or towers; 
ii.  Radio frequency interference; 
iii.  Geographical search area requirements; 
iv.  Mechanical or electrical incompatibility; 
v.  Inability or ability to locate equipment on the tower or tower; 
vi.  Availability of towers for co-location; 
vii.  Any restrictions or limitations of the Federal Communications Commission that would preclude the shared use of the tower; and 
viii.  Additional information requested by the village. 
e.  Written representation by applicant that there has been no objection from federal and state agencies that may regulate telecommunication tower siting, design and construction. 
f.  A site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the communication tower on the site indicating the location of existing structures, trees and other significant site features, type and location of landscaping used to screen the tower and the proposed color of the tower, including analysis of soil samples from the base. 
g.  Notarized statement that applicant shall notify all other telecommunication providers known to applicant and Village of the permit application at time application is accepted by the administrative official. 
h.  The description of the suitability of other structures, other structures or alternative technology, not requiring use of a tower or structure to provide the services in accordance with this paragraph. 
i.  Engineer evaluation on projected radiation, whether standards for "categorical exclusions" are met and if so why, including a notarized statement that applicants shall make periodic measurements at least every two years for compliance with FCC rules concerning such emissions. 
4.  Co-location; tenant rental fees. It is the intent of this division to encourage co-location of telecommunication facilities by service providers. Applications submitted by tenants seeking to co-locate on a pre-existing tower, or to rent space on a proposed new tower, shall receive an expedited review in the application process by the village. Such review shall be completed 30 days following the filing of a completed application. 
(i)  Installation. The installation and modification of a communication tower and communication antennae shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's prescribed installation and safety procedures, shall meet the requirements of the state building code, as amended, and shall be subject to the supervision of the village. 
1.  Foundations. Foundations for communication towers and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed and installed so as to withstand the forces due to wind pressure, as provided in the state building code, as amended. 
2.  Regulatory compliance. All such installation shall conform to the state building code, as amended; National Electrical Code, as amended; and F.A.A. and F.C.C. regulations, as amended. If such applicable standards and regulations require a retroactive application, then the owners of the towers and antennae governed by this division shall bring such towers and antennae into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal. 
3.  Other required permits. Regardless of whether a permit is required for the installation of the communication tower, separate building permits for structural or electrical work, pouring concrete or other work may be required as provided in the state building code, as amended. 
(j)  Inspection. The building official may require periodic inspections of communication towers to ensure structural and electrical integrity and compliance with the state building code, as amended, the village Code of Ordinances, and other applicable codes and regulations. Communication monopole towers shall be inspected once every five years. All other towers shall be inspected once every two years by a state licensed engineer. The inspection results shall certify structural and electrical integrity and be submitted to the building official. Based upon the results of the inspection, the building official may require repair or removal of a communication tower. 
(k)  Appeal. 
1.  Zoning board. If a permit is denied by the administrative official for noncompliance with the Code, then the applicant may appeal the decision as provided by this Code. 
2.  Factors to be considered. If the zoning board sustains on appeal the denial or conditions of the administrative official, then the village council on appeal taken shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Reasons for denial by the zoning board. 
b.  The technical and practical necessity for the installation of the communication tower. 
c.  Alternative measures or modifications that could be made to preserve the character of the neighborhood and to prevent aesthetic blight if installation were permitted. 
(l)  Municipal property. 
1.  Lease. If an applicant requests a permit to develop a site on village-owned property, the permit granted hereunder shall not become effective until the applicant and the village have executed a written agreement or lease setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the permit to occupy and use the public lands of the village will be granted. 
a.  Indemnification. The village shall not enter into any lease agreement or otherwise authorize tower and/or antenna siting by any telecommunications service provider until and unless the village obtains an adequate indemnity from such provider. The indemnity may except gross negligence or intentional misconduct on the part of the village, but must at least: 
i.  Release the village from and against any and all liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the communications facility. Each communications facility operator must further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the village in connection with the abovementioned matters; 
ii.  Indemnify and hold harmless the village, its trustees, elected and appointed officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands, or causes of action of whatsoever kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees, sustained by the village or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of each communications facility operator, or its agents, employees, or servants negligent acts, errors, or omissions. 
iii.  Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the indemnification provision shall survive the term of any agreement and continue in full force and effect as to the party's responsibility to indemnify. 
b.  Insurance. The village may not enter into any lease agreement, or otherwise authorize tower and/or antenna site by any telecommunications service provider until and unless the village obtains assurance that such operator (and those acting on its behalf) have adequate insurance. At a minimum, the following requirements must be satisfied: 
i.  A telecommunications facility operator shall not commence construction or operation of the facility without obtaining all insurance required under this division and approval of such insurance by the administrative official, nor shall a communications facility operator allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or sub-contract until all similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the communications facility is in existence. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not halve the required insurance, the village may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved. 
ii.  Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance, shall be filed with the administrative official. For entities that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. 
iii.  These certificates shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least 30 days prior written notice has been given to the village. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the state. 
iv.  In the event the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the lease agreement period with the village, then in that event, the communications facility operator shall furnish, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage for the balance of the period. 
2.  Nonexclusive grant. No permit granted under this division shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, permit or franchise to occupy or use the public lands of the village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purpose. 
3.  Rights granted. No permit granted under this division shall convey any right, title or interest in the public lands but shall be deemed a permit only to use and occupy the public lands for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no permit shall be construed as a conveyance of a title interest in the property. 
4.  Exemption. Government-owned property is exempt from the minimum distance separation and height requirements set forth herein. 
(m)  Variances. Any deviation of the location, setback, type, number and height limitations shall require a variance and application for such variance shall be made pursuant to the established procedures for same. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any change of location outside a permitted district shall require the applicant to file an application for a district boundary change pursuant to established procedures for same. 
(n)  Inapplicability to broadcasting facilities/amateur radio station operator/receiver only antenna/pre-existing towers or antennae. Provisions of this division shall not be applicable to the following: 
1.  Amateur radio. Any tower or the installation of any antenna that is for the use of a broadcasting facility, or is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur-radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
2.  Pre-existing facilities. Preexisting towers and preexisting antenna shall not be required to meet the requirements of this, division except that the construction operation and repair of such facility shall be performed in compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations and practices, and all telecommunications towers and antennas shall meet and exceed current standards, regulations of the F.A.A., F.C.C. and other agencies of the local, state or federal government with authority to regulate towers and antennas. 
(o)  Removal of abandoned antennae and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within the 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Alternatively, the administrative official may require a removal bond from the owner. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(p)  Nonconforming uses. Towers that are constructed, and antennae that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.18. - Adult entertainment regulated. 
(a)  Findings. In the development and enforcement of this division it is recognized that there are adult entertainment uses which because of their very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated in any given locations thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent business and residential areas. It is desirable, therefore, to locate adult oriented activities away from residential areas and public facilities used frequently by minors such as schools, churches, parks, libraries, and day care centers. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this division the following definitions for terms used herein shall apply: 
1.  Adult bookstore. Any business engaged in displaying, distributing, bartering, renting or selling printed matter, pictures, films, graphic or other materials which activity requires the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847, unless such activity comprises no more than 15 percent of the total floor area and is kept from clear view of minors. 
2.  Adult theater. Any business engaged in presenting films, theatrical productions, recitals, displays, printed matter or other entertainment which activity requires the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847. 
3.  Adult night club. Any business which features live entertainment requiring the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847. 
4.  Adult video store. Any business engaged in displaying, renting or selling videotapes which activity requires the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847, unless such activity comprises no more than 15 percent of the total floor area and is kept from view of minors. 
5.  Massage establishment. 
a.  Any shop, parlor, establishment or place of business wherein all of any one or more of the following named subjects and methods of treatments are administered or practiced: Body massage either by hand or by any mechanical or electrical apparatus or device (excluding fever therapy), applying such movements as stroking, friction, rolling, vibration, kneading, cupping, petrissage, rubbing, effleurage, or tapotement. 
b.  Nothing in this division shall be construed as applying to state licensed massage therapists, barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists, pedicurists, physical therapists' assistants, midwives, practical nurses, agents, servants of employees in licensed hospitals or nursing home or other licensed medical institutions, licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, naturopathic physicians or other licensed medical practitioners, or their agents, servants, or employees acting in the course of such agency, service or employment under the supervision of the licensee. 
c.  Provided, however, that, for the purpose of this division, the terms "massage establishment" shall not include any massage establishment wherein at least one state licensed massage therapist is employed and on duty full time during the hours open for business. 
6.  Adult modeling establishments. Any establishment offering nude or partially nude modeling sessions or lingerie, swimwear, or photography modeling sessions between two or more persons or private modeling sessions between two or more persons requiring the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847. 
7.  Encounter studio. All establishments offering nude or partially nude encounter sessions between two or more persons, and requiring the exclusion of minors pursuant to F.S. ch. 847. 
(c)  Uses. The following uses shall only be permitted as a conditional use approved by the council in the BU-3 land use district: 
1.  Adult bookstore; 
2.  Adult theater; 
3.  Adult night club; 
4.  Adult video store; 
5.  Massage establishment; 
6.  Adult modeling establishment; and 
7.  Encounter studio. 
(d)  Distance and spacing. Unless approved as a variance pursuant to this land development code, none of the uses set forth in the above subsection shall be permitted: 
1.  Within 1,000 feet of a private school, public school, church, public park, public library, day care center or nursery for children; 
2.  Within 1,000 feet of any of the uses described within this division; and 
3.  Within 660 feet of any RU or EU land use district; 
Provided, however, that the spacing requirements herein established shall not apply where the adult entertainment use is separated from the uses set forth herein by a county or state road of not less than five lanes, an expressway, a river or a lake. All other distance and spacing requirements pursuant to the Code shall apply. 
(e)  Measurements. The distance and spacing requirements set forth above shall be measured as follows: 
1.  From a church the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business, to the nearest point on the church property. 
2.  From a private or public school the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business to the nearest point on the school grounds. 
3.  From non-church and non-school uses the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the front door of the proposed place of business to the nearest point of the existing use. 
4.  From RU or EU districts the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business, to the nearest boundary of the RU or EU land use district. 
5.  From a public park the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business, to the nearest point on the park grounds. 
6.  From a public library the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business, to the nearest point on the library property. 
7.  From day care centers or nurseries for children the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the proposed place of business, whether it is the structure itself or the parking lot used by the patrons of the proposed place of business, to the nearest point on the property of the day care center or nursery. 
(f)  Certified survey required. For purposes of establishing the distance between the uses set forth in this division, and between such uses and private schools, public schools, churches, public libraries, day care centers or nurseries for children, or RU and EU land use districts, the applicant for such use shall furnish a certified survey from a registered surveyor. Such sketch shall indicate the distance between the place of business, and any existing use as defined by this division, any church, public school, private school, public park, public library, day care center or nursery for children, or RU or EU land use district. Each sketch shall indicate all such distances and routes. In case of dispute, the measurement, scaled by the administrative official shall govern. 
(g)  Exemptions. This division shall not apply to accredited universities, accredited colleges, or other accredited educational institutions, museums, art exhibits, arts and cultural performance theaters and playhouses or commercial professional photography and portrait studios which may use nude subjects for their photographs or portraits. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.19. - Appearance of site and structures. 
    The following standards shall apply within all zoning districts: 
(a)  Architectural style and color. All buildings constructed shall be of an architectural style and color which will harmonize with the premises and with other buildings in the same neighborhood. Facades shall be designed to reduce the mass/scale and uniform monolithic appearance of large unadorned walls, while providing visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity and character through the use of detail and scale. Articulation shall be required and accomplished by varying the building's mass in height and width so that it appears to be divided into distinct massing elements and details that can be perceived at the scale of the pedestrian or motorist. 
Residential building facades and elevations shall be designed to minimize the visual impacts of the scale of the building. Front and side facade design of the second story of two-story residential dwellings shall include building design variations at intervals no greater than seventy-five (75) feet to minimize scale impacts and promote activated elevations. Design variations or intervals shall be a minimum of 7.5 feet in length and 5 feet in depth. 
Buildings constructed within the commercial zoning districts adjacent to Pinecrest Parkway shall be designed in accordance with the architectural styles and color palette of the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan. Corporate chain building designs and prototype/generic architectural designs may be permitted to the extent that they comport with the architectural design standards of the Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) vision plan adopted by the village council on October 9, 2012. 
Commercial buildings shall be fenestrated with transparent windows and doorways for no less than 60 percent of the street frontage at the ground level and allow visibility to the inside of the building. 
The village council shall make the final determination of architectural harmony. 
(b)  Location and screening of mechanical equipment and utility hardware. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs shall be harmonious with the building or they shall be located and/or screened so as not to be visible from any public ways within the impacted area. 
(c)  Location and screening of solid waste containers. 
1.  Permanent waste storage area. All permanent waste storage areas shall be screened from adjacent properties and public ways by appropriate fences, walls or landscaping. 
2.  Required enclosure and access gate. Dumpsters shall be maintained in an enclosure with the service and access gate(s) closed except when being serviced by a commercial refuse/garbage collector or when being used to access the dumpster. 
3.  Closed lid. Dumpster lids shall be kept closed at all times when the dumpster is not being used or serviced. 
4.  Violations; health hazards. Garbage and trash shall be placed inside the dumpster and not on or around the dumpster or the enclosure. Loose garbage and trash in plain view is a violation of this Code, a health hazard, and aesthetically undesirable. The property owner shall be responsible for keeping the enclosure and surrounding area litter, garbage, and trash free at all times. It shall be a violation of the Code of Ordinances to allow the dumpster to be filled to over capacity so that the dumpster lid is prevented from closing on top of the garbage bags. 
5.  Maintenance and repair of enclosures. Approved enclosures shall be maintained in good condition, repair and appearance at all times so as to allow for collection of materials and to eliminate odors. 
6.  Location of dumpster and enclosure. The location on site of a dumpster and the dumpster enclosure shall require the prior approval of the director of public works. A dumpster shall be kept in a place easily accessible to authorized collection vehicles at all times and no service shall be given to those placing or permitting objects, ground level or overhead obstructions, or vehicles, to hinder in any way whatsoever the servicing of bulk containers by authorized collection vehicles. Unless in a public right-of-way for purposes of collection only, all dumpsters shall be placed within an approved enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or store, or allow to be placed or stored, a dumpster upon or in any public street, alley or right-of-way; provided, however, that such container or receptacle may be placed in the public right-of-way during the collection/emptying process. 
7.  Dumpster space designation and enclosure requirement. All real property utilizing dumpsters in a BU or Office zoning district shall provide an enclosure of a size that would permit the moving in or out of the dumpster without damage to the enclosure. The enclosure shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the dumpster. 
8.  Approved enclosure. All enclosures shall consist of walls and any fencing shall be of wood, plastic lumber or chainlink. Wood or plastic lumber shall be a minimum of 1.5 inches thick. Enclosures shall have a gate for collection equipment access, and may also have a gate for pedestrian access. All gates shall be totally opaque and the enclosures shall be constructed of one of the following materials: 
a.  Masonry walls. All exterior faces of the wall shall be finished and of professional quality such as stucco, pre-finished blocks, stacked block and struck joints, shadow blocks. The wall shall be painted and installed in a workmanlike manner and meet with the approval of the administrative official. 
b.  Concrete walls. Pre-cast concrete walls of quality deemed acceptable to the administrative official. 
c.  Wood fencing. Substantial wood fences of durable species, incorporating architectural design features to enhance appearance, of quality and design acceptable to the administrative official. In making this determination, consideration shall be given to: i) The thickness of the wood which must be a minimum of 1.5 inches; ii) Whether the wood is pressure treated or has a finish that protects the wood from the elements; and iii) Minimum six inches by six inches corner post and four inches by four inches intermediate posts of pressure treated materials. 
d.  Plastic lumber fencing. Lumber shall be plastic members of new or recycled materials able to withstand the climatic and ultraviolet conditions of the region and of a quality and design acceptable to the administrative official. In making this determination, consideration shall be given to: i) Whether the material is coated or has a finish that protects the plastic from the elements; ii) Adequacy of supporting in-ground posts; iii) The lumber must be a minimum of nominal one-inch by nominal six-inch boards and shall have a maximum spacing between boards of one inch; and iv) Compatibility of materials with existing materials on the subject property and surrounding neighborhood. 
e.  Chain-link fencing. Dumpster enclosures may be made of chain-link fencing with opaque material attached to the chain-link fencing so that the dumpster is not in public view. 
f.  Gates. Dumpster enclosure gates shall be constructed of a metal frame with wood or metal slats or other facing material. Servicing gates, upon opening, may not swing into the right-of-way and shall incorporate gate stops that are functional in the full open and closed positions. Hinge assemblies shall be strong and durable such that access and servicing gates do not sag and function properly. All gates for pedestrian access shall be no more than 48 inches in width and no less than 36 inches in width. Enclosure gates shall be closed at all times except for the time necessary to service the bulk container. Maze style openings shall be permitted in place of a pedestrian access gate. A maze style opening is an opaque wall or fence that can be located no more than 48 inches and no less than 36 inches from the enclosure opening and must be a minimum length of 1.5 times in length of the opening and shall be centered upon the opening. Enclosure openings shall be no more than 48 inches in width and no less than 36 inches in width. 
9.  Setback. All dumpster enclosure walls and/or fences shall be located a minimum of five feet from adjoining commercial areas and ten feet from adjoining residential uses; and a minimum of five feet from public and private rights-of-way unless not physically possible. 
10.  Garbage containers. All receptacles and bulk containers which receive garbage, liquid waste or food from food handling operations including, but not limited to, bakeries, meat processing plants, restaurants, or any business establishment where it is determined that garbage, liquid waste or food will be accumulated, shall have a poured to grade level concrete slab. If available, dumpster site shall have facilities for washing containers and ability to drain to an acceptable sanitary disposal system. If the aforementioned facilities are available, or can be reasonably installed then the dumpster shall have washout plugs. For purposes of this Code, storm drains shall not be considered as an acceptable sanitary disposal system. If no suitable drain, grease trap or sanitary disposal system is available, the dumpster containers shall be sealed so that no liquid gets on the pad or ground. Dumpster collection shall be frequent enough so as to keep odors to a minimum. Odors shall also be kept at a minimum through artificial means such as masking agents or whatever products are available to handle odors. Containers shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the state building code and must be approved by and meet the state department of health requirements. 
11.  Exceptions. All dumpsters and trash receptacles must comply with this Code except for the following: 
a.  Dumpsters and receptacles located in service yards, that are screened from public ways with a minimum six feet high fence or suitable dense landscaping as approved by the administrative official. The dumpsters and receptacles must not be visible from the public's view. 
b.  Dumpsters and receptacles located at permitted construction sites. 
12.  Time of placement and removal of receptacles. Residential trash, trash and garbage receptacles may not be placed for curbside pickup more than 24 hours before pickup and all receptacles must be removed from the curbside within 24 hours after pickup. During all other times, residential trash and recycling receptacles shall be kept within or adjacent to a carport or garage or immediately adjacent to either side of the residence, behind the building elevation facing any street. On corner lots, residential trash and recycling receptacles may be kept adjacent to the carport or garage, in front of the side building facade, provided the receptacles are screened from view from the adjoining right-of-way with landscaping shrubs and plants. 
(d)  Utility lines. In new construction, all utility lines shall be placed underground. All telephone lines shall be placed underground. Service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual installations shall be placed underground. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed underground or on concrete poles, provided that the poles are within the street right-of-way and have provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and be mounted on pads and contained within enclosures or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the construction and design shall be compatible with primary building design. Landscaping with shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen pad mounted transformers. 
(e)  Activities conducted in enclosed buildings. All businesses and services shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise permitted by the Code. If the village council determines that a demonstrated necessity exists for limited outside storage due to the impracticality and unreasonableness of enclosure of such goods, the goods shall be effectively screened by a ninety-five percent or greater opaque wall with a life expectancy of 20 years or more from the date of installation of said walls. Storage shall not occur above the height of such walls. No such storage shall be visible from a public way. 
(f)  Exterior lighting. Light sources shall be shielded and arranged to eliminate glare from roadways and streets; and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the district. Shielding of lighting elements shall be accomplished by using an opaque shade to direct the light. 
(g)  Wooden decks not exceeding 18 inches in height. Any side of any wooden deck above grade shall be enclosed from the edge of such deck to the existing grade, by wood slats or lattice work, in such a way as to prevent the area below the wooden deck from being visible from any adjacent property or waterway. 
(h)  Air conditioning and heating units; pool pumps. In all districts, the exhaust or mechanical part of any air conditioning or heating unit, other than window units, and all pool pumps, shall not be placed or installed within five feet of any property line. Where feasible, air conditioning units should be baffled for noise. Pool pumps shall be baffled to reduce noise or covered to minimize noise at the property line. All such facilities shall be screened from public view. 
(i)  Construction fencing. A project site that meets the following standards is required to install a construction fence, which means a temporary six-foot chain link fence with a dark green color fabric. The fence and screening must remain in place, upright and in good repair throughout the construction process. 
(1)  Clearing, grading, stockpiling of soil or demolition. A construction fence is required where clearing, grading, stockpiling of soil or demolition is proposed as follows: 
a.  A lot located in the residential or commercial zoning districts shall install a fence on the front, side, and rear lot lines prior to commencement of clearing, grading or demolition. 
b.  Fencing must be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon replacement with a permanent fence or wall, unless new construction or major remodeling is planned to occur in which case the construction fencing may remain in place for 90 days prior to the submission of construction plans for permitting, and for the duration of the Village's plan review and permitting process. 
(2)  New construction and major remodeling. New construction and major remodeling shall mean an increase in the building volume of 10,000 cubic feet or more, an increase in the building footprint of 1,000 square feet or more or new construction with a building footprint of 1,000 square feet or more. A construction fence is required for new construction and major remodeling as follows: 
a.  A lot located in the residential or commercial zoning districts shall contain a fence on the front, side and rear lot lines. Fencing must be removed upon final electrical inspection; 
b.  All other lots shall contain a fence on the side and rear lot lines. Fencing must be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon final electrical inspection. 
(3)  Major alteration. Major alteration shall mean a change of 50 percent or more of the gross square footage of an existing structure for reconstruction, rehabilitation, removal of walls, or other improvement excluding replacement of the roof. A construction fence is required for major alteration as follows: 
a.  A lot located in the residential or commercial zoning districts shall contain a fence on the front, side, and rear lot lines. Fencing must be removed upon final electrical inspection. 
b.  All other lots shall contain a fence on the side and rear lot lines. Fencing must be removed upon final electrical inspection. 
(4)  Exception to installation of construction fence. Where a construction fence would be required for a residential lot pursuant to subsection (1), (2), or (3) above and the owner or contractor obtains a construction fence waiver from the owner of the property that abuts the project site, the building official may waive the requirement for all or a portion of the construction fence but retains the right to require a construction fence at any time. Any required silt and sediment barriers shall still be installed as required. 
(5)  Installation. Installation of a construction fence shall occur prior to any construction activity or material deliveries. The fence shall not be placed so as to create a public safety hazard. Where the project site is enclosed by a fence, the fence gate shall not open towards the road right-of-way and shall be locked during non-working hours. 
(6)  Existing temporary fences. Existing temporary fences not in compliance with these regulations shall be removed within 60 days of notification by the administrative official. 
(j)  Permanently installed generators. 
(1)  Setbacks. In all districts, pads for permanently installed generators shall be located or installed no less than five feet from any property line and shall otherwise be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, provided, however, the exhaust outlet of a generator shall be located no less than ten feet from any part of any "packaged" air conditioning unit, any operable doors, windows, vent outlets, or other openings. In no event shall a generator or above-ground fuel tank be placed forward of the front or corner side building line. 
(2)  Vertical elevation. When a permanently installed generator is located within an "AE" flood zone, the top elevation of the pad shall be no lower than the base flood. In "X" or "X-500" zones, the minimum elevation of the pad shall be set at an elevation no less than eight inches above the roadway crown. 
(3)  Fuel tanks. All fuel tanks shall be located no less than five feet from any property line. Above-ground fuel tanks are considered as accessory structures and therefore subject to the setbacks of the appropriate zoning district. 
(4)  Screening. Generators and above-ground fuel tanks must be screened from public view by landscaping or other acceptable material. 
(5)  Testing. The testing of a permanently installed generator shall be limited to once per week for a period of no more than 30 minutes between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and further limited to Monday through Saturday. 
(k)  Maintenance of constructions sites. All construction sites shall be maintained in a safe and clean condition free from litter, abandoned and/or junk material. 
(l)  Maintenance of vacant lots. All vacant lots shall be maintained in a safe and clean condition free from litter, abandoned and/or junk material. Vacant lots shall not be fenced, enclosed, or screened, except as permitted on a temporary basis during demolition and/or construction activities. A temporary barrier, not exceeding 20 inches in height, consisting of bollards, railroad ties, posts and chain, or landscaping boulders may be placed on a vacant property adjacent to the front or side street property line to prevent unauthorized access and illegal dumping. Placement of a temporary barrier shall require a fence permit and shall be subject to the review and approval of the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2006-1,  1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2015-7,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.20. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Continuance of lawful nonconformities. 
(1)  Continuance of nonconformities. Nothing contained in this land development code shall be deemed or construed to prohibit a continuation of the particular lawful use or uses of any land, building, structure, improvement or premises legally existing in the respective districts as of November 27, 2000; provided, however, that if any such existing lawful use is changed to a different use after the date of the adoption of this Code or amendments thereto, such different use shall conform to the provisions of Code regulating the particular district in which said premises are situated. 
(2)  Change in location of nonconforming building or structure. Should any nonconforming building or structure be moved for any reason or to any location other than its permitted location, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(3)  Rules for interpretation. Nothing in this land development code shall be interpreted as authorization for, or approval of, continuation of any illegal use of a building, structure, or premises in violation of any law in effect as of November 27, 2000, or any applicable amendment thereafter. The casual, intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land, building or structure shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconformity. Any building or structure for which a lawful building permit was issued prior to November 27, 2000, or amendments thereafter, and construction of which is in conformity with approved site plans,, and building plans, shall not be affected by the changes to the Code if the planned building or structure is built in full compliance with the land development regulations existing at the time of the issuance of the building permit. 
(b)  Increase in permitted nonconformities prohibited. Unless otherwise provided for in the land development code, this division is intended to prohibit nonconformities from being enlarged upon, expanded or extended or used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Exceptions may be approved when the nonconformity is changed to a conforming use, when improvements are required by law, or as follows: 
(1)  Restoration. Any nonconforming structure which has been damaged or made unsafe or unusable to an extent less than 50 percent of its assessed value, may be restored or reconstructed for its intended use, provided the floor area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the floor area which existed as of November 27, 2000. All repairs shall be substantially completed within one year after damages occur or such use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use. A nonconforming feature may not be increased or intensified. 
(2)  Repairs. Normal maintenance and repair and incidental alteration of a nonconforming structure or a nonconforming use is permitted, provided it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use. A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livability; provided, however, that no structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or otherwise increase a nonconforming feature of the structure. 
(3)  Site alterations. Site alterations, including but not limited to the management of off-street parking or the enlargement of nonbuilding recreational facilities of a nonconforming use, are permitted provided that the proposed alterations do not increase the degree of nonconformity. 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. Restoration, repairs and site alterations can be made to existing single-family dwellings in districts which allow such single-family dwellings, provided that such restorations, repairs or site alterations do not increase the number of dwelling units, increase density, increase the degree of the nonconformity, or result in a different type of nonconformity from that which is already considered to be grandfathered. 
(5)  Nonconforming density. Existing residential dwellings which are nonconforming as to density shall not require a variance to permit the otherwise allowable addition or alteration to the building or site, provided that the density is not increased. 
(6)  Grandfather clause. Existing land uses which were lawful conforming uses prior to the adoption of the comprehensive development master plan or the land development code shall continue as lawful uses and shall be subject to and regulated by vested rights policies contained in the land development code. All duly approved and recorded lots of record which existed as legal lots of record prior to November 27, 2000 shall continue to be legal lots of record. This grandfather status may only be relinquished upon voluntary action by the vested entity. 
(c)  Effect of actual construction and application for certificate of use or building permit. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this division shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to November 27, 2000 or and upon which actual building construction has commenced and continued in compliance with the building code and applicable provisions of this the land development code. "Actual construction" is defined to include the placing of materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be "actual construction," provided that all such acts have commenced and continued in compliance with the building code. In addition, nothing in this division shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction or designated use of any building on which a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy has been applied for prior to November 27, 2000. This division shall apply to any amendment to the land development code in the same manner as the Code's original adoption. Where building permits or certificates of use and occupancy are sought in compliance with this division, the applicant shall have a period not to exceed six months after the effective date of these land development regulations, or applicable amendment thereto, within which to obtain a final building permit or certificate of use and occupancy. 
(d)  Change in nonconforming uses without structural alteration. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of a similar or higher (more restrictive) classification under the following conditions: 
(1)  The change in use shall not intensify or enlarge the basic use of the building or premises by increasing the need for parking facilities; by increasing vehicular or pedestrian traffic; by creating more noise, vibration, fire hazard, smoke, dust or fumes, by increasing hours of operation or number of employees; by increasing ground coverage or adversely impacting drainage; or otherwise result in a more intensive use of the building or premises; or change the basic character of the building or premises except where to do so would bring the use further into compliance with the provisions of this land development code. 
(2)  The village council, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, may find that the proposed use is more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the village council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this land development code. 
(3)  When a nonconforming use of all or any part of a building, structure or premises has been changed to a conforming use, the conforming use shall not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming use. 
(4)  No structural alterations shall be made to any building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use except as permitted in this Code. 
(e)  Abandonment of a nonconformity. If a nonconformity is removed, abandoned, or ceases (except when government action impedes access to the premises), then any and every future use of the structure or premises shall be in conformity with the use provisions of the land development code. All material and equipment associated with the abandoned nonconformity shall be completely removed from the premises by its owner. Additional structures which do not conform to the requirements of this land development code shall not be erected in connection with such nonconformity. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned or having ceased when the land use has been discontinued for a period of 12 months as indicated by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Allowing licenses or certificate of use to lapse; 
(2)  Removing meters; 
(3)  Not maintaining structure in a habitable condition; 
(4)  Not making unit available for occupation (i.e., advertising or marketing through a realtor or other agent); 
(5)  Failure to perform actions pursuant to the terms of an active building permit; or 
(6)  Failure to occupy the site. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 5.21. - Concurrency management. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Concurrency refers to a finding that public facilities and services necessary to support a proposed development are available, or will be made available, concurrent with the impacts of the development. The concurrency management system is intended to provide a systematic process for the review and evaluation of all proposed development for its impact on concurrency facilities and services, as required by the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. ch. 163, Part II, and F.A.C. Rule 9J-5.0055. Facilities in the village that are subject to these regulations include potable water, recreation, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, and roads. The purpose of this concurrency management system is to ensure that development orders and permits are conditioned on the availability of concurrency facilities and services, which meet adopted level of service requirements identified in this concurrency management system (CMS). The CMS is also intended to describe the requirements and procedures for determining consistency of proposed development with the comprehensive development master plan. 
(b)  Consistency with village comprehensive development master plan. All development applications shall demonstrate compliance with the comprehensive development master plan as well as with all applicable provisions of the land development code. Further, development applications shall demonstrate that specified concurrency facilities shall be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development of those facilities. A development order shall be permitted only if the final development plan complies with the goals, objectives and policies established in the comprehensive development master plan. 
(c)  Applicability and exemptions. All applications for development orders shall be subject to concurrency review unless specifically exempted below. However, in no case shall a development order be issued for a minimum threshold project which would impact a concurrency facility for which a moratorium or deferral on development has been placed. 
(1)  Projects below the minimum threshold. The following development shall be exempt from concurrency review: 
a.  Residential projects which would result in the creation of one single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling, as well as projects that entail structural alterations, including room additions to single-family structures, which do not change the land use. 
b  Construction of residential or nonresidential accessory buildings and structure, which do not create additional public facility demand. 
c.  Actions administered through development orders and other development which do not increase demand on concurrency facilities, such as grading or land excavation or structural alterations which do not include a change of use and satisfy provisions of a. and b. above. 
(2)  Vested projects. Projects that have valid final development orders or building permits prior to November 27, 2000, or any subsequent amendment to the land development code shall be considered vested and therefore exempt from concurrency management. This shall include the following: 
a.  Any project for which a valid building permit has been issued and has not expired; and 
b.  All vacant lots in single-family detached, single-family attached and two-family subdivisions which were lawfully platted in accordance with the village land development code and recorded prior to November 27, 2000; and 
c.  Approved developments of regional impact with a development order that has not expired; and 
d.  Any project which has obtained a determination of vested rights upon appeal to village council. 
(3)  Redevelopment projects. Proposed redevelopment shall be credited for the existing demand on available capacity. If a redevelopment project generates in excess of the existing demand which it is replacing, a concurrency review shall be required; however, the concurrency review shall only address the amount by which the proposed demand generated exceeds the demand of existing development. The development plan for redevelopment must be submitted no more than one year after the prior use is discontinued in order to qualify for a concurrency credit. If the proposed redevelopment generates equal or less demand than the existing project, the applicant shall be given a concurrency credit enabling the applicant to reserve the unused capacity. The concurrency credit will expire within five years of the change or discontinuance of the use. The applicant's submission of an application for a demolition permit shall also initiate a concurrency review for the express purpose of issuing credits for redevelopment. 
(4)  Public facilities. Public facilities to ensure the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the village, including public schools (pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade), shall be exempt from concurrency review. This shall include all public facility construction projects included in the village capital improvements program required to meet any adopted level of service standard. 
(d)  Criteria for concurrency and final development orders. A final development order shall not be granted for a proposed development unless the village finds that adequate capacity for concurrency facilities exists at or above adopted level of service in order to accommodate the impacts of the proposed development or that improvements necessary to bring concurrency facilities up to their adopted level of service will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(1)  Sanitary sewer, potable water, solid waste and drainage. For sanitary sewer, potable water, solid waste, and drainage facilities, the village shall find that the following criteria have been met in order for a proposed development to be found in compliance with concurrency management requirements: 
a.  A development order is issued subject to the condition that, at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent, the facilities and services are in place and available to serve the new development; or 
b.  At the time a development order or permit is issued, the necessary facilities and services are guaranteed, in an enforceable development agreement pursuant to F.S.  163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, to be in place and available to serve new development at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. 
(2)  Parks and recreation. For parks and recreation facilities, at a minimum, the village shall find that the following criteria have been met in order for a development to be found in compliance with concurrency management requirements: 
a.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are in place or under actual construction; or 
b.  A development order is issued subject to the condition that, at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the acreage for the necessary facilities and services to serve the new development is dedicated or acquired by the village, or funds in the amount of the developer's fair share are committed; and 
i.  A development order is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy as provided in the village capital improvements program; or 
ii.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are the subject of a binding executed agreement which requires the necessary facilities and services to serve the new development to be in place or under actual construction not more than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
iii.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are guaranteed, in an enforceable development agreement pursuant F.S.  163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, to be in place or under actual construction not more than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Transportation facilities. For transportation facilities (roads and mass transit designated in the adopted comprehensive development master plan), at a minimum, the village shall ensure that the following standards are met to satisfy concurrency requirements, unless state authorized exceptions are enacted by the village and duly approved by the state: 
a.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are in place or under actual construction; or 
b.  A development order is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy as provided in the village five-year capital improvements program. The capital improvement program may recognize and include transportation projects included in the first three years of the adopted state department of transportation five-year work program. The capital improvements element includes the following policies: 
i.  The estimated date of commencement of actual construction and the estimated date of project completion. 
ii.  A provision that a plan amendment is required to eliminate, defer, or delay construction of any road or mass transit facility or service which is needed to maintain the adopted level of service standard and which is listed in the five-year capital improvements program; 
c.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are the subject of a binding executed agreement which requires the necessary facilities and services to serve the new development to be in place or under actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
d.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are guaranteed, in an enforceable development agreement pursuant to F.S.  163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, to be in place or under actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
e.  For the purpose of issuing a development order, a proposed development may be deemed to have a minimal impact and may not be subject to the transportation concurrency requirements, only if all the following conditions are met: 
i.  The development proposal is for an increase in density or intensity of less than or equal to twice the density or intensity of the existing development, or for the development of a vacant parcel of land at a residential density of less than four dwelling units per acre or, for nonresidential uses, at an intensity of less than 0.1 floor area ratio. Isolated vacant lots in predominantly built residential areas where construction of a single-family house would be the most suitable use may be developed for single-family residential use under the minimal impact exception even if smaller than one quarter acre in size. 
ii.  The transportation impact of the proposed development alone does not exceed 0.1 percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard for peak hour of the affected transportation facility. 
iii.  The cumulative total transportation impact from the minimal impact exception does not exceed three percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard of the affected transportation facility if the proposed development does not meet the minimum level of service standard. 
iv.  The village has adopted within its comprehensive development master plan policies for granting such exemptions. 
f.  Proportionate fair-share: A development that has been notified of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency on a transportation facility in the village's concurrency management system, including transportation facilities maintained by FDOT or another jurisdiction that are relied upon for concurrency determinations may petition the village council for approval of a proportionate fair-share agreement. The proportionate fair-share program does not apply to developments of regional impact (DRIs) using proportionate fair-share under section 163.3180(12), F.S., or to developments exempted from concurrency as provided in section 163.3180, F.S., regarding exceptions and de minimis impacts. 
i.  Proportionate fair-share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, without limitation, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities. 
ii.  A development shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair-share. 
iii.  The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in section 163.3180(12), F. S. 
(e)  Concurrency administration. The administrative official shall be responsible for concurrency reviews as required by this concurrency management system. The administrative official in conjunction with other village staff shall determine whether adequate capacities for concurrency facilities are available to satisfy the demands of each proposed development. The concurrency management flow chart provides a graphic summary of the administrative process. 
(1)  Application for concurrency review. Concurrency review shall be initiated upon submission and acceptance of an application for a development plan approval, preliminary subdivision plat, or a building permit, whichever first occurs. At the request of the applicant and pursuant to payment of a concurrency review fee as may be established by resolution of the village council, or the administrative official in concert with other staff may render concurrency findings. 
(2)  Project impact assessment. The administrative official shall use the best available information to establish and evaluate existing capacities for concurrency facilities. The applicant shall be responsible for supplying the anticipated land uses, densities and/or intensities, of a proposed development and the anticipated date of completion of proposed development. The administrative official shall assess the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on concurrency facilities. 
(3)  Project phasing/timing of improvements. Concurrency facilities associated with a phased development may also be phased. However, all concurrency facilities necessary to accommodate the impacts of each phase must be available or a schedule for the acquired improvements must be approved prior to the issuance of a development order. The schedule of facility improvements shall ensure that all facility improvements necessary to accommodate the impacts of the development (or portion thereof) for which a certificate of occupancy has been applied shall be in place prior to the issuance of the certificate. Under no circumstances shall the final certificate of occupancy be issued for a project unless all required facility improvements required by the development order or development agreement have been completed. 
(4)  Development agreements. If the minimum requirements for concurrency cannot be met, concurrency may be achieved by guaranteeing necessary facility improvements in an enforceable development agreement. Said development agreement may include guarantees to construct required facility improvements or to provide funds equivalent to the cost of providing such facility improvements. 
(5)  Concurrency review determination. Upon the conclusion of the concurrency review, the administrative official or designee shall prepare a written determination concerning the proposed development. This determination shall address, but is not limited to: 
a.  The anticipated public facility impacts of the proposed development; 
b.  The ability of existing facilities to accommodate the proposed development at the adopted level of service standards; 
c.  Any existing facility deficiencies that will need to be corrected prior to the completion of the proposed development; 
d.  The facility improvements or additions necessary to accommodate the impact of the proposed development at the adopted level of service standards and the entities responsible for the design and installation of all required facility improvements or additions; and 
e.  The date such facility improvements or additions will need to be completed to be concurrent with the impacts on such facilities created by the proposed development. 
(6)  Concurrency denials. In the event that the village concurrency review reveals that the proposed development would generate public facility impacts beyond that which can be absorbed by available capacity, the village shall determine whether there is a financial or other legally binding commitment to ensure that public facilities necessary to correct the anticipated deficiency will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development. If the village and/or a developer are unable to provide such assurances, the project shall be denied. 
(7)  Concurrency resolution. If the administrative official or determines that an application for concurrency review cannot be supported by sufficient concurrency facility capacity, the applicant may file an application for concurrency resolution and pay the requisite filing fee as shall be established by resolution of the village council. The purpose for the concurrency resolution process shall be to enable an applicant to negotiate a development agreement, which identifies terms for resolving the capacity deficiency. The development agreement shall be consistent with F.S.  163.3220, and applicable village ordinances. If the applicant successfully resolves capacity deficiencies, the applicant may reserve capacity pursuant to the terms of the development agreement. If the issues cannot be resolved, the application shall be deemed to be denied and, at any time, the applicant may resubmit the concurrency review application to the administrative official. 
(f)  Capacity reservation. 
(1)  Reservation of capacity. Following receipt of an approved development order, the capacity demand of the approved development shall be considered to be reserved. The time frame of the concurrency reservation shall be based on the time frame of the building permit or development agreement. If the time frame of the development order and/or the development agreement lapses, the available capacity assigned to the development order shall be returned to the available capacity pool. 
(2)  First-come-first-served. Capacity shall be reserved on a first-come, first-served basis by the administrative official. Such reservation shall be valid only for the specific final development order and for the specified land uses, densities, intensities, construction and improvement schedules contained in the approved development order. Reservation of capacity runs with the land and is transferable to a successor in ownership. Reservation of capacity for concurrency shall expire if the underlying development order or development agreement expires or is revoked. The development order shall state the terms of the concurrency reservation, including the allocation of available capacity, the time-frame for the allocation, and other appropriate legal assurances. 
(3)  Project deferrals/development moratoriums. If at any time the village inventory of the capacity of concurrency facilities indicates that a concurrency facility has dropped below its adopted level of service standard, the village shall cease to issue development orders for projects which would impact the deficient facility or the area impacted by the deficient concurrency facility, as defined within this concurrency management system. Such a suspension or moratorium on the issuance of development orders shall continue until such time as the adopted level of service standard is re-established, the comprehensive development master plan is amended to reflect an acceptable level of service standard for the facilities in question, or alternative arrangements are made to ensure capacity will be available. 
(g)  Adopted level of service standards. Level of service (LOS) standards for concurrency facilities are set forth below. Prior to issuing a development order the village shall review all proposed development to ensure consistency with adopted LOS standards. No development shall be approved that is projected to decrease the existing LOS below the adopted standard, unless mitigated by the developer. 
TABLE 5-10 
Facilities Level of Service Standards Sanitary sewer 100 gallons/capita/day Potable water 95 gallons/capita/day Solid waste 9.9 pounds/capita/day and maintain solid waste disposal capacity sufficient to accommodate waste flows committed to the system through long term interlocal agreements or contracts along with anticipated noncommitted waste flows for a period of five (5) years Drainage Water quality standard: Stormwater facilities shall be designed to meet the design and performance standards established in F.A.C. ch. 62-25,  25.025, with treatment of the run-off from the first one inch of rainfall on-site to meet the water quality standards required by ch. 62-302,  62-302.500 FAC. Water quantity standard: Where two or more standards impact a specific development, the most restrictive standard shall apply: 
 a. Post development runoff shall not exceed the pre-development runoff rate for a 25-year storm event, up to and including an event with a 24-hour duration. 
 b. Treatment of the runoff from the first one-inch of rainfall on site or the first half-inch of runoff whichever is greater. Recreation and open space Three acres per 1,000 population Public schools Beginning January 1, 2008, the adopted level of service (LOS) standard for all Miami-Dade County public school facilities is 100% utilization of Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH) Capacity (With Relocatable Classrooms). This LOS standard except for Magnet Schools, shall be applicable in each public school concurrency service area (CSA), defined as the public school attendance boundary by the Miami-Dade County Public Schools. 
The adopted LOS standard for Magnet Schools is 100% of FISH (With Relocatable Classrooms), which shall be calculated on a districtwide basis.  
TABLE 5-11 
LOS FOR NON-FLORIDA INTERSTATE HIGHWAY ROADS 
Location Transit Availability No Transit Service 20-Minute Headway Transit Service within 1/2 Mile Extraordinary Transit Service (Commuter Rail or Express Bus) Outside urban development boundary LOS D: State minor arterials 
LOS C: County roads and state principal arterials N/A N/A Between urban infill area and urban development boundary LOS D: 90 percent of capacity; or 
LOS E on state urban minor arterials: 100 capacity LOS E: 100% capacity LOS E: 120% capacity Inside urban infill area LOS E: 100% capacity LOS E: 120% capacity LOS E: 150% capacity  
  
Note: Urban infill area is located east of Northwest and Southwest 77 Avenue and SR 826 excluding the area north of SR 826 and west of I-95 
TABLE 5-12 
LOS FOR FLORIDA INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM ROADWAYS 
Type FIHS Facility Urban Development Boundary Location Roadways Parallel to Exclusive Transit Facilities Inside Transportation Concurrency Management Areas Constrained or Backlogged Roadways Outside Inside Limited access facility LOS B LOS D [E] LOS D [E] LOS D [E] Manager Controlled access facility LOS B LOS D [E] LOS E LOS E Manager  
  
Note: LOS inside brackets [ ] apply to general use lanes only when exclusive through-lanes exist (Source Solin and Associates, Inc. with Carr Smith Corradino, 1998) 
(h)  Methodology for determining demands on concurrency facilities. 
(1)  Roads. In determining demand for available capacity for roads, the following criteria shall be used: 
a.  Residential development. For residential development (except within planned developments), the following trip generation rates shall be used to calculate the impact of the proposed development: 
Land Use Type Trips Per Day Per Unit Single-family 10 Multiple-family 8  
b.  Nonresidential development. For all other development categories allowed within the future land use element, the impacts of development shall be measured by utilizing the average peak trip generation rate associated with the land use designation in which the proposed development shall occur, using the most recent published edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Manual. Internal capture rates may be considered in determining traffic volumes for mixed use developments; however, the applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating any internal capture rates of the total nonresidential trips. 
c.  Other methods and procedures. If the preliminary level of service information indicates a deficiency in capacity based on adopted level of service standards (reference paragraph (g) for adopted level of service standards for roads), the developer may at his option, prepare a more detailed alternative highway capacity analysis as described in the Highway Capacity Manual (Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 1985); or conduct a travel time and delay study following professional standards and procedures contained in the state department of transportation, traffic engineering office in its Manual for Uniform Traffic Studies. If the alternative methodology, after review and acceptance by the administrative official or, indicates no deficiency in the capacity based on the adopted level of service standard, notwithstanding that the comprehensive development master plan indicates a deficiency in capacity based on the adopted level of service standard, the results of the alternative methodology will be used. However, the village shall, at its discretion, reserve the option to have the methodology reviewed by a professional transportation engineer or transportation planner prior to accepting the methodology. The cost for such review shall be borne by the applicant. 
i.  Required traffic analysis. For all new development, which are required to follow the site plan review process, the applicant/developer shall be required to submit a traffic analysis which identifies the development's impact on the village transportation system. The administrative official may also require the submission of a traffic analysis for developments if the site location, anticipated total trip generation, circulation patterns or other such factors warrant a more extensive review of traffic impacts. 
ii.  Traffic analysis methodology. The impact area for the traffic analysis shall include adjacent and connected roadway segments as determined by the administrative official. The applicant may apply alternative trip allocations together with a statement of trip allocation methodology consistent with professional standards established in one or more of the following documents as may be updated from time to time: 
a.  Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 1985. 
b.  Florida Highway System Plan, "Traffic Analysis Procedures," Florida Department of Transportation Bureau of Multi-Modal Systems Planning, 1987. 
c.  Florida Highway System Plan "Level of Service Standards and Guidelines Manual," Florida Department of Transportation. 
d.  Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers (latest edition). 
e.  Transportation and Land Development, Stover, Virgil G., Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1988. 
iii.  Traffic analysis requirements. The traffic analysis shall include the following: 
a.  Total projected average weekday trips for the proposed development: 
  Pass-by capture rate (commercial land uses only); 
  Internal capture rate (planned development only); 
  Peak external trips based on ITE Trip Generation Manual, 5th (or most recent) Edition; and 
Peak hour directional projected vehicle trips on all segments of the arterial and collector street system, which are adjacent to the development project or as determined necessary by the administrative official. 
b.  Design capacity of the accessed road(s). 
c.  Analysis of traffic distribution on the road network including all links impacted by more than ten percent of project traffic. The trip distribution shall be consistent with the "presets" contained in the approved trip generation model. The administrative official shall determine the approved trip generation model. 
d.  Necessary operational improvements to the village, county, or state maintained transportation system in order to maintain the adopted level of service for the roadway. 
e.  Other related information as required by the village. 
f.  Justification, including appropriate references, for the use of any trip generation rates, adjustments factors or traffic assignment methods not previously approved by the village. 
g.  The latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual shall be used to calculate these estimates. Adjustments to these estimates may be made, based on special trip generation information supplied by the applicant. 
(2)  Other facilities. The applicant shall provide the administrative official with the information required to apply the adopted level of service standard. The demand on concurrency facilities generated by the applicant's development shall be determined based on the following: 
a.  Solid waste. The demand for solid waste collection and disposal capacity shall be determined by multiplying the total number of persons served times 9.9 pounds. 
b.  Potable water. The demand for potable water capacity shall be determined by multiplying the total number of persons served times 200 gallons. 
c.  Sanitary sewer. The demand for sanitary sewer capacity shall be determined by multiplying the total number of persons served times 100 gallons. 
d.  Drainage. The applicant shall provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed project shall meet the LOS established in the Code for drainage facilities. 
e.  Recreation area. The demand for recreation area shall be determined by applying the village recreation area level of service standard. 
(i)  Determination of available capacity. For purposes of this division, the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by adding the cumulative total supply for each public facility component described in subsection (1) below and subtracting cumulative total demand for each infrastructure component as in subsection (2) below. 
1.  Add the indicators of available facility capacity: 
a.  Capacity of existing facility. The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
b.  Capacity of committed potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage. The total capacity of committed new facilities, if any, that will become available on or before the date a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development. The capacity of concurrency facilities may be counted and deemed concurrent only if the following standards are met: 
i.  For potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage: The standards identified in the Code shall be met. 
ii.  For parks and recreation facilities: The standards identified in the Code shall be met. 
iii.  For roads: The standards identified in the Code shall be met. 
2.  Subtract the committed capacity: 
a.  Existing demand based on existing development. The demand for services or facilities created by existing development as provided by the village. 
b.  Demand to be generated by vested development, valid capacity reservation certificates, and valid certificates of concurrency. The demand for the service or facility created by the anticipated completion of other vested and/or approved developments. 

Concurrency Management Flowchart 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.22. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Applicability. Parking shall be provided in all districts at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity by a change of use, change of tenant, or the addition of dwelling units, transient units, floor area, seats, beds, employees or other factors impacting parking demand as stated in this division. The parking spaces shall be delineated on a site plan if required. If a site plan is not required, the applicant shall submit a scaled drawing reflecting off-street parking, tenant locations, square footage and parking ratios, which shall be approved and filed by the administrative official once a determination of compliance is rendered. The land comprising approved parking spaces required by this division shall be maintained in perpetuity as off-street parking spaces, along with all its required landscaping, irrigation, lighting and drainage, and shall not be used for other purposes unless there is a village approved change in land use on the premises which warrants a change in the design, layout, or number of required parking spaces. 
(b)  Required off-street parking. 
1.  Schedule of off-street parking requirements. Proper parking spaces shall be provided at the time of the erection of any main building or structure, or at the time any main building or structure is increased in occupant capacity, or at the time any use or occupancy of an existing building is changed to a use or occupancy which increases the requirements for off-street parking facilities. A dust-free paving material such as asphalt, bitumen, concrete, turf block or other similar materials shall surface parking areas for all uses including single-family residential uses. With the exception of single-family and two-family dwellings, parking lots shall have each parking space and aisle marked. Where uses are mixed, the areas shall be identified and calculated by use. Credit for non-useable space shall be allowed for restroom facilities only. The number of parking spaces required is specified in the following schedule of off-street parking requirements: 
Uses Spaces Required 1. Assembly occupancies, private clubs, theaters, auditoriums and similar uses 1. 1 space per 3 fixed seats or 1 space per 4 occupants, calculated at 15 square feet of net usable area or fractional part thereof per occupant. 2. Auto sales, service and similar uses 2. 3 spaces per the first 2,500 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof, plus 1 space per each additional 500 square feet or fractional part thereof, plus 3 spaces per each 5,000 square feet or fractional part thereof open lot area. Office and retail parts areas shall be provided parking spaces as otherwise contained therein. Customer and employee parking shall be labeled as such. 3. Banquet and bingo halls, private clubs 3. 1 space per 100 square feet of patron area. 4. Beauty/barber shops, hair salons 4. 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 5. Churches or other places of worship 5. 1 space per 3 fixed seats, calculated at 20 lineal inches equal to one fixed seat and 1 space per 4 occupants calculated at 15 square foot offset useable area, including adjacent areas that may be used as an auditorium or assembly area. 6. Convalescent homes, homes for the aged, nursing homes 6. 1 space per each staff member plus 1 space for every 3 residents permitted on site. 7. Dwellings 
Single-family 
Duplex 
Townhouses/apartments/multi-family 
  
Group homes 7. 
2 spaces 
4 spaces 
2.5 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space per 4 units 
2 spaces 8. Furniture showrooms 8. 3 spaces for the first 2,500 square feet, plus 1 space for each additional 500 square feet. Future parking spaces at a ratio of 1 space per 250 square feet must be identified and landscaped, not to be counted toward meeting landscape requirements. 9. Gas stations, mini-marts 9. 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof plus one space per lift bay. A minimum of 3 spaces, one of which must be handicap, shall be provided and designed so as not to interfere with the dispensing operation. 10. General business, retail commercial establishments,offices or office buildings, and banks 10. 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof, unless more restrictive provisions for specific uses are listed herein. 11. Hospitals 11. 2 spaces per bed. 12. Instructional studios such as dance, karate, aerobics, health and fitness establishments 12. 1 space per each 100 square feet of classroom, equipment or similar patron use area or fractional part thereof plus 1 space per 250 square feet of additional gross floor area or fractional part thereof. 13. Libraries, art museums and similar cultural facilities 13. 1 space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. 14. Medical or dental office or clinics 14. 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof, whichever is greater. 15. Nurseries (plants) 16. 8 spaces for the first acre, plus 2 spaces for each additional acre or fractional part thereof. 16. Open lot uses (cars, vehicles) 17. 5 spaces for the first 5,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each additional 500 square feet or fractional part thereof. 17. Recreation, social, swimming, golf, tennis clubs 18. 1 space per 200 square feet gross floor area or factional part thereof, plus 4 per each tennis court, plus 1 per each 200 square feet of pool area or factional part thereof (including deck), plus per each hole of golf as applicable. Places of assembly shall be as provided herein. 18. Restaurants, lounges, nightclubs, or similar places dispensing food, drink or refreshments 19. Providing sit down service: 0.95 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part hereof devoted to patron use; plus one per 250 devoted to all other gross square floor area. 
Fast casual restaurant and cafeteria or food service areas within retail stores: 0.75 spaces per 50 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof devoted to patron use; plus one per 250 devoted to all other gross floor area. 
Fast food restaurant (without drive-through): 0.65 spaces per 50 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof devoted to patron use; plus one per 250 devoted to all other gross floor area. 
Fast food restaurant (with drive-through): 0.50 spaces per 50 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof devoted to patron use; plus one per 250 devoted to all other gross floor area. 
Providing take out service only. 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area whose waiting area does not exceed 80 square feet, otherwise 1 space per 150 square feet gross. 
A sidewalk caf which contains 100 square feet or less of dining area outdoors is exempt from providing additional parking. One parking space shall be required for every 50 square feet of dining area in excess of 100 square feet of outdoor caf dining area. 19. Schools (private) 
Kindergarten, Nurseries 
  
Elementary, Middle Schools 
  
High Schools, Universities 20.   
1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
1 space per 10 fixed or moveable seats, plus 1 space per 4 employees (excluding teachers). 20. Stadiums, gyms 21. 1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per each 200 square feet, whichever is greater. 21. Determination for unlisted uses 22. In the case of uses is not listed in this schedule, the village shall make a determination of the minimum required off-street parking spaces. In reaching the determination, the village shall be guided by the requirements for similar uses, the number and kind of vehicles likely to be attracted to the proposed use and studies of the parking requirements of such uses in other jurisdictions and nationally recognized parking standards (ITE or ULI reports).  
2.  Size and access. 
a.  All uses, except single-family and duplex dwellings. For all uses, except single-family and duplex dwellings, off-street spaces shall consist of parking spaces having minimum dimensions as required in table 5-13 below for the parallel parking of each automobile, exclusive of aisles thereto. The parking plan must be so arranged that each automobile may be placed and removed from the parking space assigned without the necessity of moving any other automobile to complete the maneuver, except for a licensed and authorized rental car agency and for a new car dealer storage building. Street or sidewalk areas may not be used for off-street parking purposes as herein defined. Individual ingress and egress drives extending across the public sidewalks and curbs and connecting the off-street parking spaces to the public street areas shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 15 feet for a residential one-way drive, and a minimum of 24 feet and a maximum of 30 feet for any nonresidential use or residential two-way drive. The design, number and placement of such drives are subject to site plan approval by the village before being constructed. However, commercial access ways are permitted as one per 100 feet of frontage, but must be 35 feet from the any street intersection. Two or more owners and operators of commercial buildings or uses of the same type of land use classifications requiring off-street parking facilities may record ingress and egress easements approved by the village provided that the combined facility is compatible with the land use being served. Spaces marked reserved or designated for a certain use may not be counted as fulfilling parking requirements where businesses share parking (i.e., shopping centers). 
b.  Single-family, and duplex uses. For single-family and duplex dwellings, off-street parking areas shall be equivalent to two nine-foot by 18-foot spaces, may not occupy more than 60 percent of the front yard, and the access way approach must be 15 feet from any street intersection. 
c.  Plan approval for ingress/egress, curbs, and sidewalks. The plan for ingress and egress, curbs and sidewalks associated with any off-street parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the village. No curbs or sidewalks may be cut or altered in any manner without a permit from the village and all other applicable county or state agencies. In approving curb or sidewalk cuts, the location of existing and proposed street trees, their spacing, the proximity to intersections or other existing traffic consideration shall be studied. 
d.  Variances. A variance to the required off street parking requirements may only be granted by the village council. 
e.  Parking dimensions. Vehicle parking shall meet the following minimum dimensions: 
TABLE 5-13 
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Dimensions Diagram 0 45 60 75 90 Stall width, parallel to aisle A 9.0 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0 Stall length of line B 24.0 26.5 22.9 20.3 18.0 Stall depth to wall C 9.0 18.7 19.8 19.6 18.0 Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 12.0 17.0 22.0 24.0 Stall depth, interlock E 9.0 15.7 17.7 18.5 18.0 Module, wall to interlock F 30.0 46.5 54.6 59.1 60.0 Module, interlocking G 30.0 43.5 52.4 28.6 60.0 Module, interlock to curb face H 30.0 44.7 52.4 56.9 58.0 Bumper overhang, typical I 0.0 1.8 2.2 2.4 2.5 Offset J N/A 6.3 2.7 0.6 0.0 Setback K 24.0 12.7 9.0 5.0 0.0 Cross aisle, one-way L 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 Cross aisle, two-way N/A 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0  
For parallel parking, minimum widths and lengths shall be nine feet by 23 feet. 
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS DIAGRAM 1 

OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS DIAGRAM 2 
3.  Location of parking spaces. Parking spaces for all uses and structures which are provided as required parking in conformance with the schedule of off-street parking and other applicable provisions shall be located on the same lot and have the same zoning district as the principal use or structure they are intended to serve. Notwithstanding this provision, off-site parking may be allowed in the BU and RU-5 zoning districts after a public hearing is convened by the village council, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The off-site parking facility is located within 100 yards of the main parcel for which permission for off-site parking is being sought. 
b.  An application has been filed with and accepted by the administrative official as being in compliance with the requirements set forth herein. 
c.  The application is in the name or names of the owner of the real property seeking permission to utilize an off-site parking facility, the name of any tenant or business on such real property seeking permission to utilize an off-site parking facility, and in the name of the owner of the real property proposed for use as an off-site parking facility. 
d.  The applicants provide to the village an ownership and encumbrance report or policy of title insurance, acceptable to the administrative official, showing the ownership of both parcels to be listed in the names of the applicants as of the date of any action by the village council on the application. 
e.  The property proposed to be utilized as an off-site parking facility is not currently required parking for any other use granted by the village or has sufficient unallocated parking available. 
f.  The application reflects that all parties acknowledge that the off-site parking facility is to be used only for off-site parking as required by the proposed business, and that such off-site parking facility shall not be available for any other use. 
g.  The applicants acknowledge that no grandfathered status shall attach to the business use, structure or real property having such off-site parking, and in the event such business or use shall lose its authority or permission to utilize such off-site parking, that use shall immediately cease. The agreement provided to the village shall be properly witnessed and notarized, shall be recorded in the official records of the county, and shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns and devises of the parties to the agreement. 
h.  Any cost to the village for recording of such agreement or attorney's fees in the preparation, review or filing of such agreement shall be prepaid by the applicant prior to any village council action on the application. 
i.  Any parking provided on any such off-site parking facility shall be upgraded to meet current village regulations for required parking (including required landscaping). 
j.  The agreement shall specify that the business for which off-site parking is being sought shall have all owners, employees or agents of such business park on such off-site facility, and not park on the real estate for which permission for off-site parking is being sought and any violation of such parking restriction shall cause off-site parking approval to be revoked by action of the village council. 
k.  The agreement provided to the village, or any approval for use of off-site parking facilities, shall not be assignable by the applicants. And any approval for the use of off-site parking facilities shall be subject to being revoked by the village council in the event that any of the applicants shall sell or covey the facility for which permission for utilization of off-site parking is being sought, the off-site parking facility, or the business seeking permission for utilization of an off-site parking facility. Any certificate of occupancy or occupational license issued concerning the property for which off-site is being sought shall be issued conditioned upon the owner or holder of any such license maintaining the exclusive right to use such off-site parking facility. 
4.  Parking or storage of rental vehicles. Parking or storage of rental vehicles in connection with a licensed and authorized rental car agency shall be located on the same lot or parcel of property as the licensed office of the rental car agency, or such lot or parcel shall be contiguous to the lot or parcel on which the main rental agency or office is located. The storage of rental cars does not require standard parking spaces for storage areas, provided such areas are within an enclosed parking structure. 
5.  Handicapped parking. Handicapped parking shall meet the requirements of the state handicapped access code, F.S,  553.501 et seq. 
6.  Utilization of parking structures. When off-street parking facilities are located within a separate parking structure, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply: 
a.  The structure shall conform to all lot, yard and bulk requirements of the district in which it is located. 
b.  The parking facilities shall conform to all other provisions of these regulations and all other ordinances of the village. 
c.  All nonstructural portions of the exterior elevations except for vehicular ingress and egress areas shall, in addition to any required safety provisions, be screened by a sight block of no more than 60 percent solidity for the total areas between deck levels, such sight blockage to be determined by elevation. Screening shall extend the full distance between deck levels except for vehicular ingress and egress. 
d.  When parking facilities are located on the roof of a structure, a seven-foot sight block shall be provided in accordance with subsection (b)(6)c. above. The definition for height of a building shall be applied with respect to feet and be measured to the top of the sight block as set forth subsection (b)(6)c. 
e.  This regulation shall not apply to or be construed to prohibit the construction of freestanding carports or garages as accessory structures to single-family or two-family residential dwellings. Nothing in this regulation is intended to prohibit the installation of a fully automatic parking facility in which the placement and removal of automobiles are accomplished wholly by machinery. However, such mechanism shall be completely shielded from public view. 
7.  Utilization of yards. 
a.  In all EU districts and in the RU-1 and RU-2 residential districts, required parking spaces for single-family and two family dwellings may be permitted in any setback areas and shall be counted as meeting off-street parking requirements, except that within a required front yard all parking shall be located in a driveway or turnaround. 
b.  In all districts, for all other permitted uses, approved permitted uses with site plan review or approved conditional uses, required front, side or rear yards may be used for off-street parking except as limited herein. A maximum of 60 percent of a required front yard may be used for off-street parking. All parking areas shall have each parking space and aisle marked and shall be landscaped in conformance with the paved area landscape requirements in these regulations. In all districts, parking area and driveway surfaces shall not extend closer than five feet from any abutting property line. 
c.  All parking spaces shall be considered impervious for the purpose of calculating required green space pursuant to district requirements established in these regulations. 
8.  Bicycle rack and pedestrian bench. A bicycle rack and pedestrian bench are required to be provided at the time of remodeling or redevelopment of a commercial property to an extent that exceeds 50 percent of its existing floor area. Two parking space credits shall be granted for providing the required bicycle rack and pedestrian bench on-site. The bicycle rack shall be capable of storing a minimum of four bicycles and the pedestrian bench shall be a minimum of five feet in length. Bicycle racks and benches shall be placed in a visible location within 15 feet of the front building elevation(s) or adjacent to the pedestrian access path. The area around the bicycle rack and bench shall be landscaped with one 14-foot shade tree and four 36-inch shrubs. 
9.  Electrical vehicle charging infrastructure. A minimum of one Level 2, 240-volt electric vehicle charging station shall be provided within a parking space designated for electric vehicles at the time of construction of a new building, or remodeling or reconstruction of an existing building beyond 50 percent of its floor area, within the commercial and multifamily residential zoning districts, except that an electric vehicle charging station shall not be required within parking lots that contain 20 or less required parking spaces. 
(c)  Off-street loading. For every building or building group or part having a gross floor area of 4,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by commercial or industrial uses or other uses similarly requiring the receipt of distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, off-street loading berths or unloading berths shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, as follows: 
(1)  4,000-25,000 square feet: 1 berth; 
(2)  25,000-40,000 square feet: 2 berths; 
(3)  40,000-60,000 square feet: 3 berths; 
(4)  For each additional 50,000 square feet: 1 berth. 
(d)  Lighted off-street parking facilities. All required off-street parking facilities for multiple family residential development and all nonresidential land uses shall install light fixtures which project the light rays directly to the parking surface, and shall include shields which restrict projection or light rays outward to adjacent properties and also restrict the upward projection of light rays into the night sky. All lighting shall comply with minimum standards and shall not cast more than one-half foot-candle at the property line. Photometric drawings, by a certified engineer, shall be provided at time of permitting and prior to final approval. Such calculations shall certify compliance with this division. 
(e)  Access driveway entrances and approaches. 
1.  Residential driveways. Residential driveway approaches must be identified on site plans and shall be constructed according to approved public works standards. The driveway approach must have a minimum width of 12 feet and a maximum width of 16 feet, except for a five-foot radius on either side. The driveway must be set back at least five feet from any adjoining properties at all points. Residential driveway approaches and access ways must be 35 feet from street intersections and are subject to required triangle of visibility standards. No more than one two-way accessway shall be permitted for any street frontage up to 100 lineal feet or no more than two one-way accessways shall be permitted for any street frontage up to 100 lineal feet, such standards to be applicable to any property under one ownership. Where such ownership involves over 100 feet of street frontage, one additional two-way or two additional one-way drives may be permitted for each additional 100 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof. The balance of such street frontage not involved with accessways shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
2.  Commercial driveways. Commercial driveway entrances and approaches shall be paved and constructed according to approved public works standards. The driveway and approach must have a minimum width of 12 feet and a maximum width of 30 feet. The driveway and approach may not encroach upon adjoining properties and must be set back a minimum of five feet from adjoining properties. Commercial accessways must be a minimum of 100 feet apart when located on properties under common ownership. No commercial driveway curbcut shall be located within 50 feet of a street intersection. 
(f)  Parking pavement markings. For all occupancies other than single-family and duplex dwellings, the parking spaces shall be marked with double striping on each side of the space to identify and facilitate their use. All striping shall be white, contrasting with the pavement, except for handicapped parking spaces that shall be painted blue and white stripe. Dimension requirements, as noted elsewhere, shall be measured to the center point of the double stripe, as shown on the "striping detail" hereby incorporated as part of this division. Notwithstanding the above provisions and striping details, where striping is required for residential users, not less than a single four-inch stripe shall be provided, with parking stall dimensions to be measured to the center line of the strip. In all instances, adequate interior driveways and ingress and egress driveways shall be provided to connect all parking spaces with a public right-of-way or alley. Where a parking space heads into and abuts a walkway, the paved parking space shall be furnished with a wheel stop or curb positioned two feet to the rear of the front end of the parking space, for purposes of protecting the walkway and its users from encroachment by vehicles. Required and surplus parking shall comply with these provisions. Parking shall not be located in any rights-of-way. 
(g)  Parking lot buffers. All lots whose parking areas are adjacent to a right-of-way or private street shall be screened by a continuous hedge or wall, as provided in the land development code. 
(h)  Parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers. For all uses other than single-family, duplex, townhouse, or multi-family uses, parking spaces specifically designated for persons transporting young children, hereby defined as ages two years or less, and strollers shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Quality of specially designated parking spaces. The following provisions shall be met: 
TABLE 5-14 
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Number of Spaces Up to 100 0 101 to 500 2 501 to 1,000 3 Over 1,000 One additional space for each 500 parking spaces over 1,000 total parking spaces.  
2.  Location of parking spaces. Such spaces shall be located as close as possible to parking spaces designated for the physically handicapped or disabled persons shall take precedence. Where no parking spaces designated for the physically handicapped or disabled persons have been provided, parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance. 
3.  Sign and markings. All parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers shall be prominently outlined with green paint and posted with an approved permanent above-ground sign which shall conform to the figure entitled "Baby Stroller Parking Sign" hereby incorporated in this division. The bottom of the sign must be at least five feet above grade when attached to a building, or seven feet above grade for a detached sign. 

Baby Stroller Parking Sign Illustration 
4.  All property owners who are required by this regulation to provide parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers shall provide such parking spaces within two years from November 27, 2000. In no event shall the number of parking spaces for the physically handicapped or disabled be reduced below the quantity required by the state building code. 
(i)  Approval of parking plan before issuance of building permits. Prior to the issuance of any building, paving, grading, and leveling or other permits, a suitable survey and sketch must be presented to the administrative official indicating the parking layout, drainage plan for the premises, and all driveways extending beyond the property line into the public right-of-way. The driveway plan and drainage plan for the premises shall be reviewed with the public works director. In approving the plans, the administrative official with the public works director shall determine that their decision is in the interest of the public safety and welfare, taking into consideration the volume of traffic to be generated, its pattern and conflict with the adjacent road traffic; the number of driveways proposed and their proximity to others in the area; location and proximity of median cuts; visual clearances or obstructions at the driveways; angle and location of driveway and its intersection with the road; elevation of the driveway in reference to the road, and any other factors that may affect the safety and welfare of the public. In addition all driveways extending into a state road shall meet with the approval of the state department of transportation. 
(j)  Parking area on application for building permit. Applications for building or use permits shall indicate the area to be used for parking and permits shall be issued stating that such area shall be so reserved and developed. Recordable restrictions so reserving such area may be at the discretion of the village council. Such area reserved for parking area will be marked on the zoning districts map and no permits for additional use of such area shall be issued. Area reserved for parking in connection with any use shall be under the same ownership as that of the use itself. 
(k)  Surface of parking areas. 
1.  In the RU-1, RU-2, and EU districts, the area reserved for off street parking shall be either graveled, mulched, or hard surfaced, and must be marked on the site plan, indicating dimensions. In all other zones, parking spaces shall be hard surfaced, except that ten percent of the parking spaces provided shall be constructed of porous pavement materials or open cell unit pavers (turf block). The design and specifications of proposed open cell unit pavers shall be subject to review and approval of the administrative official. Where the parking area is hard-surfaced, the same shall consist of a good rolled back base, well tamped and topped with oil and sand or with asphalt or with asphalt or surfaced with concrete. Occupancy of a given structure or premises shall be prohibited until the required parking area has been improved, inspected, and approved. Parking of vehicles in areas or on surfaces other than those designated and approved as permitted or required herein shall be prohibited. 
2.  Drainage. All required off-street parking areas shall be properly drained so that no nuisance will be caused to adjacent or nearby properties. All construction shall comply with design standards as established by all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
3.  Maintenance. All required off-street parking areas shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept in a reasonably clean, sanitary, and safe condition free from trash, rodents and insects vermin, and hazards. 
(l)  Parking between setback line and right-of-way. Parking areas including driveways, except for minimum ingress and egress drives in the RU, EU, AU and RU-5 districts, shall be located no closer than 25 feet to a right-of-way. Parking areas for single-family, two-family, three and four unit apartment uses may also be located no closer than 25 feet to a right-of-way. 
(m)  Parking area co-located with use served. Off-street parking areas shall be located on the same lot, parcel, or premises as the use to be served. 
(n)  Application of provisions to change of use. This article shall apply to changes of uses as well as the establishment of new uses. 
(o)  No commercial parking adjacent to public park. Where a business is adjacent to a park, neither the driveway nor the parking area shall be located between the business structure and the public park. 
(p)  Restriction on use of parking area for commercial use. No area designated as a parking area in connection with any designated use or uses shall be operated as a commercial parking lot. 
(q)  Markings/restriction on back-out movements. For all uses other than single-family or duplex dwellings, the parking area shall be marked by painted lines, as otherwise provided in this division, indicating the individual parking spaces or stalls. In all districts, the parking area shall be so arranged that there is no back-out movement into adjacent properties, public streets, or rights-of-way. 

Accessible Parking Space for Dade County 

Off-Street Parking Standards 
(r)  Shared parking. 
1.  A shared parking plan shall be considered in conjunction with the redevelopment of commercial properties in the village to an extent greater than 50 percent of its existing floor area or 50 percent of the value of existing improvements, or for the continued use of existing commercial centers that include at least three of the following uses: retail, restaurant, office, or entertainment, or in conjunction with an application for consideration of a Pinecrest Parkway alternative site plan. Applicants wishing to use shared parking as a means of reducing the total number of required spaces may submit a shared parking analysis using the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Model (latest edition). The analysis must be provided in a form established by the administrative official. Reductions in the total number of required spaces for shared parking are not permitted unless the administrative official determines a reduction is appropriate on a case-by-case basis. Uses providing shared parking must have either mutually exclusive or compatibly overlapping normal hours of operation. The administrative official will determine whether hours of operation are compatibly overlapping. 
2.  Joint use of required nonresidential parking spaces may occur where two or more uses on the same or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. 
3.  Two or more owners or operators of buildings or uses requiring off-street parking that share parking may be allowed to reduce the amount of required parking spaces in accordance with the following methodology: 
a.  Determine the minimum parking requirements in accordance with the matrix of shared parking uses for each land use as if it were a separate use; 
b.  Multiply the required minimum number of parking spaces for each separate use by the percentages for each of the eight time periods set forth in the following table; 
c.  Add the resulting required minimum number of parking spaces in each of the eight vertical columns of the table; 
d.  Select the vertical column with the highest total; and 
e  Use this number as the required minimum number of parking spaces. 
4.  Reduction of parking requirements because of joint use may be approved if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. 
b.  The developer submits a legal agreement approved by the village attorney guaranteeing the joint use of the off-street parking spaces as long as the uses requiring parking are in existence or until the required parking is provided elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of the land development regulations. 
c.  The structures and facilities provided for one or both of the uses are specialized to the degree that no change in use resulting in greater parking demand could take place without expensive reconstruction necessitating a development permit and development plan review. 
d.  If the properties are under separate ownership and control, a written easement and agreement shall be recorded at the applicant's expense, specifying the conditions of such joint use. This agreement shall be approved by the village attorney. 
Shared Parking Ratios 
(Numbers are listed as percent) 
Use Weekday 
Midnight 
- 7:00 am Weekday 
7:00 am - 
5:00 p.m. Weekday 
5:00 p.m. - 
9:00 p.m. 
Weekday 
9:00 p.m. to 
Midnight Weekend 
Midnight - 
7:00 am 
Weekend 
7:00 am - 
5:00 p.m. Weekend 
5:00 p.m. - 
9:00 p.m. Weekend 
9:00 p.m. - 
Midnight Office 5 100 30 5 0 10 0 0 Retail 5 50 75 10 5 100 75 10 Restaurant 10 50 75 40 15 75 100 50 Entertainment 10 40 100 100 80 100 100 100 Others 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
6.  If a privately owned parking facility is to serve two or more separate properties, then a "shared parking agreement" shall be filed with the village for consideration by the administrative official. Unless explicitly stated to the contrary, the owner of the parking facility accepts responsibility for operating, maintaining and accepting liability for personal injury and property damage. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2015-9,  5, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-1,  5, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.23. - Access, internal circulation, and other traffic impacts. 
    The administrative official shall advise on matters related to this division: 
(a)  Internal circulation system design and access/egress considerations. 
1.  Driveways, curb cuts, aisles, bicycle ways, pedestrian ways, and areas for parking and internal circulation of vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians shall be located, designed and controlled so as to provide for safe and convenient circulation within the site and safe and convenient access from and onto adjoining streets. The administrative official shall review such design considerations based on standard traffic engineering principles and practices and such specifications as may be adopted by resolution of the village council. Among factors to be considered shall be the need for acceleration and deceleration lanes; the number, location and size of curb cuts, access drives, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways from adjacent streets, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways, together with any special markings necessary to avoid conflict among vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; the location and design of driveways, access aisles, and bicycle ways to parking spaces; the arrangement, delineation and marking for parking areas; and the means of access to buildings for fire-fighting apparatus and other emergency vehicles. 
2.  Cross-access easements and connections. 
a.  Cross-access connections between parking lots shall be required to be provided where connection is possible to allow for the efficient flow of traffic between commercial properties, thereby reducing and minimizing traffic congestion on Pinecrest Parkway (US 1) through a reduction in the number of vehicles re-entering Pinecrest Parkway for the purpose of accessing adjoining or neighboring properties. Cross-access connections shall be for the use of customers and shall not be used by service or delivery vehicles. 
b.  Required cross-access connections shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width to allow for two-way ingress and egress. 
c.  Upon redevelopment of a property where alterations or remodeling affect 50 percent or more of the floor area of the principal building or use, or the cost of said alterations or remodeling exceeds 50 percent of the fair market value of the improvement of the site prior to the alterations or improvements, the property owner shall provide and record a cross-access easement and build one-half of the required connection to adjoining properties. The village shall notify the adjoining property owner of an application for a permit for the construction of a cross-access connection at the time of application for said permit. Required notification shall be provided by certified mail 30 days prior to issuance of the requested permit The owner of the adjacent property will be required to build the remaining half of the required cross-access connection and record a cross- access easement upon redevelopment of the property. 
d.  In instances where construction of a cross-access connection would create a dangerous condition, or where construction of a cross-access connection would serve no practical purpose, the village council or administrative official may allow a waiver of the requirement. Any decision relative to the requirement for a cross-access connection is appealable to the village zoning board and village council pursuant to article 2 of the land development regulations. In consideration of a requested waiver, the village council or administrative official shall consider the availability of alternative options for the provision of a cross-access connection and shall consider each request on a site-specific basis. 
e.  Any parking spaces required to be abandoned or removed as the result of providing a cross-access connection shall be credited toward the number of required parking for the on-site development at the rate of 150 percent of the number of spaces removed. Parking space credit shall not be provided until the cross-access connection has been constructed. 
f.  Any landscaped open space required to be abandoned or removed as the result of providing a cross-access connection shall be credited toward the amount of landscaped open space required for the on-site development at the rate of 150 percent of the landscaped open space removed. Landscaped open space credit shall not be provided until the cross-access connection has been constructed. 
g.  Any increase in traffic on a particular property that may be associated with the construction of a cross-access connection shall not be counted against the property providing a cross-access connection when calculating generated traffic volumes and impacts on adjoining levels of service or concurrency requirements. 
h.  Until both halves of a required cross-access drive are available for cross- access and connection between two properties, parking of vehicles will continue to be permitted on the unconnected cross-access drive available for future connection. 
(b)  Separation of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. Parking areas, driveways, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways shall be clearly identified, designed, and marked, where appropriate, to achieve safe and convenient circulation for motorized vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. Motorized traffic should be separated from principal bicycle ways, pedestrian routes and recreation areas by curbs, pavement markings, planting areas, fences or similar features designed to promote vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian safety. 
(c)  Driveway and curb-cut approvals. The village shall require that the proposed location of driveways and curb-cuts be coordinated with utility companies responsible for providing utility services in order to ensure that proposed construction activities are consistent with improvement plans as well as operation and maintenance activities and policies of utility service providers. No development plan or building permit shall be issued until proof of such coordination is presented to the village by the applicant/developer. In addition, the applicant submitting plans for driveway and curb-cut improvements shall comply with applicable surface water management regulations. 
(d)  Sidewalks required-Payment of fee for construction. In order to allow for the construction of pedestrian sidewalks as necessary to provide safe routes to schools pursuant to the village's sidewalk installation policy, a fee shall be paid as required by the village's fee schedule for construction of pedestrian sidewalks prior to the issuance of a building permit. The sidewalk fee shall be required and collected for the construction of any new single-family residence or commercial building, or for the renovation or reconstruction of any existing single-family residence or commercial building beyond 50 percent of its value or 50 percent of its floor area, where such construction or improvement is adjacent to a street that does not include a sidewalk adjacent to its frontage at the time of building permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-18,  2, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.24. - Cluster developments. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This article applies only to subdivisions of 25 contiguous acres or greater that are zoned EU-1 (Residential Estate). The intention of this article is to produce an alternate development scheme for large EU-1 zoned properties that clusters development in one area of the property, thereby minimizing impact on surrounding property and preserving valuable natural resources unique to the property. This will fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the village's comprehensive development master plan and land development regulations by: 
(1)  Maintaining scenic vistas along streets classified as arterial or collector roadways in the village's comprehensive development master plan; 
(2)  Maintaining compatibility with surrounding land uses by leaving unchanged the density limitation on the future land use map of the comprehensive development master plan; 
(3)  Maintaining the infrastructure levels of service in the surrounding area; 
(4)  Preserving and maintaining the unique natural characteristics of the property, including but not limited to, open space, native vegetation and tree canopies; and 
(5)  Provide diversity in housing types and lot sizes within the village by clustering units. 
(b)  Development regulations. 
(1)  Use. The subdivision shall be developed with single-family detached residential units and accessory structures located on the same lot, which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
(2)  Density. Shall not exceed one principal dwelling unit per one gross acre of property. 
(3)  Access. Primary vehicular access shall be connected to roadways with right-of-way width of 70 feet or more. Secondary access and emergency public service access shall be permitted upon demonstration that said use will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Lot size. Single-family residential lots must contain a minimum of 7,500 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum lot width and street frontage: 60 feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot depth: 110 feet. This measurement shall be from the property line abutting the front roadway. 
(7)  Lot frontage. Single family, residential lots may be located on private roadways, and must contain at least 60 feet of frontage along either a public or private roadway. 
(8)  Building height. Shall comply with division 4.2(c) of the land development regulations. 
(9)  Accessory use building height. Accessory buildings may not exceed 14 feet in height. 
(10)  Lot coverage. Maximum building coverage (inclusive of all structures): 45 percent. 
(11)  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65 percent. 
(12)  Minimum green space: 35 percent. 
(13)  Maximum floor area ratio: One-story structure, 0.40; Second floor of two-story structure, 0.30. 
(14)  Residential units. All single-family residential units shall be conveyed individually, in fee simple ownership. 
(15)  Parking. The development must comply with division 5.22 of the land development regulations. 
(16)  Front setback. Each residential unit must setback a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line. 
(17)  Side setback. Each residential unit must setback a minimum of five feet from the side property line. 
(18)  Rear setback. Each residential unit must setback a minimum of 15 feet from the rear property line. 
(19)  Side street setback. Each residential unit must setback a minimum of 20 feet from the side street property line. 
(20)  Accessory uses on single family lots. Accessory uses and buildings on single family lots such as Jacuzzis, decks, and trellises shall be permitted, at a setback of at least five feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(21)  Unit size. Each residential unit shall have a minimum size of 2,000 square feet. 
(22)  Building spacing. All unattached buildings shall be spaced a minimum of ten feet from one another. 
(23)  Common accessory buildings. Accessory buildings to serve the maintenance and community meeting needs of the development shall be permitted. Such buildings shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from the perimeter of the subdivision. 
(24)  Existing legal structures on property subject to a conditional use application may be permitted by the council as a conditional use and may be subsequently modified through conditional use approval by the council. 
(c)  Entrance features. Entrance features shall be permitted under division 7.17 of the land development regulations. 
(d)  Design. Building design shall use energy conservation measures including, but not limited to, self-shading, natural lighting, natural ventilation, outdoor circulation, and reduced dependence on artificial lighting and air conditioning. Porches, balconies, breezeways, pergolas, deep eaves, eyebrows and other elements promoting natural ventilation and shading are encouraged. 
(e)  Landscape. 
(1)  Street tree size and spacing: Street tree requirements shall be imposed only within the "development area" portion of the subdivision, and not within areas where features warrant preservation of the land in its natural condition. Street tree spacing requirements may be waived by the village manager or his designee where existing mature specimen trees warrant greater spacing between trees. 
(2)  Trees, shrubs and green space: Trees, shrubs and green space on single family residential lots shall be in compliance with division 6.1 of the land development regulations. 
(3)  Research: Research activities related to the study and maintenance of trees shall be permitted within the conservation and preservation area. 
(f)  Streets and roadways. The streets and roadways shall be maintained by a homeowner's association. Streets inside the subdivision may be privately owned, as long as access is provided to visitors and emergency vehicles. Streets shall be dimensioned and located according to plans approved by the village council. Lot(s) within the subdivision are not required to have direct street frontage on public streets, but must have frontage on private streets and must be accessible to service and emergency vehicles. 
(g)  Conservation and preservation area and maintenance. In order to prevent development and/or further subdivision of the conservation and preservation area and to provide for maintenance responsibility, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Conservation and preservation area requirements. 
a.  A minimum of 60 percent of the total development parcel must be permanently protected as conservation and preservation area. At least 60 percent of the conservation and preservation area shall be retained in contiguous areas, unless otherwise approved by the village council. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the conservation and preservation area may include watercourses, lakes, ponds and wetlands. 
c.  The village council may permit up to five percent of the conservation and preservation area to be used for passive recreation uses, such as pedestrian walks, bicycle paths, or the like. 
(2)  Land protection methods for conservation and preservation areas. 
a.  Conservation and preservation area shall be for conservation, preservation and passive recreation use which preserve the land in essentially its natural condition, by the following method: 
1.  The land shall be encumbered by a permanent conservation easement in a form acceptable to the village attorney and must be conveyed to the village, with village council approval, or to a non-profit trust or conservation organization, acceptable to the village council, whose principal purpose is to conserve open space. 
2.  Further subdivision of conservation and preservation area or its use other than passive recreation, conservation or preservation use, except for easements for utilities, shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Maintenance of conservation and preservation area. 
a.  A plan and narrative for the use, operation, maintenance and management of the conservation and preservation area shall be provided by the property owner to, and approved by, the village council prior to development approval. 
b.  Maintenance of conservation and preservation area shall insure that no hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions exist. 
(h)  Ownership and maintenance of common facilities and land. To ensure adequate planning for ownership, operation, and maintenance of common facilities and land, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Maintenance of common facilities and land. 
a.  A plan and narrative for the use, operation, maintenance and management of all common facilities and land shall be provided to and approved by the village council prior to development approval. 
b.  Maintenance of all common facilities and land shall insure that no hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions exist. 
(2)  Ownership of common facilities and land. 
a.  A homeowner's association (HOA) shall be established, requiring membership of each lot owner in the cluster development. The HOA shall be responsible for the permanent operation and maintenance of all common land, utilities, facilities, open space (other than the conservation and preservation area) and capital improvements. 
b.  A HOA agreement, easement agreement, restrictive covenant, or deed restriction shall be submitted with the cluster development application guaranteeing continuing maintenance of such common land, utilities, facilities, open space (other than the conservation and preservation area) and capital improvements. 
c.  Such agreement, restrictive covenant, or deed restriction shall be subject to the review and approval of the village council, upon recommendation of the village attorney, and properly recorded by the applicant after approval by the village council. 
d.  Such agreement or deed restriction shall provide that in the event that the HOA fails to maintain the common facilities and land in a reasonable order and condition in accordance with the agreement or covenant, the village may, after notice to the HOA, enter upon the land and maintain any part or all of the common facilities and land at its discretion in order to preserve taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common facilities and land from becoming a public nuisance. The agreement or covenant shall also provide that the cost of such maintenance by the village shall be assessed equally against each of the properties within the development. 
(i)  Site plan approval. The village council shall review the cluster development plans for compliance with the site plan review criteria and with the criteria in division 3.3(c) of the land development regulations, as a "conditional use" at an advertised public hearing. The purpose of the site plan review shall include the encouragement of logic, imagination, innovation and variety in the design process and ensure the congruity of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-7,  3, 10-12-04) 
Div. 5.25. - Tennis court/basketball court/outdoor recreational area lighting. 
    The lighting of new or existing tennis courts, basketball courts, outdoor swimming pools and pool decks, or other outdoor recreational areas may be permitted in any zoning district as a conditional use pursuant to division 3.3. However, such facilities must meet all of the following standards in order to be approved by the village council: 
(a)  A photometric plan shall be submitted which specifies the illumination levels, expressed in initial footcandles, along all affected property lines. 
(b)  The lighting shall be designed so that any overspill of lighting onto adjoining properties or street rights-of-way shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle vertically or horizontally and shall not cause any reflected illumination onto adjacent properties, structures or rights-of-way. 
(c)  Lighting standards and fixtures shall not exceed 18 feet in overall height and shall be located within the confines of the tennis court(s)/basketball court(s)s)/outdoor recreational areas. 
(d)  Tennis court/basketball court/outdoor recreational area lighting shall not be used between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use, the permittee must submit a letter of compliance from a registered engineer or architect stating that the installation has been inspected under operating conditions and found to be within the requirements set forth above. 
(f)  The lighting shall not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2005-5,  1, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.26. - Home offices. 
(a)  A home office may be permitted to residents of the dwelling unit or residence in any of the residential districts listed in div. 4.2 and div. 4.7 of the land development code, provided that: 
(1)  No more than one person shall be employed on the premises other than the residents of the premises. 
(2)  The use of the dwelling unit or residence for a home office shall be clearly incidental and secondary to its use for residential purposes. No outside display, storage or use of land is permitted. 
(3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises as a result of such occupation. 
(4)  (a)  No equipment shall be used or stored on the premises that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses outside the dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audio interference in any radio or television sets off the premises or causes fluctuation in line voltage. 
(b)  No trash or waste other than normal household trash and recyclables shall be generated. No commercial dumpsters or trash service shall be allowed. 
(c)  No permanent or temporary storage of supplies, materials or products shall be allowed on the exterior of the premises structures. 
(5)  No retail or wholesale sales on the premises shall be permitted, except for telephone, mail or internet order sales. 
(6)  No traffic shall be generated by such home office in greater volume than would be normally expected in the neighborhood for residential purposes. 
(7)  A home office shall not be construed to include, among other uses, personal services such as practice of medicine, chiropractic medicine, dentistry, massage, cosmetology, barbershops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, food processing for sale, kennels, animal grooming, radio and television repair, furniture refinishing or building, cabinet making, boat building, marine charter or towing service, auto servicing or rebuilding and repair for others, metal fabrication or cutting employing welding or cutting torches, or any other occupation requiring state-mandated inspection of the premises. 
(8)  No more than one vehicle related to the home office shall be permitted upon the premises. Such vehicle must be 20 feet or less in overall length and must be parked off any public right-of-way. 
(b)  The village manager or his designee shall determine whether the home office meets the established criteria as set out in subsections (1) through (8) of this section. The determination may be appealed to the zoning board. 
(c)  An occupation license must be obtained from the building and planning department by completing the appropriate paperwork and paying any applicable fee. The licensee shall be subject to the provisions of ch. 28, art. III of the Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize, legalize or otherwise permit a home-based business that is otherwise prohibited by a legally enforceable covenant, association document or other instrument or restriction on such use pertaining to a residence unit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-7,  1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.27. - Alternative energy systems and environmental conservation. 
(a)  Accessory solar energy systems. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this division to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of solar energy systems as an accessory use while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of adjacent and surrounding land uses. A solar energy system shall be permitted in any zoning district as an accessory to a principal use and subject to specific criteria provided herein. 
(2)  Development and design standards. 
a.  A solar energy system is permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory to a principal use. 
b.  A solar energy system may be used to generate electricity for the principal use and/or accessory use of the property on which the solar system is located and shall not be used for the generation of electricity for sale to other users, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to time to Florida Power and Light or other local utility company that provides electricity; and shall not be interpreted to prohibit generation of electricity for sale to other users if subsequently approved by the village and the state through a purchase power agreement or similar mechanism. 
c.  A solar energy system may be roof mounted or ground mounted. If ground mounted, the solar system shall be screened from view with an opaque screen consisting of shrubbery, trees, or other non-invasive plant species. 
d.  The surface area of a ground mounted system shall be calculated as part of the overall lot coverage. 
e.  Height restrictions. Roof mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the maximum permitted height of any zoning district, and shall be exempt from screening requirements. A ground mounted system shall not exceed the maximum building height for accessory buildings. 
f.  A solar energy system shall not project beyond the edge of a roof. 
g.  Setbacks. Solar energy systems, including associated mechanical equipment, shall meet all required building setback requirements for the district in which they are located. 
h.  Any required mechanical equipment shall be screened from view with an opaque screen consisting of shrubbery, trees, or other non-invasive plant species. 
i.  All power transmission lines from a ground mounted solar energy system to any building or other structure shall be located underground. 
j.  A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has been approved and issued. The solar energy system shall comply with all applicable building and construction codes. The design and installation of accessory solar energy systems shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Institute of Electrical and Electronics (IEEE), National Electric Code (NEC), the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other certifying organizations, and shall comply with the Florida Building Code and with all other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
k.  A solar energy system, including all solar panels shall be installed in a manner that prevents any glare or reflection of light to any neighboring road right of way or adjoining property. 
(3)  Solar ready construction. 
a.  Construction of new buildings and remodeling where the cost of remodeling is more than 50 percent of the assessed value of the building shall provide a roof layout plan that illustrates how future installation of a photovoltaic system and/or solar water heating system could be accommodated. The property owner shall be required to provide for the eventual installation of one system. Requirements are as follows: 
1.  Photovoltaic systems. Installation of an appropriate sized conduit, a minimum of one-inch diameter, leading from an exterior south-facing, east-facing, or west-facing roof, where a minimum of four hours of direct sunlight is achieved, to a stubbed junction box adjacent to the electrical meter. All exposed conduit shall be capped and provided with adequate flashing. The conduit shall not be located on or in the direction of a north-facing roof. Roof reinforcements shall be addressed at the time of installation. 
2.  Solar heating system. Installation of three-fourths inch diameter hot and cold copper water pipes from a south-facing, east-facing, or west-facing roof, where a minimum of four hours of direct sunlight is achieved, to an existing water heater tank. Both ends of the three-fourths inch diameter copper pipes shall be stubbed out and shall not be located on or in the direction of a north-facing roof. All exposed pipes shall be capped and provided with adequate flashing. Roof reinforcements shall be addressed at the time of installation. 
(b)  Energy efficient design and construction . 
(1)  Requirements. New residential structures that exceed 6,000 square feet in livable, air-conditioned area shall include the following energy efficient and environmentally conservative improvements: 
a.  Either a minimum of one solar water heater, tankless water heater, or a hybrid electric water heater; or a photovoltaic solar electric system. 
b.  An air conditioning system that has a minimum Seasonal Energy Efficiency Rating (SEER) of 15 and utilizes natural refrigerants or other refrigerants that contain no hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC). 
c.  Interior finishes that emit low/no levels of volatile organic compounds (VOC) - Site-applied finishes, including, paints, stains and varnishes, shall meet specified volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions limits in accordance with GREENGUARD Environmental Institute GGPS.001 standard for building materials and finishes; or Green Seal&reg; standards. 
d.  Permeable driveways consisting of porous concrete, open cell unit pavers (turf block), flagstone, or brick pavers, allowing the infiltration of water into the underlying soil. No individual slab of pavement or flagstone may exceed 42 square feet in area. 
e.  Documentation of compliance with the Energy Efficient Design and Construction requirements shall be provided in the form of an affidavit signed by the general contractor prior to the issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Auxiliary power supply. 
(1)  Requirements. New residential structures and substantial improvements to residential structures exceeding 50 percent of the market value of the existing structure shall include one of the following improvements necessary to provide auxiliary power during electrical power outages: 
a.  Permanent installation of a stand-by generator, or 
b.  Installation of a power inlet and either a separate electric panel or interlock allowing for connection to a portable generator, or 
c.  Solar panel and battery pack necessary to provide auxiliary power. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2014-7,  2, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 5.28. - Building address numbers and identification. 
(a)  Address identification. The owner of any residential or commercial building in the village shall install suitable identification numbers of the building to be composed of figures not less than three inches for the purpose of clearly identifying the address of the building. Address numbers shall be installed on the front of any building adjacent to a public right-of-way and also on the rear of commercial buildings and on the side of any building adjacent to a canal. 
(b)  Maintenance. The owner shall maintain the numbers of the building as herein provided in good condition and in a conspicuous place where same can be seen and read from the street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.29. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  With the exception of parking lot lighting which is regulated pursuant to the requirements of division 5.22, off-street parking, and tennis court/basketball court/outdoor recreational area lighting which is regulated and permitted as a conditional use pursuant to the requirements of division 5.25, tennis court/basketball court/outdoor recreational area lighting, all other outside lighting shall not be permitted except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Detailed plans shall be submitted to the administrative official showing the location, height, type of lights, shades, deflectors and beam directions. 
(2)  The administrative official may issue a permit for such lighting if, after a review of the detailed plans therefor and after consideration of the adjacent area and neighborhood and its use and future development, the proposed lighting will be so located, oriented, adjusted and shielded that the lighting will be deflected, shaded and focused away from such adjacent property and will not be or become a nuisance to such adjacent property, and will not create a traffic hazard on adjacent streets by reason of glare or the like. 
(3)  Outdoor lighting shall be designed so that any overspill of lighting onto adjacent properties shall not exceed one-half footcandle (vertical) and shall not exceed one-half footcandle (horizontal) illumination on adjacent properties or structures. An outdoor lighting installation shall not be placed in permanent use until a letter of compliance from a registered engineer or architect or the duly authorized representative of such engineer or architect is provided stating that the installation has been field checked and meets the requirements as set forth above. 
(4)  It is not intended here to regulate permitted sign lights and it is not the intent to modify, amend or repeal any portion of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.30. - Non-residential recycling. 
a.  Minimum standards for recycling on non-residential property. Owners of commercial business establishments conducting business within the village's commercial zoning districts shall provide recyclable materials containers for the collection of recyclable materials and shall collect the recyclable materials placed in the recyclable materials containers and transport or contract for the transport of those materials to a recycling facility. Recyclable material containers shall be stored at the rear of commercial properties and screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 5.31. - Parking garages. 
(a)  Design criteria. All parking garages shall be reviewed for compliance with the criteria for approval of a conditional use. The following additional design guidelines shall be implemented as applicable: 
(1)  Use of stretched cable, open railings or an alternate design achieving the same degree of openness to allow for maximum surveillance and illumination in order to maximize openness and safety. 
(2)  Use of reflective paint or materials inside. 
(3)  Illumination of all pedestrian areas to increase safety as determined by the administrative official. 
(4)  Detailing of the parking garage similar to the building it serves or if serving multiple buildings or uses, detailing of the parking garage to be compatible with the neighboring buildings. 
(5)  Incorporation of natural light, plants, exterior landscaping, storefront details, screening, and other features to increase the aesthetic quality of the building and to improve the experience and safety of the user. 
(6)  Open stairwells, appropriately illuminated as determined by the administrative official, clearly identified and located in such a way as to provide for a safe entrance and exit. 
(7)  Use of additional architectural features, landscaping, fencing, buffering, courtyards, plazas, or pedestrian areas in order to provide architectural and land use compatibility with neighboring properties. 
(8)  Review by the administrative official of the parking garage design for safety and recommendation of additional safety features if warranted. 
(9)  A minimum of one level-2, 240-volt electric vehicle charging station shall be provided on each floor of a parking garage within or adjacent to a dedicated parking space reserved for electric vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2015-7,  2, 9-8-15) 
Div. 5.32. - Vacation rentals. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Enclosed shall mean any space enclosed by a roof and four complete solid, floor to roof walls, which may include glass windows. Screening shall not count as a wall. 
    Partially rented shall mean a rental where, at all times that the property is being rented out, the owner also simultaneously resides and is living and staying overnight within the property. 
    Responsible party shall mean the owner or the person designated by the owner of the property to be called upon to answer for the maintenance of the property and for the conduct and acts of occupants of vacation rental properties. 
    Transient occupants shall mean any person, or guest or invitee of such person who occupies or is in actual or apparent control or possession of residential property registered or used as a vacation rental. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person who holds themselves out as being an occupant or guest of an occupant of a vacation rental, or a property used as a vacation rental, is a transient occupant. 
    Vacation rental shall mean any unit or group of units in a condominium or cooperative or any individually or collectively owned single-family, two-family, three-family, or four-family house or dwelling unit that is rented to guests more than three times in a calendar year for periods of less than 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is less, or which is advertised or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to guests, but that is not a timeshare project. A property which is only partially rented is not a vacation rental and is not subject to the requirements of division 5.33. 
(b)  Registration required. It is unlawful for any person to allow another person to occupy any residential property as a vacation rental within the village, or offer such rental services within the village, unless the person has registered the vacation rental property with the village and the vacation rental property has been issued a certificate of compliance in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Application for registration. The application for registration of a vacation rental shall be made to the village manager or his or her designee on a form provided by the village, which shall set forth at a minimum: 
(1)  The legal description of the property offered for rental, including the complete address, subdivision, or community name. 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the property, including the name, address and phone number of each person or entity with an ownership interest in the property. 
(3)  An approved inspection report of the Miami-Dade County Fire Rescue Department verifying compliance with the department's criteria for a residential dwelling transient lodging use. 
(4)  The gross square footage of the property, including the number of rooms, bedrooms, kitchens and on-site parking spaces attributable to the vacation rental use. 
(5)  A valid and current federal employer tax identification number (or social security number) for the owner(s) of the property. 
(6)  Proof of registration with, or exemption from, the Florida Department of Revenue for sales tax collection under F.S. ch. 212, and Miami-Dade County for Tourist Development Tax. 
(7)  Proof of licensure with, or exemption from, the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation for a transient public lodging establishment. 
(8)  The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person who will act as the responsible party, operating the vacation rental property. The responsible party phone number shall be answered 24 hours, seven days a week. 
(9)  The name and contact information for any listing services on or through which the vacation rental is to be offered for rent. 
(10)  The application shall bear the signatures of all owners, authorized agents, authorized property managers and the responsible party. 
(11)  The owner of the property and the responsible party must individually acknowledge the affirmative duty to ensure compliance with the requirements of this division, including the owner and responsible party requirements of this division. 
(12)  Acknowledgement that the application and any related approvals are specific to the property identified in the application and approval; other properties are not jointly shared commodities and shall not be considered available for use by transient occupants of the property which is the subject of the application. 
(13)  Submission of an incomplete registration application form shall result in rejection of the application. 
(d)  Responsible party required. Whenever any property is required to be registered under this division, the owner shall act as, or retain at all times, one or two appointed natural persons capable of meeting the duties provided in subsection 23-74. The designated responsible part(ies) must reside within 30 miles to serve as the responsible party(ies) for service of notices as are specified herein. Notices given to the responsible party(ies) shall be sufficient to satisfy any requirement for notice to the owner. An initial responsible party shall be designated and shall participate in the application for registration, and the village manager or his or her designee shall thereafter be notified of any change of responsible party(ies) within 15 days of such change. 
(e)  Fees for registration. The village may charge reasonable fees for registration to compensate for administrative expenses. The fees for registration shall be provided for, from time to time, by resolution adopted by the village council. 
(f)  Owner and responsible party requirements. In addition to general compliance with all federal, state, county and local laws, it is the affirmative duty and responsibility of the owner and the responsible party, individually and collectively, to adhere to the following: 
(1)  Inform all guests, in writing, prior to occupancy of the property, of all applicable Village of Pinecrest ordinances concerning noise, vehicle parking, garbage, and common area usage. 
(2)  Maintain the property under their control in compliance with the occupancy limits, as specified in this division, the Certificate of Compliance, the Minimum Housing Standards of Miami-Dade County, specific requirements of the Florida Building Code noted herein and the village Code of Ordinances, as determined by the village manager, building official or respective designee; 
(3)  Ensure that, at all times: 
a.  All vehicles associated with the vacation rental are parked within a driveway in compliance with the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Pinecrest; 
b.  The entire property, including the front, back, and side yards, is maintained free of garbage and litter, provided however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the storage of garbage and litter in authorized receptacles for collection; 
c.  All transient occupants are aware that it shall be unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set forth in the chapter 15, article II, "Noises; Unnecessary and Excessive Prohibited," of the village Code; 
d.  All transient occupants are aware that unauthorized occupants of any structure or conveyance of the property that have been warned by the owner or lessee to leave and refuse to do so commit the offense of trespass of a structure or conveyance and will be charged under the State of Florida and local law; and 
e.  The provisions of this division are complied with and promptly address any violations of this division or any violations of law which may come to the attention of the responsible party. 
(4)  Be available with authority to address and coordinate solutions to problems with the rental of the property 24 hours a day, seven days a week and be physically present at the property within one hour of notification to respond to emergencies, noise complaints, events that are being held without required permits, maximum occupancy violations, and other occurrences determined by the Police to require the presence of the owner or responsible party. 
(5)  Keep available a register of all guests, which shall be open to inspection by authorized personnel of the village at all times. 
(6)  Prohibit rental to any person on the Florida Sexual Offenders and Predators (FDLE) database or any other state sex offender database consistent with the requirements of chapter 16, article IV of the Village Code. 
(g)  Standards and requirements for vacation rentals. 
(1)  Certificate of compliance. The village manager or his designee may issue a certificate of compliance to the applicant upon proof that the owner or responsible party has: 
a.  Submitted a complete vacation rental registration application form including appropriate documentation of compliance with applicable Florida Department of Revenue and Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation requirements; 
b.  Submitted the registration fee; 
c.  Obtained a local business tax receipt (LBTR) from the village pursuant to chapter 28 of the village Code of Ordinances; 
d.  Obtained a LBTR from Miami-Dade County; 
e.  Provided an affidavit, demonstrating initial and on-going compliance with vacation rental standards contained herein, plus any other applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations and standards to include, but not be limited to F.S. ch. 509, Chapter 61C and 69A, Florida Administrative Code; and 
f.  Provided a copy of the vacation rental/lease agreement form to be used when contracting with transient occupants and guests which includes the minimum vacation rental lessee information required by subsection (2)d. below. 
g.  Requested and passed a compliance inspection pursuant to this division. 
h.  Provided evidence of liability insurance covering the use of the property as a rental property. 
(2)  Vacation rental standards. The following standards shall govern the use of any vacation rental as a permitted use: 
a.  Minimum life/safety requirements: 
1.  Swimming pool, spa and hot tub safety. A swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall comply with the current standards of Residential Swimming Pool Safety Act, F.S. ch. 515. 
2.  Smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and notification system. If an interconnected and hard-wired smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and notification system is not in place within the vacation rental unit, then an interconnected, hard-wired smoke alarm and carbon monoxide (CO) alarm system shall be required to be installed and maintained on a continuing basis consistent with the requirements of Section R314, Smoke Alarms, and Section R315, Carbon Monoxide Alarms, of the Florida Building Code - Residential. 
3.  Fire extinguisher. A portable, multi-purpose dry chemical 2A:10B:C fire extinguisher shall be installed, inspected and maintained in accordance with NFPA 10 on each floor/level of the unit. The extinguisher(s) shall be installed on the wall in an open common area or in an enclosed space with appropriate markings visibly showing the locations. 
4.  There shall be posted, next to the interior door of each bedroom or sleeping room a legible copy of the building evacuation map that is a minimum of 8 and 1/2 inches by 11 inches in size. 
b.  Maximum occupancy. The maximum vacation rental occupancy shall not exceed any of the following standards: 
1.  Two persons per bedroom; 
2.  Ten transient occupants per vacation rental unit, regardless of the number of bedrooms; 
3.  Three transient occupants per one off-street parking space legally available to the property, the exact number of which is determined by the requirement of division 5.22 of the village land development regulations of the village Code of Ordinances; 
4.  Occupancy by more than one family as defined in division 9.2 of the Code; and 
5.  Any person present on the property after 10:00 p.m. on any night shall be considered an overnight transient occupant for purposes of calculating maximum occupancy. 
c.  Solid waste handling and containment. Village solid waste containers shall be provided for the maximum transient occupancy permitted by this division, as required by the village Code of Ordinances. Required screening and storage requirements for solid waste containers shall apply and shall be incorporated into the certificate of compliance. For purposes of this section, a solid waste container shall not be placed for curbside pickup more than 24 hours before pickup and all receptacles must be removed from the curbside within 24 hours after pickup. 
d.  Minimum vacation rental lessee information. The following information shall be posted conspicuously within the establishment and shall be provided to each vacation rental lessee as part of their lease: 
1.  The maximum occupancy permitted under the certificate of compliance; 
2.  A statement advising the occupant that it is unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set forth in the chapter 15, article II, "Noises; Unnecessary and Excessive Prohibited," of the village Code and such violation is subject to village code enforcement, including but not limited to fines up to $500.00 per violation; 
3.  A sketch of the location of the off-street parking spaces available to the property; 
4.  The days and times of trash pickup and the solid waste handling and containment requirements of this division; 
5.  A delineation of those portions of the property where the owner will be residing; 
6.  A list of uses prohibited on the property which shall include use of the property as a party, event or entertainment venue; 
7.  The location of the nearest hospital; and 
8.  The local non-emergency police phone number. 
e.  Use. The following limitations apply to the use of the property: 
1.  No sound amplification system shall be used outside of any enclosed or air-conditioned portion of the primary structure on the property; 
2.  Noise from any amplified sound system shall not be audible after 10:00 p.m. on a Sunday-Thursday night or after 11:00 p.m. on a Friday or Saturday night when measured at the property line; 
3.  The property may not be used to host more than three special events in any given 12-month period; 
4.  The vacation rental may not be used or advertised for any commercial or non-residential use, including use of the property as a party, event or entertainment venue. 
f.  Advertising. Any advertising of the vacation rental unit by the owner or any service shall conform to information included in the vacation rental certificate of compliance and the property's approval, and shall include at a minimum, identification of the maximum occupancy permitted on the property. The owner or responsible party shall ensure that the name and contact information for any listing services on or through which the vacation rental is to be offered for rent which was provided in the application is updated with the village to reflect any changes and maintain with the village at all times a list of current listing services. 
g.  Posting of certificate of compliance. The certificate of compliance shall be posted on the back of or next to the main entrance door and shall include at a minimum the name, address and phone number of the responsible party and the maximum occupancy of the vacation rental. 
h.  Other standards. The occupant shall be advised that all standards contained within the Code of Ordinances and land development regulations of the village including, but not limited to: noise, setbacks, and stormwater, are applicable to the vacation rental and may be enforced against the occupant. 
(h)  Sale or transfer of dwelling unit used for vacation rentals. Whenever a dwelling used for vacation rentals is sold or otherwise changes ownership and the new owner desires to use the dwelling for vacation rentals, the new owner must, prior to allowing any vacation rental use: 
(1)  Schedule and obtain an inspection of the dwelling for a certificate of compliance; and 
(2)  Apply for a vacation rental certificate for the vacation rental use. 
(i)  Rules and procedures. The village manager or designee may create rules and procedures to assist in the implementation of this section, including but not limited to a timeline and procedure for all existing vacation rentals to apply for and obtain their first vacation rental certificate pursuant to this ordinance in a manner consistent with available staff resources. 
(j)  Administration, penalties, and enforcement. 
(1)  Initial and annual compliance inspections of vacation rentals. An inspection of the dwelling unit for compliance with this section, and for compliance with the requirements of the Minimum Housing Standards of Miami-Dade County and the specific requirements of the Florida Building Code as noted herein is required prior to issuance or renewal of a vacation rental certificate of compliance. If violations are found, all violations must be corrected and the dwelling unit must be re-inspected prior to issuance or renewal of a vacation rental certificate of compliance as provided herein. All violations must be corrected and re-inspected within 30 calendar days. Failure to correct such inspection deficiencies in the timeframes provided shall result in the denial of an initial application or suspension of the vacation rental certificate of compliance until such time as the violations are corrected and re-inspected. 
a.  Inspections will be conducted by the village manager or his or her designee. 
b.  The suspension of a vacation rental certificate of compliance shall be posted at the establishment. 
(2)  Registration not transferable. No registration issued under this division shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the person to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the location for which it is issued. 
(3)  Expiration of registration. All registrations issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for no more than one year, and all registrations shall expire on September 30th of each year. Fees for renewal and applicable late renewal fees shall be established by resolution of the village council. 
(4)  Revocation. In addition to, or as an alternative to, the penalties of subsection (5) below, any certificate of compliance issued pursuant to this division may be denied, revoked, or suspended by the village manager upon the adjudication of a violation of this division, any Village ordinance, or state law by the responsible party, property owner or transient occupant attributable to the property for which the certificate of compliance is issued. Such denial, revocation or suspension is in addition to any other penalty or remedy available at law. 
(5)  Offenses/violations. 
a.  A violation of any of the provisions of this division is punishable by a fine of up to $250.00. 
b.  Suspension of vacation rental certificate of compliance. In addition to any fines and any other remedies described herein or provided for by law, the village may suspend a vacation rental certificate of compliance for multiple violations of the maximum occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, special events permitting requirements, failure to advertise the maximum occupancy, or failure of the responsible party(ies) to perform the duties required by this division in any continuous 48 month period, in accordance with the following: 
1.  Suspension timeframes. 
i.  Upon a second violation of the maximum occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, special events permitting requirements, failure to advertise the maximum occupancy, or failure of the responsible party to perform the duties required by this division, the vacation rental certificate shall be suspended for a period of 30 calendar days. 
ii.  Upon a third violation of the maximum occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, special events permitting requirements, failure to advertise the maximum occupancy, or failure of the responsible party to perform the duties required by this division, the vacation rental certificate shall be suspended for a period of 12 calendar months. 
iii.  For each additional violation of the maximum occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, special events permitting requirements, failure to advertise the maximum occupancy, or failure of the responsible party to perform the duties required by this division, the vacation rental certificate shall be suspended for an additional 12 calendar months. 
2.  Suspension restrictions. A vacation rental may not provide transient occupancy during any period of suspension of a vacation rental certificate. The suspension shall begin immediately following notice, commencing either: 
i.  At the end of the current vacation rental lease period; or 
ii.  Within 30 calendar days, whichever date commences earlier, or as otherwise determined by the village. 
3.  Operation during any period of suspension shall be deemed a violation pursuant to this division and shall be subject to a daily fine, up to the maximum amount as otherwise provided in Florida Statutes for repeat violations, for each day that the vacation rental operates during a period of violation. 
(k)  Vesting. 
1.  Vacation rentals existing as of the effective date of village ordinance 2017-4 shall be considered vested vacation rentals only as related to contracts entered prior to the effective date of said ordinance. Rental/lease agreements that were entered into prior to the effective date of village ordinance 2017-4 as evidenced by a written and validly executed rental agreement or contract provided to the village manager no later than three months following the effective date of village ordinance 2017-4 shall be considered vested. 
2.  Vesting shall: 
a.  Apply only to date specific rentals; and 
b.  Not apply to renewals of existing rental agreements or contracts which are at the option of either of the parties. 
3.  All rental agreements entered into after the effective date of village ordinance 2017-4 shall comply with the provisions of this division. No vacation rental shall be occupied pursuant to a contract/lease entered into after the effective date of village ordinance 2017-4 until the owner has obtained the required vacation rental certificate of compliance. 
4.  A vested contract/lease transferred to a subsequent owner shall continue to be vested, but shall not be transferred to a different vacation rental property, provided the new owner complies with the inspection and licensing requirements of this division. 
(5)  Filing for exemption. Any property owner who desires to partially rent their home shall file for exemption prior to renting out any portion of their property for rental use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-4,  2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18; Ord. No. 2018-6,  2, 7-17-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1,  6, adopted January 9, 2018, repealed div. 5.32 in its entirety. Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), adopted May 8, 2018 subsequently renumbered former divs. 5.33-5.35 as divs. 5.32-5.34. Former div. 5.32 pertained to medical marijuana retail centers, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-9,  4, adopted September 8, 2015. 
Div. 5.33. - Temporary sidewalk sales. 
(a)  A temporary use permit authorizing a sidewalk sale that is temporary in nature must be obtained from the Village of Pinecrest and may be granted subject to the following: 
(1)  A complete permit application, application fee, and plan depicting the location of the merchandise shall be submitted to the village for review and approval. The administrative official reserves the right to deny the plan based on safety, aesthetics, or inadequate space. 
(2)  A temporary sidewalk sale shall be permitted no more than two times per calendar year and each permitted sale shall be limited to two consecutive days consisting of Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays immediately preceding or following a Saturday or Sunday. 
(3)  A permit for a temporary sidewalk sale shall be issued to the owner of the property. A commercial property occupied by multiple tenants shall be considered one property and shall be limited to one temporary sidewalk sale permit twice per calendar year as specified in paragraph (1). 
(4)  Temporary sidewalk sales shall be limited to the sale and promotion of goods and services made available by businesses located on the premises. 
(5)  Merchandise displayed outdoors must also be available for sale inside the adjacent commercial establishment and the merchandise shall only be displayed outside of the establishment where the merchandise is sold. 
(6)  Displays cannot hinder pedestrian circulation or impede emergency egress. 
(7)  No required parking space, parking aisle, loading space or landscaped area shall be obstructed or used for display purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-6,  2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), adopted May 8, 2018, renumbered div. 5.34 as div. 5.33. See note at div. 5.32. 
Div. 5.34. - Adult congregate living facilities. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this division to provide locational criteria and minimum standards for the use of property for an adult congregate living facility. These regulations apply to applications for adult congregate living facilities in addition to the requirements of the zoning district in which the proposed facility is to be located. These regulations do not apply to community residential homes, as such facilities are defined in and regulated by F.S. ch. 419. 
(b)  Density. Due to the unconventional arrangement of adult congregate living facilities, the density permitted shall be based on the total occupancy of the property, and shall be calculated by multiplying the allocated density of the future land use designation or zoning district assigned to the property, whichever is less, by the average persons per household for the Village of Pinecrest, as determined by the most recently completed census of the U.S. population. The product resulting from this equation shall then be multiplied by the gross acreage of the property, or portion thereof, proposed for the development of an adult congregate living facility to yield the maximum occupancy of the facility. 
The total occupancy approved for the facility shall include any units provided therein for the occupancy of care providers and shall be made part of the development approval. 
Example calculation. For the purposes of this example, the 2010 Census estimate of average persons per unit (2.753) for the village and a two-acre parcel designated as RU-3M, Residential Multi-Family Moderate Density on the Official Zoning Map are used: 
2.753 persons per unit x 12.9 units per acre = 35 persons per acre; 35 persons per acre x 2 acres = 70 persons total occupancy. 
(c)  Spacing. No adult congregate living facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of another adult congregate living facility, measured from property line to property line. 
(d)  Landscape buffers. All adult congregate living facilities with frontage on an arterial, collector, or local road shall provide a landscape buffer running parallel to such frontage. Adult congregate living facilities fronting on an arterial road shall have a minimum landscape buffer width of 20 feet, as measured from the right-of-way. Adult congregate living facilities fronting on a collector road shall have a minimum landscape buffer width of 15 feet, as measured from the right-of-way. Adult congregate living facilities fronting on a local road in residential zoning districts shall have a minimum width of ten feet as measured from the right-of-way. 
(e)  Recreational facilities. All applications for adult congregate living facilities shall include a statement outlining the recreational amenities that such a facility shall provide for its residents, and identify any impact they will have on village recreational facilities. 
(f)  Certification required. Adult congregate living facilities shall meet all applicable governmental (federal, state, county, village) requirements for operation and certification. 
(g)  Kitchenette facilities. The village council may approve adult congregate living facilities which provide kitchenette facilities in the individual units provided that the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The adult congregate living facility provides at least two meals per day for the residents in the common dining area and the cost of such meals shall be included in the normal charges to each of the residents. 
(2)  The management of the adult congregate living facility provides protective control facilities to have the ability to discontinue the use of stoves in units where it has been deemed that the occupant or occupants thereof are no longer able to safely use same. 
As part of an application for development, the applicant shall provide a written description of the meal services to be provided to the residents of the facility. 
Adult congregate living facilities which provide single-family or duplex units shall be permitted one kitchenette for each such unit and shall be otherwise exempt from the requirements of this section for such units. 
(h)  Transportation system. Adult congregate living facilities shall establish a managed transportation system as follows: 
(1)  Access to the necessary personal services and facilities shall be available on-site, or by transportation provided by the operator of the adult congregate living facility. As part of an application for development, the applicant shall provide a written description indicating how residents of the adult congregate living facility shall have access to the necessary services and facilities, and shall provide a transportation plan, if required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-2,  2, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), adopted May 8, 2018, renumbered div. 5.35 as div. 5.34. See note at div. 5.32. 
ARTICLE 6. - ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions, div. 9.2. 

Div. 6.1. - Landscape regulations. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of these landscape regulations shall apply to all existing or future development in the village. No building permit, certificate of use, certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued unless the applicant complies with these regulations. It is the intent of these regulations to establish minimum landscape standards for the village that enhance, improve, and maintain the quality of the landscape, promote economic and environmental health, minimize heat island effects, and naturally treat storm water runoff, thereby enhancing the quality of life and outdoor recreational opportunities in the village. 
(b)  Landscape plans. 
1.  General. Landscape plan(s) and, where required by the Code, irrigation plan(s), shall be reviewed and approved by the administrative official prior to the issuance of any building permit, or permit for paving for new parking areas or expansion of existing parking areas. 
2.  Landscape plan contents. 
a.  Owner/builder of new single-family or duplex dwellings or substantial improvements. Landscape plans submitted for new single-family or duplex dwellings or substantial improvements over 50 percent to such dwellings, may be in the form of a plot plan or drawing prepared by the owner or the owner's representative; provided however, developments requiring site plan approval pursuant to the Code shall meet the requirements of this division 6.1, and F.S. ch. 481. 
b.  All other development. The landscape plan for development other than that provided for in a. above shall be prepared by, and bear the seal of, a landscape architect licensed to practice in the state, or by persons authorized by F.S. ch. 481, to prepare landscape plans or drawings. Landscape plans shall be provided as part of the submission for site plan approval and permits and shall: 
i.  Be drawn to scale and include property boundaries, north arrow, graphic scale, and date. 
ii.  Include a vegetation survey provided at the same scale as the landscape plan, including aerial photo which outlines the subject site without obscuring it. 
iii.  Identify all landscape features and non-living landscape materials. 
iv.  Delineate location of existing and proposed structures, parking spaces, accessways and other vehicular use areas, sidewalks, utilities, easements, and the height and voltage of all above ground power lines on the property or adjacent property, including street trees nearby the power lines. 
v.  Indicate the common and scientific names, quantity, and size of plants to be installed using "Landscape Legend" Code format as prescribed by the administrative official. 
vi.  Show all areas of vegetation required to be preserved by these landscape regulations, including but not limited to trees, specimen trees, native plant species, and native habitats. 
vii.  Show existing conditions, trees and landscape to be removed (on a separate sheet). 
viii.  Illustrate geologic, historic and archeological features to be preserved. 
ix.  Depict stormwater retention/detention areas and areas excluded from maximum permitted lawn area. 
x.  Document land use district classification, net lot area, required open space, and maximum permitted lawn area. 
xi.  Show building coverage and the location and dimension of greenbelts, landscape buffers, and water areas proposed for business and other land uses, as may be required. 
xii.  Indicate method(s) to protect and relocate trees and native plant communities during construction. 
xiii.  Show planting details and specifications. 
xiv.  Include irrigation plans, as required by the zoning district, with irrigation details and specifications. 
xv.  Include an illustration demonstrating that the trees will be planted in a manner compliant with energy conservation zone requirements. 
3.  Vegetation survey. A vegetation survey shall be provided for all sites at the same scale as the landscape plan. Surveys shall be verified by the administrative official. The vegetation survey shall provide the following information: 
a.  The accurate location and graphic representation by size (DBH), canopy, and type of tree, in relation to existing development of all existing trees of a minimum two inches DBH or ten feet in height or, for native trees, of a minimum 11/2 inches DBH or eight feet in height, including those which are proposed to be removed, relocated or preserved on-site in accordance with the requirements of landscape regulations. 
b.  The boundaries of any native habitat, native plant community, native plant species, and/or natural forest community and associated understory that exists on site, as determined by the administrative official. 
c.  A table showing the following information: 
i.  The scientific and common name of each tree, each of which shall be numbered; 
ii.  The diameter at breast height (DBH) of each tree, or if a multiple trunk tree, the sum DBH for all; and 
iii.  Estimated height, canopy cover, and physical condition of each tree, and whether specimen tree(s) exist on-site. 
4.  Irrigation plan. An irrigation plan shall be submitted whenever an irrigation system is required by zoning district regulations or where a landscape plan is required. 
a.  New single-family or duplex dwellings or substantial improvements. For a new single-family or duplex dwelling or substantial improvement over 50 percent to such dwellings, the irrigation plan may be indicated on a plot plan or a separate drawing prepared by the owner or the owner's agent indicating area(s) to be irrigated, locations and specifications of lines and heads and pump specifications. 
b.  All other development. The irrigation plan for development other than that provided in 4a above shall: 
i.  Be drawn on a base plan at the same scale as landscape plan(s). 
ii.  Delineate existing and proposed structures, parking areas or other vehicular use areas, access aisles, sidewalks, driveways, the location of utilities and easements, and similar features. 
iii.  Include water source, design, operating pressure and flow rate per zone, total volume required for typical depths of application, and application rate. 
iv.  Include locations of pump pipes, controllers, valves, sprinklers, back flow prevention devices, rain sensor/shutoff devices and electrical supply and irrigation details. 
v.  Delineate landscape areas, major landscape features, and hydrozones. 
(c)  Tree removal and preservation. Tree removal permits or natural forest community vegetation removal permits are required prior to the removal of trees, specimen trees, or any vegetation in a natural forest community, respectively. The administrative official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing these provisions. Before permitting the removal of any tree, the administrative official shall inspect and advise the applicant concerning appropriate measures to be applied in order to comply with these landscape regulations. The applicant shall clearly mark all trees proposed for removal and identify them by type, size (DBH), canopy, and height. 
(d)  Minimum landscape standards. The following standards shall be considered minimum requirements unless otherwise indicated: 
1.  Lawn area (turf). 
a.  Lawn areas. Lawn areas shall be planted in a species well adapted to localized growing conditions in the village. Lawn areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydromulched, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used, overseeding shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Developers are encouraged to have no more than 40 percent of open area as lawn areas. 
b.  Use of drought tolerant landscape material and limitations. Drought tolerant grasses and low growing native plants are strongly encouraged. Tree and plant material requirements by land use district are presented in the following table: 
TABLE 6-1 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR TREES AND GREEN SPACE 
Zoning District Number of Trees RequiredPer Acre of Net Lot Area (1),(2) Minimum Percent Required Green Space Residential RU-1 and RU-2 6 35% EU-M and EU-S 12 35% EU-1 and EU-IC 18 55% RU-3 28 40% RU-3M and RU4L 28 35% RU4M and RU4 28 35% Office/Business/Commercial RU5; BU-1, BU-IA, BU-2 and BU-3, PS, PR 28 18/22%  
       (1) In addition to the above trees, street trees are required. 
       (2) Minimum grade and standards. Plants installed pursuant to this Code shall conform to, or exceed, the minimum standards for Florida Number One as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part I and H," prepared by the state department of agriculture and consumer services. Prohibited or controlled trees shall not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum tree requirements. 
2.  Irrigation. 
a.  All newly planted and relocated plant material shall be watered by temporary or permanent irrigation systems until such time as they are established. 
b.  Irrigation shall be prohibited within native plant communities and natural forest communities, except for temporary systems needed to establish newly planted material. Temporary irrigation systems shall be disconnected immediately after establishment of plant communities. 
c.  Irrigation systems shall be designed to conserve water by allowing differential operation schedules based on hydrozone. 
d.  Irrigation systems shall be designed, operated, and maintained to not overthrow or overflow onto impervious surfaces. 
e.  Low volume water distributing or application devices, such as micro-jet emitters or soaker hoses shall be used. Overhead irrigation systems shall only be permitted in bona fide agricultural activity areas. 
f.  During dry periods, irrigation application rates of between one and one and one-half inches per week are recommended for turf areas. Under drought conditions, restrictions of the South Florida Water Management District apply. 
g.  A functioning moisture or rain sensor device shall be required on all irrigation systems equipped with automatic controls as required by state law. The device shall not be installed under eaves of houses, buildings or other structures, nor in the path of the irrigation system. 
h.  Irrigation systems shall be timed to operate only during hours and on days permitted in the Landscape Manual administered by the village and consistent with policies of the South Florida Water Management District. 
i.  If an irrigation system is not provided, a hose bib shall be provided within 75 feet of any landscape area. 
3.  Trees. 
a.  Tree size. Residential zoning districts: All trees, except street trees located beneath power lines, shall be a minimum of 12 feet high and have a minimum caliper of three inches at time of planting and four feet of clear trunk. Thirty percent of the tree requirement must be met by native species. 
Commercial business zoning districts: All trees, except street trees located beneath power lines, shall be a minimum of 20 feet high and have a minimum caliper of eight to ten inches at time of planting and four feet of clear trunk. Thirty percent of the tree requirement must be met by native species. 
b.  Street tree size and spacing. Street trees shall be of a species typically grown in the county and which normally mature at a height of at least 20 feet. Street trees shall have a clear trunk of four feet, and shall meet the following height, diameter and spacing requirements: 
i.  An overall height of 14 feet and a minimum caliper of three inches at time of planting, and shall be provided along all roadways at a maximum average spacing of 30 feet on center, except as otherwise provided in these tree regulations; and excluding a distance of ten feet on both sides of an intersecting driveway, which shall not be obstructed; 
ii.  An overall height of 18 feet and a minimum caliper of four inches at time of planting, and shall be provided along all roadways at a maximum average spacing of 40 feet on center, except as otherwise provided in these tree regulations; and excluding a distance of ten feet on both sides of an intersecting driveway, which shall not be obstructed; 
In the planting of street trees, consideration shall be given to the needs of adjoining businesses in maintaining a reasonable view of permitted advertising signs. Adjustments in required spacing may be permitted by the administrative official as necessary to permit visibility of permitted signs and allow maturation of planted trees, if the administrative official determines that adjustments in required spacing requires the removal of a required tree from the adjoining street frontage, the administrative official may permit the removal of a maximum of one tree if the property owner provides three replacement trees elsewhere on the subject property subject to review and approval of the administrative official. The 25-foot average spacing requirement for multiple single-family units such as zero-lot-line and townhouse units shall be based on the total linear footage of roadway for the entire project and not based on individual lot widths. Street trees shall be placed within the swale area or shall be placed on private property where demonstrated to be necessary due to right-of-way obstructions as determined by the administrative official. Street trees planted along private roadways shall be placed within seven feet of the edge of roadway pavement or, where present, within seven feet of the sidewalk. Suggested canopy trees that are drought tolerant may be found in the landscape manual. Appropriate types of street trees shall be approved by the administrative official. 
c.  Power lines. Where the height and location of overhead power lines require the planting of low growing trees, street trees shall have a minimum height of eight feet, a minimum caliper of two inches at time of planting, and shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Single tree trunks clear of lateral branches to four feet. 
ii.  A maximum average spacing of 25 feet on center. 
Special consideration shall be given to the selection of tree species to be planted under power lines. Japanese Blueberry, Calophyum, Pigeon Plum, and Stoppers are preferred species. 
d.  Palms planted as street trees. Palms which meet all of the following requirements shall count as a required street tree on the basis of two palms per tree. Queen palms (Syagrus romanzoffiana) shall not be allowed as street trees. No more than 30 percent of the requirement may be met by palms. 
i.  Minimum canopy of 15 feet at maturity. 
ii.  Provided at an average maximum spacing of 25 feet on center. 
iii.  Fourteen feet minimum overall height or minimum caliper of four inches at time of planting. 
e.  Palms planted as shade trees (not street trees). Palms of a 12-foot minimum overall height or minimum caliper of three inches at time of planting shall count as a required tree on the basis of two palms per tree, except as provided herein for palms used as street trees. No more than 30 percent of the minimum tree requirements may be met by palms. Cabbage palms are prohibited, except as provided herein. 
f.  Required number of shade trees. Trees shall be planted to provide shade to residential structures of a height of 35 feet or less. At least three required lot trees shall be positioned in the energy conservation zone as defined herein. 
g.  Shade for air conditioning units. All exterior air conditioning units, except for air conditioning units placed on the roof, shall be shaded and screened by trees and/or shrubs. 
h.  Preservation of existing trees. Existing trees required by law to be preserved on site and that meet the requirements set forth in the Code may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum tree requirements. Dead trees shall be removed and replaced as required following approval of a no-fee permit by the village. 
i.  Prohibited and controlled tree species. Prohibited and controlled tree species shall not be counted toward fulfilling minimum tree requirements. Prohibited trees shall be removed from the site. 
j.  Required number of native species. Thirty percent of the required trees or palms shall be native species. Consistent with the goals of the village's initiative, "Bringing Pines back to Pinecrest," one-third of the required number of native species shall be Dade County Slash Pine trees native to Miami-Dade County's pinelands. 
k.  Limitation on cabbage palms. In order to prevent adverse environmental impacts to existing native plant communities, only existing Sabal palmettos (cabbage palms) shall be used to satisfy minimum tree and native plant requirements, except that cabbage palms rescued from government approved donor sites, transplanted within the site, or commercially grown from seed shall be counted toward the minimum tree and native plant requirements. 
l.  Maintenance of trees, and grass planted in right-of-way. When trees and grass are planted within the right-of-way, the owners of land adjacent to the areas where street trees are planted must maintain those areas, including the trees, plants and sod, using pruning methods specified in these tree regulations. A covenant executed by those owners is required, or a special taxing district must be created to maintain these areas. Where a government with proper jurisdiction determines that the planting of trees and other landscape material is not appropriate in the public right-of-way, that governmental entity may require that said trees and landscape material be placed on private property. Dead trees shall be removed and replaced as required following approval of a no-fee permit by the village. 
m.  Avoidance of related adverse impacts. Consideration shall be given to the selection of trees, planting and plant site, and conditions may be imposed in order to avoid serious problems such as clogged sewers, cracked sidewalks, triangle of visibility, falling limbs, and encroachment into power lines to prevent associated problems such as safety hazards and power service interruptions. Trees and landscaping shall be maintained to avoid hazardous conditions and adverse impacts. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to allow the trimming and maintenance of trees adjacent to power lines by Florida Power and Light and/or qualified arborists as necessary to prevent damage to adjacent power lines, and to prevent interruption of electrical service. Consideration shall be given to the planting of the "right tree in the right place" to ensure that planted trees will not cause adverse impacts or be adversely impacted by nearby obstructions. When noting and selecting trees, care shall be taken to prevent the planting of new trees underneath existing tree canopy unless the noted and selected trees are an appropriate understory tree species that will thrive in a shaded condition and not interfere with the growth of existing trees and tree canopy. 
4.  Shrubs (hedges). 
a.  All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Shrubs shall be provided at a ratio of ten per required tree. Thirty percent of the shrubs shall be native species of shrubs and/or native Florida grasses (not including turf grass), such as Fakahatchee Grass, Muhly Grass, or Wire Grass, for example. 
b.  When used as a visual screen, buffer, or hedge, shrubs shall comply with all criteria regulating location, number and character of plant material necessary to meet the criteria for required buffers between dissimilar land uses in paragraph eight below. 
c.  All shrubs shall be located within the property in such locations that would enable those shrubs to be maintained entirely from said property. 
5.  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 12 inches in length immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified. Planting of perimeter walls with vines is recommended as a deterrent to graffiti. 
6.  Ground covers. Ground cover plants used in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year after planting. 
7.  Mulch. 
a.  Weed-free mulch shall be applied and maintained in a minimum three-inch layer under and around all trees and shrubs, and in a minimum two-inch layer under and around all ground cover. 
b.  The use of mulch shall be restricted to the planting areas. 
c.  Cypress mulch shall not be used because its harvest degrades cypress wetlands. 
8.  Buffers between dissimilar land uses. Where dissimilar land uses exist on adjacent properties, and where such areas will not be entirely visually screened by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, that portion of such area not so screened shall be provided with a buffer consisting of a six feet wall or fence with a life expectancy of at least ten years, together with shrubs which normally grow to a minimum height of six feet or more and shall be maintained at that height. Where chain link fencing is used, shrubs shall also be required to cover such fence. Shrubs used as a buffer shall be planted at a minimum of 24 inches on center and 30 inches in height at time of planting. The buffer shall form a continuous unbroken and solid visual screen between the dissimilar land uses within one year after planting. Buffers screening dissimilar uses shall include mahogany or oak trees, or similar hardwood canopy trees acceptable to the administrative official, planted at a maximum average spacing of 25 feet on center and shall have a height of at least 16 feet within the required setback. Shrubs required as a buffer shall not be trimmed shorter than 72 inches except where required in order to maintain a safe site distance. 
9.  Buffers required for vehicular use area. Shrubs shall be maintained at a minimum height of four feet for all vehicle use areas, except where a shorter height is required to maintain a safe sight distance. Shrubs shall be maintained at a height of six feet or more, and shall provide a continuous buffer for vehicular use areas, including a six-foot wall, in order to buffer areas between dissimilar uses. All vehicular use areas adjacent to a right-of-way or private street shall be screened by a continuous hedge planting at least four feet high and shall include a five feet landscaped strip incorporating said planting or wall on private property. Planting material shall be installed at a minimum of 24 inches on center and shall have a height of 30 inches at time of planting. 
10.  Landscaped areas in parking lots. Ten square feet of landscaped area per parking space shall be provided within a parking lot. In order to maximize the distribution of shade, trees shall be planted throughout the interior of the parking lot at a minimum density of one tree per 80 square feet of landscaped area, exclusive of parking lot buffers. Planting islands for each tree shall have a minimum width of five feet, exclusive of the curb dimension, and shall be planted or covered with other landscape materials. This requirement is in addition to any applicable open space required pursuant to the provisions of the land development code. Every eight spaces, a landscaped island extending at least three-quarters of the depth of the parking space shall be provided that is at least five feet wide, exclusive of the curb dimension, and shall include at least one shade tree per row or per 25 linear feet, whichever formula provides the greater number of trees. Landscaping in parking areas and along streets shall be in addition to the minimum required trees per acre according to the minimum standards for green space identified herein. 
11.  Plant quality. 
a.  Minimum grade and standards. Plants installed pursuant to these tree regulations shall conform to, or exceed, the minimum standards for Florida Number One as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part I and II," prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
b.  Minimum height. Trees installed pursuant to these landscape regulations shall have one primary vertical truck and secondary branches free of included bark up to a height of four feet above natural grade. 
12.  Stormwater retention/detention areas. 
a.  Stormwater retention/detention areas shall be designed to maximize the perimeter dimension, where feasible. 
b.  Stormwater retention/detention areas shall be planted throughout with native herbaceous facultative plants with the following exceptions: 
i.  Areas that are designated and actively used for play or picnic areas, overflow parking or sports activities shall be planted with grasses which are very drought tolerant, as well as tolerant of wet soils. 
ii.  Areas where the minimum required stormwater retention capacity would be adversely affected are excepted. 
c.  The minimum required number of native herbaceous facultative plants shall be one plant per square foot of retention/ detention area, including the slope. Minimum required herbaceous plant container size shall be 11/2 inches, commonly referred to as a liner. Sprigging, seeding, plugging, hydro-mulching or sodding with native herbaceous facultative plants grown from local seed sources may be used in lieu of liners. Herbaceous plants shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year after planting. 
d.  Native facultative trees or shrubs may be used in lieu of native herbaceous facultative plants, provided that the minimum required stormwater retention capacity is not adversely affected. 
(e)  Landscape plan review criteria. Landscape plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the following criteria and the guidelines and illustrations provided in the landscape manual. 
1.  Landscape design. Landscape design shall enhance architectural features, relate structure design to the site, visually screen dissimilar uses and unsightly views, reduce noise impacts from major roadways and incompatible uses, strengthen important vistas and reinforce neighboring site design and architecture. 
2.  Preservation requirement. Existing specimen trees and native vegetation (including canopy, understory, and ground cover) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible and all applicable requirements of these landscape regulations. 
3.  Water conservation. In order to conserve water, reduce maintenance, and promote plant health, plant species shall be selected and installed based on their water needs, growth rate and size, and resource needs. Plants with similar needs shall be grouped in hydrozones. Adequate growth area based on natural mature shape and size shall be provided for all plant materials. 
4.  Use of native plant species. The plan shall include use of native plant species in order to reestablish an aesthetic regional quality and take advantage of the unique diversity and adaptability of native species to the environmental conditions of South Florida. Where feasible, the reestablishment of native habitats shall be incorporated into the landscape plan. 
5.  Planting in energy conservation zone. Trees and shrubs shall be planted in the energy conservation zone where feasible, in order to reduce energy consumption by shading buildings and shall be used to reduce heat island effects by shading paved surfaces. 
6.  Street trees. Street trees shall be used to shade roadways and provide visual order. Where feasible, selected species shall be used to establish a road hierarchy by defining different road types. 
7.  Planting material near utility lines. Special attention shall be given to the use of appropriate species located under, or adjacent to, overhead power lines, near native plant communities and near underground utility lines. Adequate growth area shall be provided for all plant materials. 
8.  Avoidance of visual obstructions. Landscaping shall be designed to provide safe and unobstructed views at intersections of roadways, driveways, recreational paths and sidewalks. 
9.  Historic landscapes and features. Historic landscapes and landscape features designated by local, state or federal governments shall be preserved. 
(f)  Preparer's certification of landscape compliance. 
1.  Preparer's certification of landscape compliance. A preparer's certificate of landscape compliance bearing the original letterhead of the designing firm and licensing number shall be submitted to and approved by the administrative official prior to issuance of any final certificate of occupancy. The preparer's certification of landscape compliance shall contain a statement signed and sealed by the landscape architect or by person(s) authorized to prepare plans, who prepared the approved plans, that the landscape and irrigation plans have been implemented and that all requirements of these landscape regulations have been met. Any changes or substitutions to the approved plan shall be approved by the administrative official prior to the implementation of said changes and substitutions. All changes or substitutions to the approved plan shall be noted on all copies and a revision shall be submitted and approved before installation. Changes and substitutions of plant material shall be of similar quality, quantity and size, as originally approved and shall be in compliance with the intent and requirements of these landscape regulations. 
2.  New single-family or duplex residence. For a new single-family or duplex residence on its own lot or applicable existing development, the owner or owner's agent may certify in writing that landscape and irrigation improvements have been installed according to approved plan(s). 
3.  Inspection. The administrative official shall inspect all projects for compliance prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of use. 
(g)  Landscape manual. The adopted village landscape manual shall provide an illustrative interpretation of the standards provided herein and suggested guides for landscaping in accordance with the above standards. If a manual for the village has not been adopted, then the currently effective county landscape manual shall be the guide until such adoption by the village. 
(h)  Landscape maintenance. 
1.  Responsibilities of owner. An owner is responsible to ensure that landscaping required to be planted pursuant to these landscape regulations is: 1) installed in compliance with the landscape requirements; 2) maintained as to present a healthy, vigorous, and neat appearance free from refuse and debris; and 3) sufficiently fertilized and watered to maintain the plant material in a healthy condition. 
2.  Existing developments. Residential developments existing on September 5, 2001 shall maintain the required tree qualities and quantities as regulated by the Miami-Dade County Landscaping Code in effect as of that date. Commercial developments shall be required to comply with the provisions of these regulations when the property owner receives approval to increase the floor area of development or for substantial improvement. Projects that have obtained approval from the zoning board or village council shall be permitted to develop in accordance with the approved plans. The issuance of a certificate of use shall trigger compliance with these landscape regulations. An addition to an existing residential development shall require compliance with these landscape regulations governing street trees only. 
3.  Replacement. If any tree or plant which is being used to satisfy these landscape regulations dies, such tree or plant shall be replaced with the same landscape material or an approved substitute. 
4.  Pruning requirements. Trees shall be pruned in the following manner and shall be consistent with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300: 
a.  All cuts shall be made at the branch bark ridge, outside of branch collar and at junctions, laterals or crotches. 
b.  Removal of dead wood, crossing branches, weak or insignificant branches, and suckers shall be accomplished simultaneously with any reduction in crown. 
c.  Cutting of lateral branches that result in the removal of more than one-third of all branches on one side of a tree shall only be allowed if required for hazard reduction or clearance pruning. 
d.  Lifting of branches or tree thinning shall be designed to distribute over half of the tree mass in the lower two-thirds of the tree. 
e.  No more than one-fourth of a tree's living canopy may be removed within a one-year period, except for mango and avocado trees, which may be pruned as follows: 
1.  Mango and avocado trees - In order to promote lateral branching as necessary to improve tree stability, increase survivability in hurricanes and high winds, and improve fruit production, one-third of the living canopy of a mango or avocado tree may be removed each year for three consecutive years within a limited three-year period, subject to approval of a three-year, no-fee permit by the village. Vertical branches less than four inches in diameter may be removed where they branch to a main branch provided no more than one-third of the tree canopy is removed. Following expiration of an approved three-year permit, no more than one-fourth of a tree's living canopy may be removed within a one-year period. 
5.  Slash Pine, especially juvenile Slash Pine, is extremely sensitive to construction disturbance, foot traffic around the base, and artificial irrigation. Precautions shall be taken as necessary to preserve and maintain slash pines during and after planting. 
(i)  Prohibitions. 
1.  Prohibited plant species. Prohibited species, and all species listed in division 6.2(c)d.2. shall not be planted and shall be removed from any site that is subject to the requirements of these landscape regulations. 
2.  Controlled plant species. Controlled species shall not be planted within 500 feet of a natural forest community or native habitats as defined herein. 
3.  West Indian mahogany. West Indian mahogany (Swietenia mahagoni) shall not be planted within 500 feet of a rockland hammock or pine hammock. 
4.  Tree abuse. Tree abuse is prohibited. Abused trees shall not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum tree requirements. 
(j)  Enforcement. 
1.  Withholding a certificate of compliance. The administrative official shall withhold approval of any final regulatory action or final building inspection prior to the issuance of a final certificate of use, certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion until a preparer's certification of landscape compliance has been approved. 
2.  Inspections. The administrative official shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by these regulations, to order actions required for Code compliance, to issue civil violation notices and to process cases to the special master for violations. 
3.  Violations. Failure to install or maintain landscaping according to the terms of these landscape regulations shall constitute a violation of this Code. Failures to plant, preserve, or maintain each individual tree shall be considered to be a separate violation of these regulations. Each day in which either landscaping or individual trees are not installed or maintained according to the terms of these landscape regulations shall constitute a continuing and separate violation of these regulations. 
4.  The administrative official may permit minor and minimal adjustments to these landscaping regulations when determined to be practically necessary, provided such variation or adjustment is "de minimis" and not contrary to any specific condition of a development order approved by the village council or zoning board. 
(k)  Conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. If these landscape regulations conflict with other ordinances or regulations, the more stringent regulation or requirement shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 6.2. - Tree preservation and protection. 
(a)  Generally. These tree preservation and protection regulations ("tree regulations") shall be a minimum standard for the protection, removal and relocation of trees and shall be enforced by the village. 
(b)  Tree cutting standards. 
1.  No person shall commit tree abuse, hatrack or effectively destroy any tree located on his or her property in the village, unless otherwise permitted by the terms of these tree regulations. Each separate action shall constitute a violation of this section regardless of whether the tree was previously abused, hatracked or effectively destroyed. 
2.  Any tree that is cut in violation of this section shall be replaced as set forth in this section. 
(c)  Tree removal and relocation permits. 
1.  Permits required. 
a.  Tree removal. A tree removal permit is required for the removal or relocation of any tree in the village not specifically exempted below. 
b.  Illegal removal. Trees that have been removed illegally shall be replaced on the basis of two caliper inches per each one caliper inch of tree removed [i.e., if a ten inch caliper tree was removed, a total of 20 caliper inches shall be re-planted to comply with this provision]. Trees shall be replanted on site and meet minimum standards for caliper and other provisions of these regulations, including height. 
c.  Violations. A village official shall not issue a tree removal permit that does not comply with these tree regulations. Any such permit issued in error or under false pretenses shall be void. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or not comply with any of the conditions of a village tree removal or landscape permit. 
1.  Mortgagees. Any mortgagee with respect to property upon which any violation of these regulations has occurred shall not be liable for such violation unless, prior to said violation, said mortgagee has foreclosed upon said property or participated in the management or control of said property, or unless said mortgagee has effected or caused the tree ordinance violations occurring on said property. 
2.  Prior actions. If actions or omissions constituting a violation of these regulations occurred at a time when the completed actions or omissions were not prohibited by law, such completed actions or omissions shall not constitute a violation. 
d.  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from tree removal permits, but may only be undertaken following an inspection by the administrative official. 
1.  Removal of any dead tree. 
2.  Removal of any of the following tree species (provided the tree is not within a natural forest community, in which case a permit shall be required, but all application and permit fees shall be waived by the village): 
i.  Melaluca quinquenervia (cajeput/paperbark) 
ii.  Adenanthera pavonina (red sandalwood) 
iii.  Casuarina (Australian pine, beefwood) 
iv.  Cupaniopsis anacardioides (carrotwood) 
v.  Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian pepper) 
vi.  Dalbergia sissoo (Indian rosewood) 
vii.  Bischofia javanica (bischofia, bishopwood) 
viii.  Ficus microcarpa (laurel fig) 
ix.  Ricinus communis (castor bean) 
x.  Psidium guajava (guava) 
xi.  Flacourtia indica (governor's plum) 
xii.  Albizia lebbek (woman's tongue) 
xiii.  Hibiscus tiliaceus (mahoe) 
xiv.  Acacia auriculiformis (earleaf acacia) 
xv.  Leucaena leucocephala (lead tree) 
xvi.  Schefflera actinophylla (Queensland Umbrella) 
xvii.  Mimosa pigra (catclaw mimosa) 
xviii.  Araucaria columnaris (Norfolk Island Pine) 
xix.  Thespesia populnea (seaside mahoe) 
xx.  Metopium toxiferum (poison wood) 
xxi.  Bauhinia blakeana (Hong Kong orchid tree) 
xxii.  Ficus benjamina (weeping fig) 
3.  Removal of any tree which has been destroyed or effectively destroyed by an act of God, or by acts outside of the control of any person, individually or otherwise, who has or had a legal, beneficial or equitable interest in the real property upon which such tree is located, which acts could not have been prevented by the exercise of reasonable care by that person. Where a tree has been destroyed or effectively destroyed as described above, it is the intent of this provision to exempt from liability for such destruction or effective destruction the person who has or had a legal beneficial or equitable interest in the real property upon which such tree is located if the person could not have prevented the destruction by the exercise of reasonable care. 
4.  Removing, trimming, cutting or altering of any mangrove tree or removal of any tree located upon land which is a wetland as defined in this Code. Instead, trees located upon land which is a wetland and mangrove trees located anywhere in the village shall be subject to the applicable wetland permitting requirements of this land development code. 
5.  Review of projects involving tree removal or relocation. The administrative official shall review all applications for development approval to determine if the applicant must apply for a tree removal permit. The administrative official shall also review for the same purpose proposed plans for new roadways or improvements to highway design projects and proposed plans for new public parks and recreational facilities and other public facilities. 
2.  Permit application. The administrative official shall provide permit application forms for removal or relocation of trees within the village. An owner, agent of the owner, or lessee of a property may apply for a tree removal permit. If the permit application is a lessee or agent of the owner, a statement from the property owner indicating that the owner has no objection to the proposed tree removal shall accompany the application. The permit applicant shall submit to the administrative official a completed application form. Permit application forms shall be accompanied by two sets of site plans, which are subject to review and approval by the village administrative official. The site plan shall include the locations of all existing tree resources, the sizes (DBH), type, location, canopy spread, and all proposed structures or utilities which may require removal or relocation of trees. The administrative official may require that said plans be prepared by either a landscape architect, architect or an engineer registered in the state. If the submitted site plan does not provide sufficient information to determine which trees will be affected by the proposed development, the administrative official may require that a tree survey of the site be prepared and submitted for review. 
3.  Review and evaluation of permit application. The administrative official shall conduct a review of each completed tree removal permit application. This review and all actions taken by the administrative official under the provisions of these tree regulations shall be conducted using best available practices from biology, botany, forestry, landscape architecture and other relevant fields, and shall be conducted in a manner that is consistent with all applicable goals, objectives and policies in the comprehensive development master plan. Upon receipt of a completed permit application, the administrative official shall visit the site and determine whether the site contains specimen trees or any other trees subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
a.  Specimen trees. If a site contains any specimen trees, then the provisions of the specimen tree standards section shall apply. 
b.  Other trees. If there are trees present on a site other than any portion of a natural forest community or specimen trees, then the replacement provisions of the replacement requirements for tree removal section shall apply. 
c.  Combination of tree types. In the event that a site contains any combination of natural forest community, specimen trees or other trees, then the provisions of the Code shall be applied in proportion to the presence of each type of tree or community. 
4.  Specimen tree standards. The standards to be applied in reviewing tree removal applications involving specimen trees are as follows: 
a.  Specimen trees application. Specimen trees shall be preserved whenever reasonably possible. Upon receipt of an application to remove a specimen tree, the administrative official shall consider the following factors in evaluating said application: 
i.  Size and configuration of the property. 
ii.  Size and configuration of any proposed. 
iii.  Location of the tree relative to any proposed development. 
iv.  Whether or not the tree can be preserved under the proposed plan or any alternative plan. 
v.  Health, condition and aesthetic qualities of the tree. 
vi.  Whether the tree poses a threat to persons or property. 
b.  Alternate plans. If, upon review of the factors enumerated in subsection a. above, the administrative official determines that a specimen tree cannot reasonably be preserved under the proposed plan, then the applicant shall provide an alternate plan when feasible, which shall include preservation of the specimen tree and design alterations consistent with the scope and intent of the initially-proposed plan. Alterations consistent with the scope and intent of the initially proposed plan may include, but shall not be limited to: 
i.  An adjustment of building orientation on a site. 
ii.  An adjustment of lot lines within a site proposal where said adjustment will not cause an unreasonable loss of usable space. An applicant shall have the burden of proof in the determination of what constitutes an unreasonable loss of usable space. 
c.  Specimen tree relocation. If preservation of the specimen tree and any alternate design consistent with the scope and intent of the initial plan are mutually exclusive, then the administrative official may issue a permit to relocate the specimen tree. If the tree removal permit requires relocation, then the applicant shall be required to relocate the tree in accordance with the standards set forth herein. 
d.  Removal of specimen trees. If relocation of the specimen tree is not feasible due to the size, health, location, species or any other factor, then a permit may be issued for removal, and tree replacement shall be required. 
e.  Replacement requirements for specimen trees. Removal of a specimen tree with a diameter at breast height of 18 inches or more shall require replacement at the rate of one and one-half or two times the caliper removed in accordance with the provisions of either paragraph i. or paragraph ii. below, except that palm trees and fruit trees shall be replaced at the rate of one tree for each tree removed. Each required replacement tree, except palm trees shall be a minimum of 14 feet in height and three inches in caliper at the time of planting. As a condition of the issuance of a tree removal permit for the removal of a specimen tree, tree replacement requirements shall be as follows: 
i.  Twice those specified otherwise by these regulations. For example, a tree with a caliper of 18 inches shall be replaced with a tree or trees (minimum four inches diameter at breast height (DBH) and 12 feet in height) having a combined, cumulative caliper of 36 inches. 
ii.  One and one-half those specified otherwise by these regulations, except that a tree with a caliper of 18 inches shall be replaced with a tree or trees (minimum eight inches diameter at breast height (DBH) and 25 feet in height) and having a combined, cumulative caliper of 27 inches. 
In instances where the village arborist determines that a specimen tree is causing damage to a home, street, driveway, or utilities located on a subject property and where the arborist further conclusively determines that no other feasible alternative exists that would allow for preservation of the tree without further damage to those facilities, and where relocation of the damaged facility is not practical, replacement of the tree may be permitted at the rate of one or more trees equaling the diameter of the tree removed. 
In the event that replacement is not feasible on-site, then alternative off-site replacement shall be required or, as a last alternative, there shall be a contribution to the village tree trust fund for the full value of the replacement trees. Additionally, there shall also be an equitable contribution to the village tree trust fund for the irreplaceable loss of the aesthetic and environmental contributions of the specimen tree(s), according to a contribution schedule established by resolution of the village council. 
f.  Exemptions. An applicant may be exempt from the replacement requirements of paragraph e. above, but subject to the tree replacement requirements of paragraph 6.c. below under the following circumstances: 
i.  Upon submittal of a statement from a certified arborist registered in the state which indicates that a specimen tree, due to disease, condition, growth habit or any other reasonable botanical factor, does not provide the aesthetic or environmental contribution associated with a specimen tree. Said statement shall include the specific reason(s) for the claimed exemption from the provisions of these regulations. 
ii.  When a site contains more than one specimen tree, and 50 percent or more of the existing specimen trees and at least 50 percent of the existing specimen tree canopy area is preserved. 
5.  Replacement requirements for tree removal. As a condition of the issuance of a tree removal permit, the permittee shall be required to replace trees that are authorized to be removed under the provisions of these tree regulations. The number of trees and number of species of trees required for replacement shall be determined according to the specifications contained herein. Tree replacement shall be not required in instances where the existing or proposed tree canopy equals or exceeds 70 percent of the area of the subject property. The administrative official may require that replacement shall be described in a landscape replacement plan which shall meet the minimum requirements of the Code. No tree removal permit shall be issued until the administrative official has approved said plan. 
6.  Procedures for determining tree replacement requirements. The administrative official shall determine the total number and type of replacement trees required for the issuance of a tree removal permit according to the following procedural steps: 
a.  Step 1: Determining existing tree canopy coverage on-site. The area of existing tree canopy. coverage of a site shall be determined by the administrative official, using one or any combination of the following methods: Review of aerial photography; on-site inspection; and review of a tree survey. The administrative official may require the applicant to submit a tree survey for the purpose of this determination. 
b.  Step 2: Determining impact area of proposed project. The area of existing canopy coverage which will be affected (impact area) by the applicant's proposed development shall be determined by the administrative official based on a site plan and completed tree removal permit application. 
c.  Step 3: Determining number of replacement trees required to be planted. The total number of trees required for replacement shall be based on the area of impact and the category of replacement tree selected by the applicant. Each replacement tree shall compensate in accordance with the requirements of paragraph i or ii below as follows: 
i.  At a ratio of 2:1 for a portion of the tree canopy lost in the impact area. 
ii.  At a rate of one and one-half times the tree canopy lost in the impact area if replacement trees are provided at a minimum of six to ten inches in diameter and 25 feet in height at the time of planting. 
In instances where the village arborist determines that a non-specimen tree is causing damage to a home, street, driveway, or utilities located on a subject property, where the arborist further conclusively determines that no other feasible alternative exists that would allow for preservation of the tree without further damage to those facilities, and where relocation of the damaged facility is not practical, replacement of the tree may be permitted at the rate of one or more trees equaling the canopy of the tree removed. The following table shall be used as a standard for determining the required number of replacement trees: 
TABLE 6-2 
DETERMINING NUMBER OF REPLACEMENT TREES 
Category of Replacement Tree Portion of Impact Area that Each Replacement Tree Compensate for in Square Feet Shade tree 1 1,500 Shade tree 2 1,000 Shade tree 3 700 Shade tree 4 500 Shade tree 5 300 Palm tree 1 300 Palm tree 2 100 Small tree 200  
Replacement categories shall compensate for the lost canopy. In the event that a replacement tree actually has more canopy coverage at the time of planting than the amount of credit allowed under the tree replacement formula above, then the applicant shall receive full credit for the canopy coverage provided by the replacement tree at the time of planting. The applicant shall submit a list of proposed replacement trees on a form provided by the administrative official, except when the total number of replacement trees exceeds 20, and then the applicant shall be required to submit a landscape replacement plan consistent with the provisions of the landscape regulations. Proposed replacement lists or plans are subject to administrative official approval. The administrative official shall approve proposed replacement trees that are consistent with the standards of these tree regulations. 
d.  Step 4: Location of replacement tree. Specific placement of replacement trees on-site shall be determined by the applicant. If the site cannot accommodate the required replacement trees because of insufficient planting area as determined by the administrative official, then the applicant shall be required to plant replacement trees at an off-site location subject to the administrative official approval, or, as an alternative, shall provide an equitable contribution to the village tree trust fund to compensate for those replacement trees which cannot be accommodated on-site. 
e.  Step 5: Minimum species diversity standards. When more than ten trees are required to be planted in accordance with the provisions of this division, a diversity of species shall be required. The number of species to be planted shall be based on the overall number of trees required. The number of species to be planted shall be based on the overall number of trees required. The applicant shall be required to meet the following minimum diversity standards: 
TABLE 6-3 
Required Number of Trees Minimum Number Species 11-20 2 21-50 4 51 or more 6  
Permittees shall not be required to plant in excess of six species. The number of trees of each species planted shall be proportional to the number of species required. A minimum of 50 percent of all replacement trees planted shall be native to the county, and no more than 30 percent of the replacement trees shall be palms. However, when native trees are removed, all replacement trees shall be native species. As an alternative to the minimum species diversity required herein, an applicant may propose an alternative species diversity in an alternative landscape enhancement plan described in these tree regulations. 
f.  Step 6: Minimum standards for replacement trees. 
i.  All replacement trees shall have a minimum quality of a Florida No. 1 grade or better. 
ii.  The administrative official shall maintain a list of species for each category of replacement tree. This list may be amended from time to time, as necessary. Replacement tree heights shall be determined by overall height measured from where the tree meets the ground to the top-most branch. 
aa.  All category 1 replacement shade trees shall be a minimum of 26 to 35 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 10 to 12 inches at the time of planting, and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 1,500 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
bb.  All category 2 replacement shade trees shall be a minimum of 19 to 25 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 7 to 9 inches at the time of planting, and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 1,000 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
cc.  All category 3 replacement shade trees shall be a minimum of 15 to 18 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 5 to 6 inches at the time of planting, and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 700 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
dd.  All category 4 replacement shade trees shall be a minimum of 14 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 4 inches at the time of planting, and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 500 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
ee.  All category 5 replacement shade trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at the time of planting and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 300 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
ff.  All category 1 replacement palm trees shall have a minimum height of ten feet at the time of planting and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 300 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
gg.  All category 2 replacement palm trees shall have a minimum height of three feet at the time of planting and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 100 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
hh.  All replacement small trees shall have a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting and at maturity should have a canopy coverage of 200 square feet under normal growing conditions. 
7.  Requirements for a landscape replacement plan. A landscape replacement plan shall be submitted to the administrative official by the permit applicant when a minimum of 10,000 square feet of replacement canopy are required. All landscape replacement plans shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Number, species, and size of trees. The number of trees, number of species of trees, and size of trees proposed for planting shall be consistent with provisions of these regulations. 
b.  Site plan. The applicant shall submit a site plan that includes the proposed replacement locations of all replacement plantings and tree relocations, all property lines, and all proposed and existing structures, driveways and utility casements. 
c.  Canopy. The canopy spread of any tree that is proposed for preservation shall be shown on the plan. Where a portion of the canopy of a tree or trees will be removed without removal of the trees, a notation shall be made on the plan. When noting and selecting replacement trees, care shall be taken to prevent the planting of new trees underneath existing tree canopy unless the noted and selected trees are an appropriate understory tree species that will thrive in a shaded condition and not interfere with the growth of the existing trees and tree canopy. 
8.  Tree protection requirements during construction. 
a.  Protection requirements. During site development, protection requirements for trees designated for preservation under an approved tree removal permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  Protective barriers shall be placed around each tree, cluster of trees, or the edge of the preservation area no less than six feet (in radius) from the trunk of any protected tree cluster, or preservation area unless a lesser distance is specified by the administrative official. Protective barriers shall be a minimum of four feet above ground level and shall be constructed of wood, plastic or metal, and shall remain in place until development is completed and the administrative official has authorized their removal. Protective barriers shall be in place prior to the start of any construction. 
ii.  Understory plants within protective barriers shall be protected. 
iii.  No excess oil, fill, equipment, building materials or building debris shall be placed within the areas surrounded by protective barriers, nor shall there be disposal of any waste material such as paints, oils, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or any other material harmful to trees or understory plants within the areas surrounded by protective barriers. 
iv.  Trees shall be braced in such a fashion as to not scar, penetrate, perforate or otherwise inflict damage to the tree. 
v.  Natural grade shall be maintained within protective barriers. In the event that the natural grade of the site is changed as a result of site development such that the safety of the tree may be endangered, tree wells or retaining walls are required. 
vi.  Underground utility lines shall be placed outside the areas surrounded by protective barriers. If said placement is not possible, disturbance shall be minimized by using techniques such as tunneling or overhead utility lines. 
vii.  Fences and walls shall be constructed to avoid disturbance to any protected tree. Post holes and trenches located close to trees shall be dug by hand and adjusted as necessary, using techniques such as discontinuous footings, to avoid damage to major roots. 
viii.  Root barriers shall be installed with the planting of new trees in instances where there is a likely possibility that future root growth will cause damage to foundations, driveways, utilities, or other infrastructure. 
b.  Replacement. If these tree protection regulations are not adhered to by the permittee and the trees are effectively destroyed, then all such trees shall be replaced according to the standards of these regulations, in addition to being subject to the penalty provisions of the Code. 
9.  Tree relocation standards. The relocation of any tree subject to the provisions of these regulations shall be consistent with the minimum standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the tree relocation standards promulgated by the county department of environmental resources and management. 
10.  Permit issuance. 
a.  Issuance. The administrative official shall deny an application or approve an application and issue a permit (subject to conditions, limitations or restrictions), for the activity proposed under the permit application, provided: 
i.  The required application fee and permit fee are submitted to the village. 
ii.  A performance bond, if required, has been posted. As a condition of issuing a tree removal permit, the administrative official may require the posting of a performance bond, which shall be equivalent to 100 percent of the estimated cost of the permitted activity and may be in the form of a letter of credit, surety, cash, or certificate of deposit. All performance bonds shall remain in force for a minimum of either one year after the actual completion date of the permitted activity to ensure that any replanted trees which perish are replaced, or until viability of all replanted trees has been achieved, whichever occurs last. However, at the discretion of the administrative official, performance bonds may be partially released in phases based upon partial completion of planting or other permit requirements. 
iii.  All required plans or covenants are submitted and are in compliance with the standards herein. 
b.  Incomplete permit applications. All tree removal permit applications which remain incomplete for a period of 120 days shall be denied. A new tree removal permit application shall be required for all work previously proposed under a permit application which has been denied. 
11.  Continuance of official documents. The natural forest community maps approved by the county board of county commissioners on December 12, 1984, by Resolution No. 1764-84; all tree removal permits issued pursuant to Chapter 26B of the Code of Miami-Dade County; administrative approvals; and all consent agreements executed in order to resolve alleged violations of Chapter 26B of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, are hereby confirmed and shall remain in full force and effect, and all conditions, restrictions and limitations contained therein shall continue to apply, and compliance therewith shall be enforceable pursuant to the provisions of this these tree regulations. 
12.  Tree trust fund. 
a.  Creation of the tree trust fund. There is hereby created a village tree trust fund, the purpose of which is to acquire, protect and maintain natural forest communities in the village and to plant trees on public property. If a site cannot accommodate required replacement trees because of insufficient planting area as determined by the administrative official, and an acceptable location for replacement trees at an off-site location cannot be identified or approved by the administrative official, then as an alternative, the applicant shall provide an equitable contribution to the village tree trust fund to compensate for those replacement trees which cannot be accommodated on-site. 
b.  Disbursement and maintenance of the tree trust fund. Monies obtained for the tree trust fund shall be disbursed for the acquisition, maintenance, management and protection of natural forest communities, or for planting trees on public property. Disbursement from the tree trust fund shall require approval by resolution of village council, provided, however, that any funds received pursuant to the conditions of any tree removal permit shall be used as required by the permit conditions without the necessity of approval, appropriation, or action of any kind by the village council. The administrative official is hereby authorized to receive and disburse monies in accordance with this provision. 
13.  Permit fees. The village shall charge and collect application, permit and tree trust fund contributions at the rates established by separate resolution approved by the village council. Applications from government agencies for tree removals in areas dedicated to public use may, at the discretion of the administrative official, be exempted from application fees and permit fees. 
14.  Penalties for violation of tree regulations. The following penalties shall be assessed where these tree regulations would not have permitted trees to be removed and they have been effectively destroyed or removed in violation of these regulations. The contractor committing the violation will also be cited via a uniform civil violation notice if observed by staff or if the property owner/violator has records that identify the contractor and can provide sufficient evidence to identify the person or company who committed the violation. 
a.  First offense with no prior knowledge. 
Per tree and double the amount of canopy replacement required by code: 
Less than 12-inch diameter at four-foot height\$500.00 
12 inches to 18 inches\$1,000.00 
18 inches to 36 inches\$2,000.00 
Greater than 36 inches\$3,000.00 
b.  Second offense or prior knowledge. Double the fines required for the first offense, or the fine that would have been required for the first offense in the case of prior knowledge. Double the amount of canopy replacement required by code if a permit had been issued. 
c.  Subsequent offenses. Triple the fine required for the first offense, or the fine that would have been required for the first offense in the case of prior knowledge. Double the amount of canopy replacement required by code if a permit had been issued. 
15.  Enforcement and remedial actions. The following remedial actions are required for tree abuse: 
a.  In the event a person is found to have committed a violation of tree abuse, the person/violator shall be responsible to undertake pruning and other remedial actions that the village determines are reasonably necessary to protect public safety and property, and to help the tree survive the tree abuse damage. 
b.  If the village determines that a specimen or non-specimen tree will not survive and/or will not grow at a rate and in a manner normally expected for that species as a result of tree abuse, the person/violator shall remove the abused tree and install a replacement tree. The diameter breast height of the replacement trees shall be equal to the diameter breast height of the abused tree, or if an equivalent diameter breast height tree is not available, the closest sized tree that is commercially available subject to approval of the administrative official. 
Any remedial action required under this section shall be completed within 60 days of notice from the village that such actions are required. The village may require the person/violator to immediately commence remedial actions in the event the abused tree is an immediate threat to the public or property. 
(d)  Landscaper registration. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Definitions. 
a.  Landscaper shall mean any person, company, corporation or service which does regularly, for compensation or fee, transplant, remove, trim, repair, inject, or perform surgery on a tree or plant. 
b.  Trim shall mean to cut away, remove, cut off or cut back any part of a tree or plant. 
2.  Registration requirements. 
a.  Any landscaper or tree service performing work within the village shall be required to register with the village manager or the village manager's designee on registration forms provided by the village. Each registration shall include the following supplemental documents: 
i.  A copy of the applicant's valid driver's license or other form of photo identification. 
ii.  A copy of the applicant's current local business tax receipt. 
iii.  Signed acknowledgment that the applicant has been provided a copy of the village's tree pruning and removal regulations and that the applicant has read and agreed to the requirements. 
iv.  A certificate of insurance, reflecting a minimum of $300,000.00 of commercial general liability insurance to include bodily injury and property damage. The applicant shall certify compliance with F.S. ch. 440, Workers' Compensation Insurance, as amended. The Workers' Compensation Insurance shall be for landscapers and tree trimmers. The policy(ies) of insurance shall be issued in the name of the applicant or the business organization. The Village of Pinecrest shall be named as additional insured. A copy of the required policy(ies) or a copy of a certificate of insurance shall be available for inspection at each site where landscaping or tree trimming activities are in progress. 
b.  A landscaper's or tree service's registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Registrations are not transferable or assignable to any other person or entity. 
c.  Registered landscapers and tree services shall maintain a copy of such registration on site and available for inspection at all times when performing work within the village. 
d.  The village may revoke or deny renewal of a landscaper or tree service registration if such landscaper fails to conform to the tree cutting standards prescribed in section (b) above or if found to have committed tree abuse, hatracking, or to have effectively destroyed a tree. In addition to revocation or non-renewal of registration, a landscaper who violates the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section (e)3 below. 
e.  Landscapers or tree services who have been found to have committed tree abuse shall be required to take remedial measures to correct said abuse, as determined by the village's arborist, including, but not limited to, payment to the tree trust fund for the replacement value of said tree, as set forth in this chapter. 
f.  Landscapers or tree services performing work within the village shall have the name as shown on their landscaper or tree service registration clearly marked on each of their vehicles located on site. 
(e)  Tree cutting permit required. 
1.  Any person or company who wishes to trim a tree located within the commercially zoned district within the village shall be required to obtain a tree cutting permit prior to performing any tree cutting services within the village. 
2.  If after review of the permit application, the village manager, or village manager's designee, determines that the following criteria are met, then a permit shall be issued: 
a.  Whether cutting the tree is necessary for health of the tree; 
b.  Whether cutting the tree is necessary for safety of public; 
c.  Whether cutting the tree will have a detrimental impact on the tree canopy over US 1. 
3.  Penalties: 
a.  Any person or company found to be in violation of this section shall be assessed a fine as specified pursuant to the village's schedule of civil penalties as provided in chapter 2, administration, of the Village's Code of Ordinances, article V, code enforcement, division 2, civil citation procedures, section 2-174, schedule of civil penalties. 
b.  Any person or company who is found to be in violation of this section for a second time within two years shall be assessed a fine as specified pursuant to the village's schedule of civil penalties as provided in chapter 2, administration, of the Village's Code of Ordinances, article V, code enforcement, division 2, civil citation procedures, section 2-174, schedule of civil penalties, and shall be prohibited from performing services within the village for one year from the date of the second violation. 
c.  In addition to the assessment of an appropriate fine, if the tree is found to be effectively destroyed and, at the discretion of the village, in need of replacement, then the violator will be responsible for replacing the tree as set forth in this chapter. 
4.  Permit expiration/renewal. 
a.  "Stand alone" tree removal and relocation permits shall expire one year after issuance or upon such other date as may be specified in a development order or order of the Special Magistrate and may be renewed for successive 6 month periods, if necessary, unless prohibited by the terms of a development order or order of the Special Magistrate. Renewal of any tree removal permit shall be subject to payment of a fee as established by the Village's permit fee schedule. Tree removal permits approved as sub-permits in conjunction with a master permit shall expire within 180 days if no inspection has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2012-4,  2, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2015-11,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 6.3. - Floodplain Management.[5] 
ARTICLE I ADMINISTRATION 
    6.3.101 GENERAL. 
    6.3.101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance" of the Village of Pinecrest, hereinafter referred to as "this ordinance." 
    6.3.101.2 Scope. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
    6.3.101.3 Intent. The purposes of this ordinance and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
    6.3.101.4 Coordination with theFlorida Building Code. This ordinance is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
    6.3.101.5 Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code , as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this ordinance. 
    6.3.101.6 Disclaimer of Liability. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Village Council of Village of Pinecrest or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
    Sec. 102 APPLICABILITY. 
    6.3.102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
    6.3.102.2 Areas to which this ordinance applies. This ordinance shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the Village of Pinecrest, as established in Section 102.3 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.102.3 Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Miami-Dade County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated September 11, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this ordinance and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Pinecrest Building and Planning Department, 12645 Pinecrest Parkway, Pinecrest, Florida 33156. 
    6.3.102.3.1 Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Section 105 of this ordinance the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this ordinance and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
    6.3.102.4 Other laws. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
    6.3.102.5 Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This ordinance shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this ordinance. 
    6.3.102.6 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
    Sec. 103. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. 
    6.3.103.1 Designation. The Floodplain Manager, or Village Manager's designee, is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
    6.3.103.2 General. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this ordinance consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this ordinance without the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 107 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.103.3 Applications and permits. The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this ordinance is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
    6.3.103.4 Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this ordinance is required. 
    6.3.103.5 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of theFlorida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 107 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.103.6 Notices and orders. The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
    6.3.103.7 Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Section 106 of this ordinance for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code , including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
    6.3.103.8 Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Section 103.4 of this ordinance; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within 6 months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of Village of Pinecrest are modified. 
    6.3.103.9 Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this ordinance; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at Pinecrest Building and Planning Department, 12645 Pinecrest Parkway, Pinecrest, Florida 33156. 
    Sec. 104. PERMITS. 
    6.3.104.1 Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this ordinance, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
    6.3.104.2 Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this ordinance for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code , including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
    6.3.104.2.1 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this ordinance: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in section 604.50, F.S. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in section 366.02, F.S., which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in section 553.73(10)(k), F.S., are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
    6.3.104.3 Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Section 105 of this ordinance. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
    6.3.104.4 Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this ordinance shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this ordinance, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
    6.3.104.5 Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
    6.3.104.6 Suspension or revocation. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
    6.3.104.7 Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; section 373.036, F.S. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; section 161.055, F.S. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
    Sec. 105. SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. 
    6.3.105.1 Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this ordinance shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with Section 105.2(2) or (3) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Section 105.2(1) of this ordinance. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this ordinance but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this ordinance. 
    6.3.105.2 Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
(a)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
(b)  Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
    6.3.105.3 Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 105.4 of this ordinance and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 105.4 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.105.4 Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
    Sec. 106. Inspections. 
    6.3.106.1 General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
    6.3.106.1.1 Development other than buildings and structures. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
    6.3.106.1.2 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
    6.3.106.1.2.1 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code,lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with Section 105.2(3)(b) of this ordinance, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
    6.3.106.1.2.2 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code,final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Section 106.1.2.1 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.106.1.3 Manufactured homes. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
    Sec. 107. VARIANCES AND APPEALS. 
    6.3.107.1 General. The Village Council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this ordinance. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the Village Council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    6.3.107.2 Appeals. The Village Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
    6.3.107.3 Limitations on authority to grant variances. The Village Council shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in Section 107.6 of this ordinance, the conditions of issuance set forth in Section 107.7 of this ordinance, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The Village Council has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance. 
    6.3.107.3.1 Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in Section 105.3 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.107.4 Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    6.3.107.5 Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this ordinance, provided the variance meets the requirements of Section 107.3.1, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
    6.3.107.6 Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the Village Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this ordinance, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
    6.3.107.7 Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this ordinance or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the Village Council that: 
(a)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
(b)  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
(c)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
    Sec. 108. VIOLATIONS. 
    6.3.108.1 Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this ordinance, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    6.3.108.2 Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
    6.3.108.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS 
    Sec. 201. GENERAL. 
    6.3.201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings shown in this section. 
    6.3.201.2 Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance and are defined in the Florida Building Code , such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
    6.3.201.3 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
Sec. 202. DEFINITIONS. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement). A form provided by the Floodplain Administrator to be signed by the owner and recorded on the property deed in Official Records of the Clerk of Courts, for the owner to agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and these regulations, enclosures below elevated buildings. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 29, 1972. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 29, 1972. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain Administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this ordinance. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this ordinance, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code , structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 29, 1972 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 29, 1972. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S.  320.01] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in section 320.01, F.S.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood- related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10 year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 1-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the 1-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to January 1, 2015. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. [See Instructions and Notes] 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
ARTICLE III FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
    Sec. 301. BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 
    6.3.301.1 Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. Pursuant to Section 104.2.1 of this ordinance, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 307 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.301.2 Specific methods of construction and requirements. Pursuant to Chapter 8 Article III of the Miami-Dade County Code, the following specific methods of construction and requirements apply: 
(1)  Additional Elevation of Buildings. 
a.  For buildings located in the special flood hazard area, the minimum elevation requirements in the Florida Building Code shall be to or above the base flood elevation plus one (1) foot, or the back of the sidewalk elevation plus one (1) foot, or if there is no sidewalk, the elevation of the highest crown of the road or street abutting such building site plus one (1) foot, whichever is higher. 
b.  For residential buildings not located in the special flood hazard area, the minimum lowest floor elevation requirements shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches above the back of sidewalk elevation, or if there is no sidewalk, a minimum of eight (8) inches above the elevation of the highest crown of road or street abutting such building site, whichever is higher. 
c.  For non-residential buildings not located the special flood hazard area, the minimum lowest floor elevation shall be a minimum of four (4) inches above the back of sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, a minimum of four (4) inches above the elevation of the highest crown of road or street abutting such building site, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Limitations on Enclosures Under Elevated Buildings. For buildings located in the special flood hazard area, permit applications for enclosed areas under elevated buildings shall be accompanied by a Nondisclosure Agreement. Enclosures shall: 
a.  Have the minimum necessary access to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door), or entry to the elevated building (stairway or elevator). 
b.  Not have the interior portion partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(3)  Cumulative Substantial Improvement. In the Florida Building Code, Building, and Florida Building Code, Existing Building, definitions for the term "Substantial Improvement" shall be as follows: 
Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 1-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the 1-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to January 1, 2015. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(4)  Flood Damage and Substantial Damage. In the Florida Building Code, Building, and Florida Building Code, Existing Building, definitions for the term "Substantial Damage" shall be as follows: 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood- related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10 year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of structure before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
    Sec. 302. Subdivisions. 
    6.3.302.1 Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
    6.3.302.2 Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with Section 105.2(1) of this ordinance; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Section 303 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 303. SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS. 
    6.3.303.1 Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
    6.3.303.2 Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
    6.3.303.3 Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
    6.3.303.4 Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in Section 105.3(1) of this ordinance demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
    6.3.303.5 Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this ordinance, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    Sec. 304. MANUFACTURED HOMES. 
    6.3.304.1 General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this ordinance. 
    6.3.304.2 Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this ordinance. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to 304.4.2 are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
    6.3.304.3 Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
    6.3.304.4 Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 304.4.1 or 304.4.2 of this ordinance, as applicable. 
    6.3.304.4.1 General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of Section 304.4.2 of this ordinance, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
    6.3.304.4.2 Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to Section 304.4.1 of this ordinance, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
    6.3.304.5 Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 for such enclosed areas. 
    6.3.304.6 Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
    Sec. 305. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS. 
    6.3.305.1 Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
    6.3.305.2 Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in Section 305.1 of this ordinance for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Section 304 of this ordinance for manufactured homes. 
    Sec. 306. TANKS. 
    6.3.306.1 Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
    6.3.306.2 Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section 306.3 of this ordinance shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
    6.3.306.3 Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
    6.3.306.4 Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
    Sec. 307. OTHER DEVELOPMENT. 
    6.3.307.1 General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of Section 303.4 of this ordinance if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
    6.3.307.2 Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Section 303.4 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.307.3 Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 303.4 of this ordinance. 
    6.3.307.4 Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 303.4 of this ordinance. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of Section 105.3(3) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14,  2, 12-8-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-14,  2, adopted December 8, 2015, repealed the former Div. 6.3, and enacted a new Div. 6.3 as set out herein. The former Div. 6.3 pertained to flood damage control and derived from Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, adopted November 13, 2002; and Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, adopted April 8, 2014. 

Div. 6.4. - Preservation of wetlands and transitional wetlands. 
    As of September 5, 2001, the village had no wetlands or transitional wetlands within its boundaries. Should future annexation incorporate such wetlands, this division shall then apply. In order to promote and preserve natural hydrological conditions and to preserve water quality, natural habitats, and environmentally sensitive areas, the following regulations shall be applied to wetlands, regardless of their district or zoning designation, and to all areas designated conservation on the future land use map. 
(a)  Definitions. Wetlands shall be defined as the area propagating the freshwater marsh vegetative community found along portions of the Snapper Creek Canal. If additional areas are incorporated into the village, the definition of wetlands shall be based on hydrology as well as hydric soil and wetland vegetation within the annexed area. Wetlands shall include transitional wetlands and shall include those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do, or would, support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determinations shall be consistent with the most stringent of those of the state department of environmental protection, South Florida Water Management District, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(b)  Wetland delineation-Establishing the wetland line. A delineation of the upland/wetland boundary shall be established based upon an on-site (field) survey by a professional biologist or state licensed engineer provided by the applicant, and coordinated with the South Florida Water Management District, the state Department of Environmental Protection, or the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. The field investigation, which delineates a larger area, shall be used as the upland/wetland boundary line. 
(c)  Wetland development restrictions and interpretations. No development shall be permitted in wetlands, including transitional wetlands, until and unless the applicant has obtained all required permits or exemptions from state or federal agencies having jurisdiction and has met all requirements of the land development regulations. 
(d)  Density and site alteration. Site alteration on sites with environmentally sensitive lands including, but not limited to, wetlands shall not result in a density in excess of one dwelling unit per ten acres of environmentally sensitive land. Site alteration, including filling or plant removal in the environmentally sensitive areas shall be limited to ten percent of the total site size. The determinations of site size shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations by professionals competent in: 1) Identifying vegetation and soils; 2) Analyzing data; and 3) Making impact assessments, including findings regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological value and function of environmentally sensitive lands. The village shall coordinate with the state and federal jurisdictional agencies for purposes of rendering legal, equitable, and environmentally sensitive determinations of the development rights to be permitted on such wetlands or lands. The developer of a parcel of environmentally sensitive land shall be responsible for obtaining permits or exemptions from all agencies having jurisdiction prior to obtaining a development order or development plan review approval from the village. Regardless of permitting by federal or state permitting agencies, the village shall reserve the right to determine the appropriate land use density or intensity, and special mitigation measures required to comply with this Code. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof for a Village determination that development shall not adversely impact wetlands, transitional wetlands, and other environmentally fragile natural systems. Such determinations shall be based on physical and biological data obtained from specific site investigations by a biologist, a state licensed engineer or by another professional competent in producing data and analysis necessary to support impact assessments. 
(e)  Wetland buffer zones. Wetlands and transitional wetlands shall be protected from impacts generated by adjacent land uses through natural upland buffer zones. The upland buffer shall be an area landward of the upland edge of a wetland (i.e., the upland/wetland jurisdictional line if applicable). The buffer area provides an undeveloped area which separates developed upland from a wetland area. The purpose of the buffer area is to ensure the continuing function of the different wetland communities, to prevent pollutants from surface water runoff from entering the wetlands, and to enhance water quality. The village shall retain the right to prohibit development within the buffer area. The boundary of an upland buffer area shall be established by field investigation and shall be consistent with South Florida Water Management District permitting standards for upland buffers adjacent to wetlands to sufficiently protect adjacent wetlands. 
1.  Vegetative buffers. Any development adjacent to environmentally sensitive areas, including wetlands, shall provide buffers of 25 feet. An applicant for development shall include a wetland protection plan, which must address the following: 
a.  Measures to abate erosion; 
b.  Depth of the water table below the soil surface in the zone immediately upland of the wetland line; 
c.  Habitat requirements of wetland dependent wildlife; and 
d.  Prohibit hazardous waste storage or disposal within upland buffers. 
2.  Required dedication of conservation easements. The village may require applicants for site plan review approval or for subdivision development approval to include the dedication of conservation easements or reservations, where the village finds that the dedication is reasonable in order to protect the value and function of a wetland and upland buffers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.5. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  Applicability. In order to prevent both soil erosion and sedimentation, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required as a part of an application for development plan review whenever a development will involve any clearing, removal of native or protected vegetation, grading, or other form of disturbing land by the movement of earth. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this division the following definitions are provided: 
    Erodible slope: All slopes with inclines in excess of four percent, unless modified by the administrative official based on consideration of specific soil conditions. 
    Large flat surface area (unpaved): An area which is flat or whose slope is less than four percent and which consists of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of exposed soil. 
    Sedimentation: The settling out of the soil particles which are transported by water or wind, in which soil particles are suspended or slowed to a sufficient degree and for a sufficient period of time to allow the particles to settle out of suspension, or when the degree of slope is lessened to achieve the same result. 
    Soil erosion: Any removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water, gravity, or wind. Erosion includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles. 
(c)  Erosion control measures. Development proposals must include all measures necessary to minimize soil erosion and to control sedimentation in the disturbed land area. All disturbed areas shall be protected by measures that minimize velocities of water runoff, maximize protection of disturbed areas from storm water runoff, and prevent or retain sedimentation. Where the following natural features are present on the site proposed for development, an erosion control plan shall be required to address the specific objectives listed below: 
1.  Erodible slopes: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles from soil. 
2.  Streams, streambeds, streambanks, bodies of water, lake shorelines: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles. 
3.  Drainageways: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles (which would otherwise be deposited in streams, bodies of water, or wetlands); and promote deposit or sediment loads (traversing these areas) before these reach bodies of water. 
4.  Land adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles. The applicant shall not adversely impact aquatic vegetation within the sensitive transition zone located between the upland and the ordinary high water line. No such vegetation shall be disturbed without approval of the village. Any such approval shall be based on a demonstrated necessity which promotes the overall public health, safety and welfare. Furthermore, any such disturbance of aquatic vegetation shall be compensated by re-vegetation based on a plan approved by the village required herein. Where deemed appropriate, the site plan shall include the planting of native indigenous aquatic plant vegetation to promote stability of the shoreline. 
5.  Enclosed drainage structure: Prevent sedimentation in structure, erosion at outfall of system, and deposit of sediment loads within system or beyond it. 
6.  Large flat surface areas (unpaved): Prevent detachment of soil particles and their off-site transportation. 
7.  Impervious surfaces: Prevent the detachment and transportation of soil (in response to the increase in the rate and/or volume of runoff of the site or its concentration caused by impervious surfaces). 
8.  Borrow and stockpile areas: Divert runoff from face of slopes exposed in the excavation process; convey runoff in stabilized channels to stable disposal points; leave borrow areas and stockpiles in stable condition. 
(d)  Clearing and grading. Appropriate measures shall be taken during land clearing and building operations to assure that exposed, destabilized or otherwise altered soil is expeditiously covered with an acceptable erosion control material. These measures shall apply to the act of subdividing and installation of related improvements, including the periods during which improvements are made and during the length of time soil may be exposed to the environment. Permits for clearing and grading activities shall include specifications for management principles guiding the removal or placement of vegetation and landscaping design. Developers shall be required to take precautionary measures, where necessary to avert destruction or damage to native vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.6. - Aquifer recharge protection. 
(a)  Applicability. As of September 5, 2001, the village had no prime aquifer recharge areas as defined by the South Florida Water Management District. Should the village annex prime aquifer recharge areas into its corporate limits, these regulations shall apply to development within such prime aquifer recharge area. 
(b)  Restrictions on development within recharge areas. All development within prime recharge areas shall comply with the following development requirements: 
1.  Topography. Development shall preserve the predevelopment topography with regard to soil type, drainage rates, grade elevation, and shall be designed so as to minimize the reduction or recharge of the surgical aquifer. The groundwater level and fluctuations shall not exceed those under predevelopment conditions. 
2.  Soil removal. Removal of soil from a development site or any portion thereof which is located above 25 feet mean sea level is prohibited. On such sites or portions thereof, the natural topography shall not be reduced beyond six feet above the normal high water table (with the exception of drainage conveyance or retention ponds) or eight feet below existing land surface, whichever is more restrictive. 
3.  Clearing. No clearing of soil or vegetation may occur before a permit is issued. 
4.  Excavation. No excavation which cuts below the seasonal high water table (this practice lowers the water table level) shall be allowed. This includes, but is not limited to, excavations for building foundations parking lots, and site drainage. Open drainage conveyances below the normal high water table shall be prohibited. Underground piping of stormwater is required when culverts are lower than the normal high water table. 
5.  Impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces of recharge areas shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Development on sites with any land having an elevation no greater than 25 feet above mean sea level (MSL) shall restrict impermeable surfaces to 50 percent of the total area of the site which is 25 feet or less MSL. 
b.  Development on sites with any land exceeding 25 feet mean sea level (MSL) shall restrict impermeable surfaces to 35 percent of the total area of the site which is above 25 MSL. 
(c)  Prohibited land uses. The following land uses and activities are prohibited within aquifer recharge areas: 
1.  Sanitary landfills; 
2.  Animal feedlots; 
3.  Wastewater treatment facilities; 
4.  Petroleum and pesticide treatment facilities; 
5.  Incinerators; 
6.  Above-ground or below-ground pipes for pollutants or contaminants; 
7.  All other land uses that store, handle, or generate hazardous materials or wastes. The following state and federal rules define and regulate additional hazardous material: 
a.  Chapter 38F41 of the Florida Administrative Code (the Florida Substance List); 
b.  Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes); 
c.  Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 302.4, Table 302.4 (List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities); 
d.  Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 355, Appendix A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances). 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.7. - Multi-agency review of natural resource issues. 
    As part of the staff analysis and evaluation of development plans, the administrative official shall coordinate with members of a multi-agency technical review committee comprised of the following agencies: the county department of environmental resource management (DERM), the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD), and other federal, state, and regional agencies as may be appropriate in managing the following activities: 
(a)  The village shall coordinate all development and resource conservation measures impacting waterways with the above cited agencies These activities shall include, but not be limited to, review of proposed development potentially impacting natural resources, including development petitions for docks, shoreline stabilization, dredging, or other alteration of natural resources under federal or state jurisdiction. 
(b)  The village shall coordinate with technical staff within DERM and SFWMD in order to ensure implementation of sound principles and practices of natural resource management during the development review process. 
(c)  The village shall coordinate with DERM and SFWMD, as well as other appropriate state agencies, in matters involving stormwater management, drainage, water quality and quantity, and consumptive use permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.8. - Wildlife habitat preservation and protection of flora and fauna. 
    Vegetative communities and wildlife habitats (particularly those identified as primary habitat for endangered or threatened species or species of special concern), which are deemed environmentally significant shall be protected from adverse impacts associated with development. Table V-1 (Flora and Fauna Found in Miami-Dade County Which Are Endangered, Threatened, or Species of Special Concern) contained within the comprehensive development master plan conservation element: data inventory and analysis, lists the protected flora and fauna. The following species as identified by the state game and freshwater fish commission's office of environmental services are found in the village: rim rock crowned snake (Tantilla oolitica); little blue heron (Egretta caerulea); mangrove gambusia (Gambusia rhizophorae); mountain mullet (Agonostomus monticola); little strongbark (Bourreria cassinifolia); Carter's small-flowered flax (Linum carteri var. Carteri); silver palm (Coccothrinax argentata); bahama brake (Pteris bahamensis); slender spleenwort (Asplenium trichomanes-dentatum), tropical ironwood (Eugenia confusa); golden leather fem (Acrostichum aureum); Christmas berry (Crossopetalum ilicifolium); rhacoma (Crossopetalum rhacoma); pineland jacquemontia (Jacquemontia curtissii); Florida five petaled leaf-flower (Phyllanthus pentaphyllus ssp. Floridanus); rockland painted leaf (Poinsettia pinetorum); and West Indian cherry (Prunus myrtifolia). Essential breeding, feeding or habitat sites for endangered or potentially endangered flora or fauna shall be protected pursuant to these regulations. Applicants for development within any areas identified as refuge, breeding, feeding, or habitat areas of endangered or threatened species or species of special concern shall prepare a habitat management plan, which shall as a minimum comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  Critical habitat management plan required. Development plans and preliminary plats shall include a "Critical Habitat Management Plan" prepared by a professional biologist, ecologist, or other related professional. The plan shall ensure the protection of endangered and threatened flora and fauna as determined by the state or federal government. As a minimum standard, the plan shall address the following: 
1.  Occurrences of designated species by a qualified ecologist; 
2.  Land needs to support continued on-site presence of the species; 
3.  Impacts of proposed development which will disturb the species; 
4.  Management plans and measures necessary to protect the subject species; 
5.  Cost to developer to implement the recommended management plan as approved. 
(b)  Criteria for reviewing critical habitat plan. Development activities which have an adverse effect upon a designated species shall require mitigation acceptable to the village or shall not be permitted. Viable habitat for endangered or threatened species or species of special concern occurring on a site shall be identified on the management plans as preservation areas. All development activities shall be prohibited within these preservation areas, with the exception of recreational and educational uses where such uses shall not adversely affect such species. The administrative official shall review the critical habitat management plan. The final development plan shall comply with directives of the federal, state or local agencies having jurisdiction, and the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c)  Incentives for conservation easements. The applicant and the village may negotiate a development agreement which ensures the preservation of habitats. Where the applicant agrees to dedicate a conservation easement embracing the identified habitats, the village council may permit a transfer of density or intensity to adjacent lands under common ownership which are unencumbered by environmentally sensitive ecosystems. The village council may require payment of a fee in lieu of the above described mandatory habitat preservation. However, any payment allowed in lieu of preservation must be in sufficient amounts to purchase equally sensitive habitat of equal or greater size. Such cash payment may be used for the purchase of upland habitat preservation offsite rather than on-site. Where mitigation is applied, the program should require a minimum 2:1 ratio to enhance survivability. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.9. - Hazardous waste storage and disposal. 
    No hazardous wastes shall be stored or disposed of on wetlands or transitional Wetlands. Similarly, no hazardous wastes shall be stored or disposed of on upland buffers pursuant to these land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.10. - Conservation of potable water supply. 
    The village shall assist in regulating development for purposes of complying with policies of the South Florida Water Management District directed toward conservation of potable water supply and to achieve a reduction in the current rates of water consumption. Therefore, development plans shall be required to comply with the following potable water supply performance criteria: 
(a)  Where nonpotable alternative sources of irrigation water are available, potable water supplies shall not be used to meet irrigation needs. 
(b)  All new development shall be required to use water-saving plumbing fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.11. - Regulation of waterways, watercraft and marine related structures. 
(a)  Mooring of watercraft. Watercraft shall not be moored along any shore without the consent of the riparian land owner. Watercraft shall not be used as dwellings nor shall watercraft be permitted as business offices or other related commercial enterprises. Moored watercraft shall be kept in seaworthy condition. 
(b)  Maximum permitted projection of waterfront structure. Docks and similar facilities shall not be permitted without approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or any other agency having appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.12. - Excavation and fill. 
(a)  Certain excavations considered as a conditional use; exceptions. Excavations below the level of any street or right-of-way shall be deemed a conditional use, shall comply with site plan procedures, and shall be the subject of a public hearing. The following type of excavations shall not require a conditional use approval but shall comply with site plan review procedures unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this Code. 
1.  The foundation of a building or any structure to be constructed immediately after such excavations. All excavations shall be refilled after construction of such foundation in a manner which will prevent accumulation of stagnant water or other hazard. 
2.  Swimming pools. 
3.  Water hazard in a bona fide golf course. 
4.  Canals which are part of the village, the county or South Florida Water Management District canal system. 
5.  Reflecting ponds and water features with a maximum depth of six feet of water, so long as said amenities are completely lined with impervious material; a horizontal five-foot safety shelf is provided around the perimeter of the reflecting pond or water feature at an elevation where not more than 18 inches of water is provided on the shelf area; and backsloping or a perimeter berm is provided to prevent overland storm water runoff from entering the water body. 
(b)  Additional requirements for approval and/or continuance of the project. The site plan shall comply with all requirements for site plan approval and conditional use approval. In addition, the following requirements shall be met. For the purposes of this division, D.C.F.C. shall be defined as the county flood control elevation and W.C.2.4 shall be defined as "water control," page 2.4 in the public works manual of the county, which includes a detailed drawing of the mean low water elevation points throughout the county. 
1.  Elevations and restoration plan. The grading, leveling, sloping of the banks and perimeter restoration shall be on a progressive basis as the project develops and the excavation progresses. In accordance with this requirement, the applicant will submit final as-built surveys prepared and sealed by a state-licensed surveyor and/or professional engineer upon completion of the excavation, or upon request of the administrative official when it appears that the excavation is proceeding contrary to approved plans. 
2.  Field markings posted. The property shall be staked and posted to meet with the approval of the administrative official; said stakes shall be maintained in proper position so that the limits of excavation, slopes and grade levels may be easily determined and posts shall warn the public concerning possible hazards. 
3.  Required soil borings. Prior to site plan review, a report on soil borings taken on-site shall be submitted for review to the administrative official to determine if excavation to the requested depth may result in the displacement of layers of soft material (e.g., sand) and cause sinking of nearby properties. In addition, if hard rock is not encountered during excavation, the administrative official may require the vertical cut to be modified in such a manner that a stable side slope will be sustained. 
4.  Depth of excavation. The depth of the lake excavation shall not be less than ten feet below mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4). The maximum depth of the excavation shall be limited to that depth computed to contain water of two hundred 50 (250) ppm chlorides as projected to the year 2000. Penetration of the aquiclude, as determined by the administrative official, is prohibited. 
5.  Required berm. An earth berm, or alternative structure as approved by the administrative official, shall be constructed around the perimeter of all lakes to prevent overland storm water runoff from entering the lake. The berm shall be constructed adjacent to the lake top of slope on the landward side. Said berm shall extend one foot above the D.C.F.C. elevation. The landward slope of the berm shall have a gradient not steeper than one foot vertical to four feet horizontal. The lakeward slope shall not be steeper than the required lake slope. Berming and backsloping treatments shall be constructed in a manner acceptable to the administrative official. 
6.  Slope. The maximum permissible slope shall be in one of the following manners: 
a.  Lakes adjacent to arterial roadways (slope option available in every case). Beginning at top of slope (D.C.F.C. elevation), a slope dropping one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal extending lakeward to a point where five feet of water depth is provided below the mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4.); thence begin deep cut with a slope as material permits. A twenty-foot minimum offset, measured from lake top of slope to the established right-of-way, shall be provided when the lake is adjacent to an arterial roadway. The offset and berm may be deleted where curb and gutter roadway is provided. Where the water area lies outside of a horizontal roadway curve, the necessary shoulder safety requirements shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the public works manual). Drainage structures, other than approved outfall pipes, are not permitted within the lake slope area. 
b.  Lakes adjacent to roadways other than arterial roadways. The slope option identified above is available as well as the following alternative option: Beginning at top of slope (D.C.F.C. elevation), a slope dropping one foot vertical to four feet horizontal shall be provided extending lakeward to a point where three feet of water depth is provided below the mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4.), followed by an eight-foot horizontal shelf; thence begin a deep cut with a slope as material permits. The berm may be deleted where a curb and gutter roadway is provided. Where the water area lies outside of a horizontal roadway curve, the necessary shoulder safety requirements shall be provided in accordance with best management practices. 
c.  Lakes with common or public access to the lake shore and not adjacent to roadways. The slope options identified above are available as well as the following third option: Beginning at top of slope (D.C.F.C. elevation), a slope dropping one foot vertical to three feet horizontal with slope protection as required by the administrative official shall be provided extending lakeward to a point where three feet of water depth is provided below the mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4.) followed by a five-foot horizontal shelf; thence, begin a deep cut with a slope as material permits. 
d.  Lake(s) without common or public access to the lake shore and not adjacent to roadways. The slope options identified above are available as well as the following fourth option: Beginning at top of slope (D.C.F.C. elevation), a slope dropping one foot vertical to one foot horizontal with slope protection as required by the administrative official shall be provided extending lakeward to a point where three feet of water depth is provided below the mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4.) followed by a five-foot horizontal shelf; thence, begin a deep cut with a slope as material permits. 
7.  Drainage improvements; retention of pollutants. No positive drainage of storm water from roads or any other source will be allowed to enter the excavation except as the result of issuance of a class II permit by the administrative official. Retention of pollutants is one criterion for issuance of a class II permit. 
8.  Connections to drainage canals restricted. There shall be no direct connection between a lake excavation and a drainage canal. A system to permit overflows from lakes to canals for flood control purposes is allowable. 
9.  Impact on wellfields regulated. No portion of the proposed lake excavation area shall fall within the thirty-day cone of influence of any public water supply wellfield as defined in section 24-12.1, Miami-Dade County Code of Ordinances. Between the 30- and 210-day cones of influence of any public water supply wellfield, lake excavations will be permitted to a maximum water depth of 40 feet below mean low water elevation (W.C.2.4.). 
10.  Dedication and improvement of rights-of-way. Any required dedication of rights-of-way shall be made in accordance with adopted standards for public road rights-of-way, unless the village council deems such are not necessary or requires a lesser amount. Improvements shall be made to such rights-of-way in order to comply with best management practices for road construction, including construction of such improvements deemed desirable and necessary by the village council. 
11.  Dry open space. In all zoning districts that have open space requirements, development plans submitted for review and approval which contain a lake shall have at least 30 percent of the dry land open space requirements satisfied on land immediately adjacent to the lake(s) perimeter. 
12.  Restoration subject to village approval. Upon completion of the project, the property shall be restored and left in an acceptable condition meeting the approval of the administrative official. 
13.  Fencing of hazardous areas. If in the opinion of the administrative official the excavation is hazardous to the surrounding area, the hazardous area will be fenced in, or otherwise protected, by the applicant as directed by the administrative official. 
14.  Explosives prohibited. During the entire operation explosives shall not be used. 
15.  Hours of operation. The applicant shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays; Saturday and Sunday operation and/or other hours of operation than 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., may be permitted by the administrative official only if the same does not become objectionable, in official's opinion, to the surrounding area. 
16.  Required cash or surety bond. To insure compliance with all conditions imposed, a cash or surety bond or substantially equivalent instrument approved by the administrative official shall be posted and made payable to the village, in an amount to be determined by the administrative official. Said instrument shall be in such form that the same may be recorded in the public records of the county and said instrument shall be executed by the property owner and any and all parties who may have an interest in the land, including mortgagees and others an interest. The bond amount will be based on the volume of cut required to execute the approved plan. 
17.  Timing of completion. The time for the completion of the project including excavation, grading, and all related activities shall be determined by the administrative official and the work shall be carried on continuously and expeditiously so that the excavation will be completed within the allocated time. 
18.  Discontinuance or abandonment. If the operation is discontinued, abandoned, falls behind schedule, or time expires, the existing excavation shall immediately be sloped to conform to the approved slope. 
19.  Transfer of property restricted. The title of the property in question shall not be transferred without the approval of the administrative official unless the excavation of the subject property has been completed and/or unless the bond has been released. 
20.  Renewal and cancellation. The approval of excavation activities shall be renewable annually by the administrative official. Permits will be canceled only when the work is found to be in violation of any of the conditions or requirements of this division and/or when it is detrimental and/or incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
21.  Fill. Soil, dirt, rock or other materials used to change the elevation or topography of a site or to fill a hole or depression shall be inspected and approved by the village prior to application on site. 
(c)  Maintenance of natural grade and elevation. Development and construction in the Village of Pinecrest shall be designed and constructed with an elevation and grading that are consistent with the requirements of the Village's Floodplain Management Ordinance, Stormwater Management Plan, and Comprehensive Development Master Plan. The established natural elevation and grade of a property under construction shall be fundamentally preserved and the finished grade and elevation shall be consistent and compatible with the grade and elevation of adjoining properties. 
(d)  Fill waterward of the top of slope of any lake or waterway or alteration of an established shoreline in the Village of Pinecrest shall not be permitted unless approved as a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 20185,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 6.13. - Privately owned artificial lake slope provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This division shall govern the placement of accessory improvements and landscaping, which are hereby deemed not to modify the established slope of privately owned artificial lakes. This division shall not apply to the placement of accessory improvements landward of the top of the slope of such artificial lakes, which structures are permitted as accessory uses under other sections of this Code. 
(b)  Terms. As used in this division, "privately owned artificial lake" shall mean only a privately owned artificial lake not connected to any jurisdictional wetlands or to any other surface water body; and "water's edge" shall be defined as the average low ground water elevation. 
(c)  Improvements and landscaping waterward of slope. The placement of the following accessory improvements and landscaping shall be permitted waterward of the top of slope on a residential lot, parcel or tract, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Docks shall either be floated or be placed on pilings at right angles to the shoreline, except as otherwise provided herein. 
2.  All docks on a single lot, parcel or tract collectively shall not exceed 30 percent of the subject lot's width as measured at the top of the slope per county flood criteria (D.C.F.C.) elevation; provided, however, a dock that is placed parallel to the lot and that does not extend more than six feet beyond the water's edge may be built to the side setback lines. 
3.  No dock shall project further into the artificial lake more than one-half the length of the lot's shoreline frontage as measured at the water's edge, or 20 percent of the lake width at its widest point, whichever is smaller. In no event shall a dock exceed 50 feet in length. For purposes of this division, the length shall be the perpendicular dimension measured from the water's edge to the farthest point of the dock extending into the lake. 
4.  In no event shall a dock be placed closer than 100 feet to the opposite shore's top of slope (D.C.F.C. elevation). 
5.  A dock or a deck not exceeding 18 inches above D.C.F.C. elevation may be placed with a zero foot side setback. A dock or a deck exceeding 18 inches above D.C.F.C. elevation shall conform to accessory building side setback requirements. 
6.  Only one dock shall be permitted for each principal building on the subject lot, parcel or tract. 
7.  Rocks and landscaping water-ward of the top of slope but landward of the water's edge are allowed. 
8.  Rip-rap and interlocking block waterward of the top of slope and extending to a point one foot below the water's edge are allowed. 
9.  Open sided structures shall be permitted waterward of the top of slope but landward of the water's edge, subject to compliance with accessory building setback and lot coverage requirements of the district in which the structure is located; provided, however, the rear setback requirement shall be zero feet. In no event shall an open sided structure that is placed waterward of the top of slope exceed 15 feet in height nor shall it exceed 225 square feet in area. Only one such open sided structure shall be permitted for each principal building on the subject lot, parcel or tract. Open sided structures other than railings on docks and decks shall not be permitted, unless approved as a variance at a public hearing. 
10.  Steps and decks on pilings or on similar spatially separated upright supports shall be permitted waterward of the top of slope and landward of the water's edge. 
11.  Boat ramps shall be permitted providing no filling of the slope area occurs. 
12.  Filling waterward of the top of slope shall be prohibited. 
13.  Structures other than those listed above are prohibited from placement within the area waterward of the top of slope. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 6.14. - Sustainable building program. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose is to establish goals, programs and procedures that will help the village become a more sustainable community. This program shall establish new environmental goals for the village, define a certification-based sustainable building program with incentives, and define new measurement parameters and reporting criteria to track the village's performance toward its environmental goals. This program will promote economic and environmental health in the village, through the design, construction, operation, and deconstruction of its own facilities and provide leadership to both the private and public sectors in the arena of sustainable building and development practices and resource efficiency. Specific practices are outlined below. 
(1)  Promote a sustainable future that meets today's needs of a stable, diverse and equitable economy without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs by: 
a.  Protecting the quality of the air, water, land, and other natural resources; 
b.  Conserving native vegetation, wildlife and habitat; 
c.  Minimizing human impacts on local ecosystems and ecosystems worldwide; and 
d.  Reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
(2)  Become a leader in setting policies and practicing service delivery innovations that promote environmental sustainability. 
(3)  Create a sustainable community by delivering renewable energy and energy-efficient projects, developing green buildings and water-thrifty landscapes, resource education, and utilizing recycling and environmentally sound solid-waste services. 
(4)  Establish a sustainable building program to: 
a.  Improve the economic and environmental health of the village through measurable objectives; 
b.  Track and analyze key indices to measure performance in village buildings and facilities; 
c.  Commit the village to achieve green designations in a fiscally responsible manner; 
d.  Provide incentives for voluntary compliance; 
e.  Provide green building educational opportunities for the community; and 
f.  Assist the village in meeting its overall goal of reducing emissions, energy needs, and water consumption. 
(b)  Government leadership. 
(1)  To demonstrate the village's commitment to a sustainable building program, the village shall: 
a.  Strive to achieve a Gold Level FGBC Local Government designation. For any building or office project undertaken by the village, the village will participate in the sustainable building program; and 
b.  Track and report the village's monthly water and energy use; and 
c.  Publish an annual report that outlines the Village of Pinecrest's energy and water use for the prior year and outlines methodologies for potential reductions in the subsequent year. 
(2)  The village recognizes USGBC, FGBC, and Energy Star as the official standards for the village, and it shall be the policy of the village to finance, plan, design, construct, manage, renovate and maintain its facilities and buildings to be sustainable. It is the village's intent that all buildings constructed meet criteria standards of USGBC LEED, Florida Green Building Coalition Green Building certification, Energy Star, or similar state or nationally recognized program certification standards. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  For all private construction projects, compliance with this Code is voluntary. 
(2)  For all new buildings constructed and owned by the village, and for all modifications to existing village-owned buildings where the total renovation includes more than 50 percent of the total building square footage, the village is expected to design and construct buildings and modifications in accordance with the criteria and standards of USGBC LEED, Florida Green Building Coalition Green Building certification, Energy Star, or similar state or nationally recognized program certification standards unless the costs associated with participation significantly outweigh the benefits of participation. 
(d)  Definitions. 
(1)  For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Energy Star means the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Energy Star labeling program. 
FGBC is an acronym for the Florida Green Building Coalition, Inc., a non-profit corporation, whose mission is to establish and maintain a Florida system of statewide green building standards and third party certification programs with environmental and economic benefits. 
GBI is an acronym for the Green Building Initiative, a non-profit organization whose mission is to accelerate the adoption of building practices that result in energy efficient, healthier, and environmentally sustainable buildings by promoting credible and practical green building approaches for residential and commercial construction. 
GBI's Green Globes means the Green Building Initiative's Green Globes rating system. 
LEED means the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Rating System of the U.S. Green Building Council. 
Sustainable building means generally the resource efficient design, construction, and operation of buildings by employing environmentally sensible construction practices, systems, and materials. Sustainable building also means an office, residential or village structure which has obtained sustainable building certification. 
Sustainable building certification means the final designation awarded to a program participant for a particular project for satisfying all requirements associated with LEED certification, GBI's Green Globes rating system, Energy Star, or FGBC's standards. 
USGBC is an acronym for the U.S. Green Building Council, a non-profit organization whose mission is to transform the way buildings and communities are designed, built and operated, enabling an environmentally and socially responsible, healthy and prosperous environment that improves the quality of life. 
(e)  Administration. 
(1)  The building and planning department is responsible to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this Code in the construction of new village-owned buildings, when participation in the sustainable building program is authorized by the village manager. 
(2)  The building and planning department shall coordinate at least two training workshops per year for the purpose of educating village staff in the provisions and requirements of the Pinecrest Sustainable Building Program, and shall provide information and outreach to residents, businesses, and contractors through newsletters, brochures and other community outreach efforts. 
(3)  The building and planning department shall make available fast track development review pursuant to the requirements of the sustainable building program. 
(4)  The sustainable building program shall be administered on either a per-unit or per-development basis, as specified at the time of permitting. "Per-unit" means each unit built, except that any multi-family dwelling or similarly clustered structure may count as one unit. "Per-development" means each planned development, subdivision, or business park. 
(f)  Environmental sustainability account. The village shall establish and maintain an environmental sustainability account. The account may be utilized as a source for training, awards, and other direct costs associated with administration of the sustainable building program, subject to availability of funds and appropriation by the village council. 
(g)  Standards. Published LEED standards of the USGBC, FGBC green building standards, GBI's Green Globes rating system, Energy Star standards, or similar state or nationally recognized program certification standards shall be used to measure compliance of buildings participating in the sustainable building program. 
(h)  Incentives. The incentives contained in this section are intended to encourage the construction of sustainable buildings. For any program participant seeking sustainable building certification for new residential or commercial construction, residential or commercial retrofitting/remodeling, or new village-owned buildings, the following incentives shall be made available: 
(1)  Expedited permitting and fast track development review. 
a.  Development services for sustainable building program projects, including review of site plans and review of applications for building permits, shall be given priority over review of applications for projects that are not sustainable building program projects by all village departments reviewing such applications. Building permit applications for green buildings shall be accompanied by the appropriate sustainable building permit program application form. 
b.  Applications for subdivision plat approval shall be given priority over other applications provided the developer records in the public records of Miami-Dade County covenants or other restrictions sufficient to require that the development meets the certification criteria as an FGBC Green Development or all homes in the subdivision will be constructed so as to qualify for sustainable building certification. 
c.  Applicants who obtain priority status pursuant to this Code shall provide proof of sustainable building certification, or preliminary sustainable building certification, to the building and planning department within 120 days of construction completion, as defined by the certificate of occupancy or certificate of use issue date. Application forms for sustainable building certification and agreements with property owners or developers seeking priority status may provide that property owners or developers who obtain priority status but fail to obtain sustainable building certification may be denied future priority status by the village manager. 
d.  Applicants for building permits who wish to receive expedited permitting and fast track development review for buildings that are not eligible for sustainable building certification may receive expedited permitting and fast track review upon payment of permit fees in the amount of 125 percent of regular permit fees as adopted by village council by resolution. 
(2)  Rebate of permit fees. Building permit and plan review fees shall be rebated upon certification of sustainable building program projects, including one- and two-family residential projects, and remodeling projects that meet the certification requirements of USGBC, FGBC, GBI's Green Globes, or Energy Star. Proof and verification of certification shall be required as a condition of the rebate of fees by the village and shall be submitted to the village within 120 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of use to be eligible. Rebates shall be provided pursuant to the following schedule: 
a.  A rebate of thirty (30) percent of paid permit and plan review fees for FGBC "Gold," USGBC "Platinum," or four (4) Green Globes certification; 
b.  A rebate of twenty-five (25) percent of paid permit and plan review fees for FGBC "Silver," USGBC "Gold," or three (3) Green Globes certification; 
c.  A rebate of twenty (20) percent of paid permit and plan review fees for FGBC "Bronze," USGBC "Silver," or two (2) Green Globes certification; and 
d.  A rebate of fifteen (15) percent of paid permit and plan review fees for FGBC "Certified," USGBC "Certified," Energy Star "Certified," "Certified" remodel, or one (1) Green Globe certification. 
(3)  Green building award. For the purpose of publicly recognizing outstanding commitment to "green building and construction practices" the sustainable building program shall provide for an award of a framed village proclamation to be awarded annually to each program participant receiving a recognized certification. 
(4)  Recognition. The village shall coordinate a program of recognition, on the village web site or through other additional means, identifying participating sustainable building projects. 
(5)  Signage. 
a.  A builder may install one additional temporary construction sign, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area that notes: "This project is a Village of Pinecrest Green Certified Project by (Company Name)" and/or "Certified Florida Yards & Neighborhoods." 
b.  A developer of a commercial project may add the notation, "Village of Pinecrest Green Certified Project" in four-inch letters on permitted project entry and identification signs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-5,  2, 6-14-11) 
Div. 6.15. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Applicability. All new development, including construction of single-family residences on existing platted lots, and any redevelopment where such redevelopment equals or exceeds 50 percent of the existing value of on-site improvements or where 50 percent or more of the existing floor area is remodeled, shall comply with the minimum storm water management standards designed to meet minimum water quality and water quantity performance criteria. The requirements of this division shall not apply to single-family residential lots within an existing or approved platted subdivision which includes permitted central or common stormwater management facilities, if the common facilities have sufficient available capacity to accommodate the water quality and quantity criteria of this division at the time of application for a building permit. 
(b)  Criteria. One of the following two alternatives can be implemented to comply with the minimum storm water management standards to meet the minimum water quality and water quantity performance criteria. 
(1)  Alternative 1: 
a.  Water quality standard: Storm water facilities shall be designed to meet the design and performance standards established in chapters 62-4 and 62-302 of the Florida Administrative Code, for treatment of the storm water runoff, the first inch of runoff shall be retained on-site to meet the water quality standards required by ch. 62-302, paragraph 62-302.500 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
b.  Water quantity standard: Post-development runoff shall not exceed the pre-development runoff rate for a 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 
c.  Runoff from the aforementioned water quality and quantity standards shall be retained onsite by surface or sub-surface means such as exfiltration trenches, which must be designed with a minimum safety factor of two and maintained by the property owner as outlined in this section. Excess runoff must be directed to public right-of-ways in lieu of adjacent properties, when feasible. 
d.  Retained stormwater within the property shall be infiltrated, evaporated or exfiltrated within 72 hours. 
(2)  Alternative 2: 
a.  Water quality standard: Storm water facilities shall be designed to meet the design and performance standards established chapters 62-4 and 62-302 of the Florida Administrative Code, for treatment of the storm water runoff, the first half-inch of runoff shall be retained onsite to meet the water quality standards required by Ch. 62-302, paragraph 62-302.500 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
b.  Water quantity standard: Post-development runoff shall not exceed the pre-development runoff rate for a 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 
c.  Runoff from the aforementioned water quantity standard, less the first half-inch of runoff to be retained onsite to meet the water quality standards, shall be directed to public right-of-ways when feasible. The water quantity standard runoff, less the half-inch of runoff to be retained onsite, must be retained within the village right-of-way adjacent to the property by sub-surface means such as exfiltration trenches. In addition, the runoff from the five-year, 24-hour design storm event for the area fronting the property to the centerline of the adjacent roadway must also be retained. The following criteria shall apply to the proposed drainage system: 
i.  Exfiltration trench must meet the following requirements: 
1.  Located within the roadway travel lane when possible. 
2.  Sized to include a minimum factor of safety of 2.0. 
3.  Must be a minimum of 40 feet long with two manholes for maintenance. 
4.  Manholes must provide a minimum of a two-foot sump. 
5.  Baffles shall be installed at all entrance points to the exfiltration trench. 
ii.  Entire road must be resurfaced in front of the property. 
iii.  Village will maintain the drainage system within the village's right-of-way, and property owner shall pay an increased impact fee to cover the village's annual cost of maintaining the exfiltration trench in the future over a 15-year period. 
d.  Retained stormwater within the property and village right-of-way for the area fronting the property to the centerline of the adjacent roadway shall be infiltrated, evaporated or exfiltrated within 72 hours. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. Applications for building permits for new construction or remodeling shall include sufficient information to confirm compliance of the proposed development with the village's stormwater management criteria. The following minimum information shall be submitted: 
(1)  Two sets of scaled grading and drainage plans signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state in accordance with F.S. ch. 471, showing pre- and post-improvement conditions including: 
a.  Existing contours in intervals with spot elevations not exceeding one foot. 
b.  Existing drainage features such as pipes, inlets, etc. with elevations. 
c.  Proposed improvements such as buildings, parking areas, pools, detention systems, control structures, etc. 
d.  Detail of proposed grading with spot elevations or proposed contours. Contour information shall be sufficient to clearly define the portion of the watershed which drains through the property. 
e.  Storm water retention or detention facilities and storage capacities of such facilities, if any. 
f.  A location map with sufficient information to locate the project; i.e., adjoining streets, section, range and township, etc. 
(2)  Two copies of originally signed and sealed computations by a professional engineer registered in the state in accordance with F.S. ch. 471. The design must include references to and methodologies used to determine the storage volumes and control structures sizes. This section will constitute the "Drainage Report" and will follow the village storm water management drainage calculations procedure outlined in the following sections. 
(3)  A minimum of one copy of percolation test results signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state in accordance with F.S. ch. 471, representing the Geotechnical Lab Company which performed the test. Percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) open-hole fixed head percolation test. Depth of test hole to match depth of the exfiltration trench. The recommended depths of the test shall be ten and 15 feet. Also, a minimum of one double-ring infiltration test to establish correct coefficient of infiltration for pervious areas will be required. If fill is proposed for the site, the infiltration test shall be representative of the fill material proposed. 
(4)  For exfiltration system design, the plans and computations shall include the following: 
a.  Top of exfiltration trench elevation. 
b.  Bottom of exfiltration trench elevation, according to the percolation test(s) depth. 
c.  Design groundwater table elevation - average October elevation as defined by Miami-Dade County Department of Regulatory and Economic Resources (DRER). 
d.  Diameter of perforated pipe and invert elevation, not less than 18 inches in diameter to facilitate maintenance. 
e.  Back of sidewalk elevation (if applicable). 
f.  Length of exfiltration trench pipe (feet) (minimum length, 40 feet, with two inlets). 
g.  Inlets discharging to exfiltration trenches shall have baffles or skimmers to prevent oil and floatable debris from entering the exfiltration trench. 
h.  Inlets shall have a minimum two-foot sump from the lowest pipe invert elevation. 
i.  Storage volume of exfiltration trench (acre-feet per foot length). 
j.  Proposed inlet elevation. 
k.  Percolation (exfiltration rate in cubic-feet per second per foot of head) per foot length of trench at various stages above average October groundwater elevation as defined by DRER. 
l.  Width, depth and shape of trench (provide cross-section with elevations and pipe size). 
m.  Materials including rock, filter fabric and perforated pipe conforming to DRER standards. 
n.  Trench length calculations using DRER formulas demonstrating that the proposed trench length will adequately exfiltrate the required volume of runoff. 
o.  Average percent slope of paved area(s). 
p.  Drawdown calculations to exfiltrate required retention volume. 
(5)  For infiltration retention/detention system design, the plans and computations shall include the following: 
a.  Bottom of infiltration areas shall be a minimum of one foot above the design groundwater elevations-average October groundwater elevation as defined by DRER. 
b.  Storage volume of infiltration system (acre-feet) 
c.  Infiltration test (infiltration in inches per hour) representative of the depth and material to be used for the infiltration system. Minimum safety factor of two shall be applied to the infiltration rate. 
d.  Drawdown calculations showing that the retained runoff will be infiltrated or evaporated within 72 hours. 
(6)  Materials. 
a.  Any and all fill material proposed in pervious areas will maintain the same drainage characteristics, at a minimum, as the in situ soil. 
b.  Any consideration for the use of porous or pervious paving materials must be accompanied by a cut sheet from the manufacturer to substantiate the consideration. 
(7)  Drainage calculations procedure. 
a.  Provide the following parameters as defined below: 
  A, s.f., total contributing area 
  A i , s.f., impervious area 
  A p , s.f., pervious area 
  H WT , ft., elevation of water table from county maps 
  EL AP , ft., average pervious area elevation 
  D WT , ft., depth of high ground water from surface 
  CWS, in., compacted water storage 
  SSC, in., soil storage capacity 
  R, in., runoff depth 
  P, in., rainfall depth (25yr/24hr storm, SFWMD) (9.5 inches) 
  V TOT , c.f., total runoff volume to be retained 
  V P ET , c.f., volume provided by exfiltration trench 
  V P SWALE , c.f., volume provided by swales, ditches, retentions areas, etc. 
b.  Calculation approach: 
1.  Calculate soil storage (SSC) based on D WT and SFWMD Applicants Handbook Volume II. 
2.  Calculate pre-development runoff using NRCS runoff equation, (National Engineering Handbook, Part 630 Hydrology, Chapter 10). 
3.  Calculate post-development runoff using NRCS runoff equation. 
4.  Calculate water quality volume requirements, per land development regulation, division 6.15, section (b) criteria. 
5.  Determine and state the "design control volume" to be retained. 
6.  Calculate exfiltration trench (if used, use DRER formulas with minimum FS=2). 
7.  Calculate retention areas (show method of volume calculation). 
8.  Provide drawdown calculations. 
9.  Summarize design calculations and proposed solution(s). 
(d)  Inspections and recertification requirements. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the village, the following items shall be submitted to the village for review and approval: 
(1)  As-built survey with spot elevations including a spot elevation every 25 feet at the property line adjacent to all sides of the property and extending 25 feet into adjacent properties. 
(2)  One copy of the approved grading plan. 
(3)  A signed and sealed letter from a civil engineer confirming that the proposed improvements have been constructed as per the approved grading plan and that it is in compliance with the village's storm water management criteria. 
(4)  A signed letter from the property owner stating all drainage improvements will be properly maintained in perpetuity and granting the village the right to inspect the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15) 
ARTICLE 7. - SIGNS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions, div. 9.2. 

Div. 7.1. - Short title and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Sign Code of the Village of Pinecrest, Florida" and shall be applicable in the village. 
(b)  If property in the village fronts a street or public right-of-way that forms a common boundary with another municipality or unincorporated area of the county, and if the zoning classifications on both sides of the boundary are comparable, the property in the village shall comply with the provisions of the village's ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.2. - Scope, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall govern the number, size, location, and character of all signs which may be permitted either as a principal or accessory use under the terms of this article. No signs shall be permitted on a lot as a principal or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  This article does not regulate village signs on property owned by the village, Miami-Dade County or the State of Florida, and does not regulate traffic control devices. 
(3)  In the event of any conflict between this article and any declaration of covenants, bylaws, or other restrictions applying to any property within the village, the language affording the more restrictive interpretation shall apply. 
(4)  The village specifically finds that these sign regulations are narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling and substantial governmental interests of traffic safety and aesthetics, and that there is no other way for the village to further these interests. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  Florida Constitution. Article II, Section 7 of the Florida Constitution provides that "[i]t shall be the policy of the state to conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty. . . ." A beautiful environment preserves and enhances the desirability of the village as a place to live and to do business. Implementing the Florida Constitution is a compelling governmental interest. 
(2)  Florida Statutes. Florida law requires cities to adopt comprehensive plans and implement them through the adoption of land development regulations (also known as zoning regulations) and the approval of development orders that are consistent with the comprehensive plan. See Part II of Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. Florida law specifically requires that the village adopt sign regulations. See Section 163.3202(2)(f), Florida Statutes. Complying with state law is a compelling governmental interest. 
(3)  Village Strategic Plan. The Village of Pinecrest is a highly livable community with an excellent government, stable finances, safe streets, outstanding recreational facilities and infrastructure, a high-quality residential character with lush streetscape, excellent schools, valuable cultural assets, and sustainable operations and living, with leadership which progressively enhances opportunities for citizen interaction and participation. 
(4)  Village comprehensive plan. Located in southern Miami-Dade County, the Village of Pinecrest is home to over 18,400 people and occupies approximately eight square miles of land. The predominant land use, single-family residential, is buffered by a vibrant commercial corridor on the east side of the Pinecrest-Parkway (U.S. 1). Development of the area began in the 1950s and 1960s, as large, ranch style homes on one acre lots were built, establishing the foundation for the lushly landscaped properties that are prominent in the community today. Since its incorporation in 1996, the village has been committed to improving the infrastructure of the community and the quality of life of its residents. With its tree-lined streets, large estate lots, and historical Pinecrest Gardens, the village is recognized as one of the most beautiful and best places in Florida for quality of life. Pinecrest strives to preserve and enhance its beautiful setting and quality of life through the goals, objectives and policies described in the comprehensive development master plan (CDMP). The future land use element of the CDMP identifies the need to promote efficient traffic flow, improve the image and function of commercial development, and promote, reinforce and enhance the village's community appearance. The Transportation element addresses the need to develop a multi-modal system that emphasizes safe and convenient movement of pedestrian and non-motorized and motorized vehicles. The village's comprehensive plan has numerous provisions that require the village to ensure the aesthetic character of the village and ensure traffic safety on roads within the village through the regulation of signs, as set forth in detail below. Implementing the village's comprehensive development master plan is a compelling government interest. Several goals, objectives, and policies of the village's comprehensive plan require the village to maintain its scenic beauty and traffic safety through its land development regulations and actions: 
Goal 1-1: Land Use. The Village of Pinecrest shall maintain and enhance the extraordinary character and quality of land uses within the village by: Advancing the aesthetic, physical, social, cultural, and economic [welfare] of its residents; and protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and preventing threats to health, safety, and welfare which may be caused by incompatible land uses, environmental degradation, hazards, and nuisances. 
Policy 1-1.2.3: Improve the image and function of commercial development along Pinecrest parkway. The land development regulations shall address issues surrounding urban design amenities, including, but not limited to, signage controls, pedestrian amenities, landscaping improvements and other related design features. 
Policy 1-1.3.2: Planning and management framework. The Village of Pinecrest shall maintain land development regulations which regulate land use, density and intensity of development, and nuisance impacts of non-residential development. 
Policy 1-1.3.3: Pursue nuisance abatement standards and criteria. The village land development regulations include performance standards that protect residential areas from nuisance impacts of non-residential development. 
Objective 1-1.7: Promote village appearance, natural amenities and urban design principles. 
Policy 1-1.7.1: Reinforce and Enhance the village's community appearance. Major physical attributes within the village shall be preserved through application of design review standards and management of signs, landscaping, open space preservation, tree protection, and other urban design amenities. 
Policy 1-3.2.2: Comprehensive Plan implementation and land development regulations. The village land development regulations ensure that qualitative and quantitative performance criteria are applied in the development review process to achieve consistency with the comprehensive plan. The village shall require maintenance and continuing adherence to these criteria. The land development regulations shall be enforced and shall be revised as needed in order to: 1) effectively regulate future land use activities and natural resources identified on the future land use map; 2) adequately protect property rights; and 3) implement the goals, objectives, and policies stipulated in the comprehensive plan. The land development regulations shall include a regulatory framework to: 1. Regulate signage; and 2. Ensure safe and convenient on-site and off-site traffic flow and vehicle parking needs and prohibit development within future rights-of-way. 
Policy 1-3.2.5: Performance standards. Performance standards have been incorporated in the land development regulations and reflect best management principles and practices. These standards include balancing and protecting private property rights and the public interest by incorporating legally defensible land use controls. 
Policy 1-3.3.1: Regulatory enforcement activities. Land development regulations and building code compliance activities shall be continued as an integral part of the village's code compliance programs. The code compliance program shall preserve and protect structurally sound land improvements and land uses consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
Policy 1-3.9.8: Urban Design and Community Appearance. Good principles of urban design shall be applied through site plan review procedures in order to enhance general community appearance as well as to preserve and enhance open space and landscape. This program shall assist in protecting major natural and man-made resources within the village. 
Objective 2-1.1: Motorized and Non-Motorized System. Develop an integrated multi-modal transportation system that emphasizes safe and convenient movement of pedestrian and non motorized and motorized vehicles, maximizes efficient use of energy resources, and minimizes emission of greenhouse gases within Pinecrest, through the use of management systems. 
(5)  Caselaw. In accordance with the U.S. Supreme Court's cases on sign regulation, the regulations in this article are not intended to regulate or censor speech based on its content or viewpoint, but rather to regulate the secondary effects of speech that may adversely affect the village's substantial and compelling governmental interests in preserving scenic beauty and community aesthetics, and in vehicular and pedestrian safety in conformance with the First Amendment. These cases and their holdings include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Reed v. Town of Gilbert, U.S. , 135 S. Ct. 2218, 192 L. Ed. 2d 236 (2015) on the topic on noncommercial temporary signs; 
b.  Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981) on the topic of commercial signs and off-premise signs: 
c.  City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U.S. 43 (1994) on the topic of political protest signs in residential areas; 
d.  Linmark Assocs., Inc. v. Township of Willingboro, 431 U.S. 85 (1977) on the topic of real estate signs in residential areas; 
e.  Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992) on the topic of election signs near polling places; 
f.  Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission, 447 U.S. 557 (1980) on the topic of commercial speech; and 
g.  City Council v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789 (1984) on the topic of signs on public property. 
(6)  Impact of sign clutter. Excessive signage and sign clutter impair the legibility of the environment, and undermine the effectiveness of governmental signs, traffic control devices and other required signs (such as noncommercial onsite directional signs and warning signs) that are essential to identifying locations for the delivery of emergency services and other compelling governmental purposes. The intent of these sign regulations is to enhance the visual environment of the village, ensure that village residents and visitors can safely navigate through the village to their intended destinations, and promote the continued well-being of the village. It is therefore the purpose of this article to promote aesthetics and the public health, safety and general welfare, and assure the adequate provision of light and air within the village through reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory standards for the posting, displaying, erection, use, and maintenance of signs that are no more restrictive than necessary to achieve these governmental interests. 
(7)  Specific legislative intent. More specifically, the sign regulations are intended to: 
a.  Classify and categorize signs by type and zoning district. 
b.  Permit, regulate and encourage the use of signs with a scale, graphic character, and type of lighting compatible with buildings and uses in the area, so as to support and complement the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the village's comprehensive development master plan; 
c.  Establish regulations affecting the design, erection and maintenance of signs for the purpose of ensuring equitable means of graphic communication, while maintaining a harmonious and aesthetically pleasing visual environment within the village. It is recognized that signs form an integral part of architectural building and site design and require equal attention in their design, placement and construction; 
d.  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the village; 
e.  Maintain and enhance the scenic beauty of the aesthetic environment and the village's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
f.  Ensure pedestrian safety and traffic safety; 
g.  Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; 
h.  Foster the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; 
i.  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive area of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and are not necessary to aid in wayfinding; 
j.  Allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, while precluding the placement of signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs; 
k.  Encourage and allow signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located consistent with and serving the needs of the land uses, activities and functions to which they pertain; 
l.  Curtail the size and number of signs to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location, and the nature of such use, and to allow smooth navigation to these locations; 
m.  Regulate signs so that they are effective in performing the function of identifying and safely directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic to a destination; 
n.  Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the lot and adjoining lots; 
o.  Regulate signs so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of, or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
p.  Except to the extent expressly preempted by Miami-Dade County, State or Federal law, ensure that signs are constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from unsafe signs; 
q.  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts in the village; 
r.  Allow for traffic control devices without village regulation consistent with national standards because they promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets and highways, and by notifying road users of regulations and providing nationally consistent warnings and guidance needed for the safe, uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream and modes of travel, while regulating private signs to ensure that their size, location and other attributes do not impair the effectiveness of such traffic control devices; 
s.  Protect property values by precluding, to the maximum extent possible, signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; 
t.  Protect property values by ensuring that the size, number and appearance of signs are in harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, structures, and conforming signs in the area; 
u.  Regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the village and that complements the natural surroundings in recognition of this village's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts as a source of economic advantage as an attractive place to live and work; 
v.  Not regulate signs more than necessary to accomplish the compelling and important governmental objectives described herein; 
w.  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations; 
x.  Be considered the maximum standards allowed for signage; 
y.  Regulate signs in a permissive manner so that any sign is not allowed unless expressly permitted and not expressly prohibited; and 
z.  Establish dimensional limits and placement criteria for signs that are legible and proportional to the size of the parcel and structure on which the sign is to be placed, or to which it pertains. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.3. - Interpretation. 
    Only those signs that are specially authorized by this article shall be permitted. Those that are not listed or authorized shall be deemed prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.4. - Permits required. 
(a)  Applications and permits. No sign, unless exempted by this article, shall be erected, constructed, posted, painted, altered, maintained, or relocated, except as provided in this division and until a sign permit and any applicable building permit have been issued by the administrative official. Before any sign permit is issued, an application for such permit shall be filed together with two sets of drawings and/or specifications (one to be returned to the applicant) as may be necessary to fully advise and acquaint the issuing department with the location, method of construction, type of materials, manner of illumination, method of erection, securing or fastening, number and type of signs applied for, and advertisement to be carried. All electrically illuminated signs shall require a separate electric permit and inspection. 
(b)  Consent of property owner. No sign shall be placed on any property unless the applicant has the written consent of the owner and lessee, if any, of the property. 
(c)  Calculating number of signs. A single sign containing advertisement on two sides shall be counted as one sign when the two sides face opposite directions and are not simultaneously visible from any one point. Every other sign shall be counted as a separate sign for each face thereof. Each tenant/owner along the business district may select one design type (wall, projecting or marquee) and seek a permit for an awning sign as provided in this Code. Additional signs may be permitted for large single tenant properties based on the lot frontage dimension as follows: lot frontage 0-75 feet, two signs; 76-150 feet, three signs; and 151 feet or greater, four signs. 
(d)  Calculating sign size. The area of sign shall include borders and framing. Heights shall be measured to the top extremity of the sign and distances to the farthest point. The administrative official shall have the discretion of determining the area of any sign which is irregular in shape and in such cases will be guided by calculations as made by a licensed registered engineer when same are shown on the drawing. 
(e)  Location of signs. All signs must be placed on the owner's property as permitted in this Code. No signs may be placed in areas within five feet of a residential zone, with the exception of those businesses having primary street frontage on a public road. Further, no signs may be placed in the public right-of-way. Any sign found posted or otherwise affixed upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this article shall be removed by the department of public works, public safety department or code compliance staff. The person or entity responsible for any such posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal and disposal thereof, and the village is authorized to collect such cost from the owner or person placing the sign, or the person who is the beneficiary of the sign. 
(f)  Application review. The village shall approve or deny the sign permit application based on whether it complies with the requirements of this article. Such applications shall be first reviewed by the administrative official or his/her designee who shall, within ten business days of the receipt of such application, determine whether the sign permit application is complete. If the application is deemed incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant within ten business days with a letter detailing the information needed to complete the application. Upon resubmission of the application, the village shall have five additional business days to determine whether the applicant's revisions are sufficient to complete the application. If they are not, the village will again inform the applicant of any remaining deficiencies in writing. This process shall continue until the applicant has submitted a complete application, or demands that the application be reviewed "as is." For complete applications, the administrative official or his/her designee shall, within 30 business days of a determination of completeness, issue a sign permit if the application complies with the requirements of this article. If the application does not comply with the requirements of the article, the application shall be returned to the applicant with a letter detailing the requirements that are not satisfied. If the village does not approve the application, then the applicant may seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in Miami-Dade County, as provided by law. 
(g)  Lack of sign permit. Signs erected without a sign permit shall be brought into compliance or removed. If such signs are not brought into compliance or removed following notification by the village, the village shall proceed with enforcement actions as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.5. - Compliance with other codes. 
(a)  Required. All signs shall conform to the requirements of the building, electrical, and other applicable technical codes. 
1.  Signs erected, constructed, posted, painted, altered or relocated without a building permit shall be brought into compliance or removed. If such signs are not brought into compliance or removed following notification by the village, the village shall proceed with enforcement actions as provided herein. 
2.  Signs shall not obstruct driver visibility or normal pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Conflict with zoning rules. No sign shall be erected or used in a manner which would conflict with the regulations for the district in which it is located or be in conflict with the use permitted under the certificate of use or occupancy for the property. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2007-1,  1, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.6. - Qualification and certification of erector. 
    Where the erection of any sign requires compliance with any applicable technical code, the erector of the sign shall qualify with the respective examining board. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.7. - Fee required. 
    No sign, where a sign permit or building permit or both is necessary, shall be exhibited unless the required sign permit and building permit is issued and permit fees are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.8. - Time limitation of sign permits. 
    All signs shall be erected on or before the expiration of 90 days from the date of issuance of the sign permit. If the sign is not erected within said 90 days, the sign permit shall become null and void, and a new sign permit required; provided, however, that the administrative official may extend such sign permit for an additional period of 90 days from the date of the expiration of the sign permit if written application for such extension is received and approved by the administrative office prior to the expiration date of the initial sign permit and provided that the proposed sign complies with all requirements in effect at the date of such renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.9. - Identification of permit holder on sign. 
    Each sign requiring a sign permit shall carry the permit number and the name of the person or firm placing the sign on the premises; such marking shall be permanently attached and clearly visible from the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.10. - Responsibility for sign. 
    The owner or tenant of the premises, and the owner, erector or beneficiary of the sign shall be held responsible for any violation of this article, provided, however, that when the sign has been erected in accordance with this article, a sign company shall be relieved of further responsibility after final approval of the sign by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2007-1,  2, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.11. - Inspection. 
    No sign shall be approved for use, unless the same shall have been inspected by the building and planning department, and no sign shall be erected or used unless it complies with all the requirements of this article and applicable technical codes. The holder of a permit for a sign shall request inspections of a sign as follows: 
(a)  Foundation inspection. This shall include method of fastening to building or other approved structure. 
(b)  Shop inspection. Electrical and/or structural where indicated on the permit and/or approved plan. 
(c)  Final inspection. This shall include structural framing, electrical work identification of permit number and erector of sign, etc. 
(d)  Additional inspections. Any additional inspections, which may be specified on the permit and/or approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.12. - Exempt signs. 
    All signs or sign structures erected or required to be erected on village, county or state government property or by an agency of such government are exempt from regulation as provided in Div. 7.2. The following signs shall be exempt from the sign permit requirements of this article. However, this exemption in no way waives the requirements of the Florida Building Code or the village's adopted engineering standards, any limitation or restriction on the number, size, height, setback, placement or duration of such signs under this article, or any limitation or restriction under any other applicable law or regulation. 
(a)  Private traffic signs, provisional warnings and signs indicating danger, not containing any commercial advertisement. 
(b)  Signs not exceeding 11/2 square feet in area identifying the premises. 
(c)  Flags. 
(d)  Temporary signs as set forth in Div. 7.16. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2007-1,  3, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.13. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  No sign shall be so located as to constitute a danger to public safety. 
(b)  No sign shall exhibit thereon any lewd or lascivious matter. 
(c)  No sign shall be attached to trees, utility poles or any other unapproved supporting structure. 
(d)  Roof signs are prohibited. 
(e)  No signs shall be erected or painted on fence and wall enclosures in residential districts. Fence and wall signs shall be prohibited in the residential district. 
(f)  Blinking or flashing lights, streamer lights, pennants, permanent banners, streamers, and all fluttering, spinning or other type of attention attractors or advertising devices are prohibited. Flags shall not be used in mass primarily as an advertising device in order to circumvent this subsection. 
(g)  No revolving or rotating sign shall be permitted or erected. 
(h)  Signs that may be confused with a traffic control device. Red, green or amber (or any color combination thereof) revolving or flashing light giving the impression of police or caution light is a prohibited sign, whether on a sign or on an independent structure. 
(i)  Portable signs unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(j)  Signs painted or affixed in any manner to any vehicle, trailer or pickup truck, van or similar transportable device and which are used to advertise a place of business or activity as viewed from a public road shall be prohibited. This shall not be interpreted to prohibit identification of commercial vehicles provided such vehicles are operational and moved and used daily for delivery of service purposes and are not used, or intended for use, as portable signs. This sign shall also not be interpreted to apply to buses, taxicabs, and similar common carrier vehicles, which are licensed or certified by the county or other governmental agency. 
(k)  Billboard signs are prohibited. 
(l)  Animated signs that use movement, changeable message, moving message, or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, or emit a sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or vapor or uses variable graphics or video are prohibited. Manual changeable copy signs are not included in this prohibition. 
(m)  Balloons or inflatables used as signs or for advertising purposes are prohibited. 
(n)  Electronic signs are prohibited. 
(o)  Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for any building that would cause a violation of the Building Code are prohibited. 
(p)  Obsolete signs, abandoned signs, or dilapidated signs. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.14. - Illumination. 
    Except as provided in Division 7.16, sign standards and requirements, signs illuminated by flashing, moving, intermittent, chasing or rotating lights are prohibited. Signs may be illuminated by exposed bulbs, fluorescent, tubes, interior lighting, or by indirect lighting from any external source. Indirect lighting, such as floodlights, shall not shine directly on adjacent property, signage, motorists or pedestrians, or illuminate an area greater than the area occupied by the permitted signage. Illumination shall be such that it will provide reasonable illumination and eliminate glare and intensity, which might pose safety hazards to drivers and pedestrians. 
    In order to prevent glare, illuminated signs shall not emit more than 5,000 candelas per square meter (Cd/M 2 ) in full daylight and 100 candelas per square meter (Cd/M 2 ) between dusk and dawn. 
    Illumination of building facades with light emitting diodes (LED) or other "wall washer" or "building wash" lights is prohibited. 
    Awnings and canopies shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.15. - Maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Required. All signs shall be properly maintained in a safe and legible condition at all times. In the event that a use having a sign is discontinued for a period of 45 days, all signs identifying the use are to be removed from the site or in the case of a painted sign, painted out. Sign removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. 
(b)  Latticework, painting, etc. Where the rear of any sign is visible from a street, waterway, park or residence, or from a EU, RU, or BU district, the exposed structural members of such sign shall be either concealed by painted latticework, slats or be suitably painted or decorated, and such back screening shall be designed, painted and maintained to the satisfaction of the administrative official. 
(c)  Cutting weeds. The owner of each sign not attached to a building shall be responsible for keeping the weeds cut on his property within a radius of 50 feet or to the nearest highway or waterway. 
(d)  Removal of dilapidated signs. The administrative official may cause to be removed any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated or where the area around such sign is not maintained as provided herein after due notice has been given. The owner of the sign and/or the property shall be financially responsible for the removal of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.16. - Sign standards and requirements. 
    The following charts indicate the physical standards and requirements applicable to specific sign types and the districts in which they are permitted. 
    Permanent sign types permitted: 
(1)  Awning sign; 
(2)  Detached sign; 
(3)  Marquee sign; 
(4)  Master planned development entrance sign; 
(5)  Non-commercial onsite directional sign; 
(6)  Noncommercial sign; 
(7)  Parking area light standard sign; 
(8)  Projecting sign; and 
(9)  Wall sign. 
    Temporary sign types permitted: 
(1)  Banner sign; 
(2)  Construction/subdivision sign; 
(3)  Real estate sign; 
(4)  Temporary non-commercial sign. 
    The following standards are subject to other applicable technical code requirements: 
(a)  Permanent Signs. 
1.  Awning Sign. 

Awning Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions EU, RU residential districts Not permitted. Shopping centers BU districts RU-5 See conditions One per awning per tenant Seven feet from R.O.W. Illumination permitted; see general provision on illumination N/A 1. One awning sign per awning or tenant at ground level is permitted not to exceed 24 square feet inclusive of any logo in area. 
2.  Individual characters may not exceed eight inches in height. 
3. In the event of multiple street frontages for a tenant, one additional awning sign is permitted. 
4. All three sides of an awning may have a sign provided that there are no hanging or projecting signs.  
2.  Detached sign. 

Detached Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions RU-EU districts Not permitted. Shopping centers Up to 40 square feet for first 50 feet of frontage plus 0.75 square feet for each additional foot of frontage to a maximum sign size of 300 square feet One sign only if shopping center has less than 500 feet of lineal street frontage; a shopping center with 500 or more lineal street frontage is permitted either one 300-square foot sign or two 200-square-foot signs; shopping centers on a corner lot are permitted an additional 40 square-foot sign on a side street Setback for all street r.o.w. is seven feet for a sign not exceeding 40 square feet; thereafter 0.1825 feet of additional setback for each ten square feet of sign (calculated to the nearest one-half foot). Interior side setback shall be as follows: Street frontage/setback: 
0-59 feet - 3.5' 
60-99 feet - 13.5' 
100-199 feet - 33.5' 
200 feet - 63.5' Illumination permitted; see general provision on illumination 30 feet from grade to top of sign Sign shall be used to identify the shopping center and/or as a directory of tenants in the shopping center. The supporting structure of the sign must be attached to the ground by a concrete foundation. BU districts 40 square feet for first 50 feet of initial street frontage plus 0.75 square feet for each additional foot of street frontage to a maximum sign size of 300 square feet See special conditions Setback for all street r.o.w. is seven feet for a sign not exceeding 40 square feet; thereafter 0.1825 feet of additional setback for each 10 square feet of sign (calculated to the nearest one-half foot); maximum required setback need not be greater than 20 feet. Interior side setback shall be as follows: Street frontage/setback: 
0-59 feet - 3.5' 
60-99 feet - 13.5' 
100-199 feet - 33.5' 
200 feet - 63.5' 
Minimum space between detached signs shall be 10 feet. Pole signs erected in connection with service stations may disregard the interior side setbacks, provided that they do not overhang on property of different ownership and the clear distance between the bottom of the sign and the established grade elevation of the property is at least eight feet with service stations. See general provision on illumination 30 feet from grade to top of sign Type and number of point of sale signs permitted for a single individual business on a lot will be based on the following formula: 
Lot frontage: 0-75 feet = no detached signs allowed. 
Lot frontage: 76-150 feet = one detached sign. 
Lot frontage: 151+ feet = one detached sign. 
In addition, a corner lot with minimum dimensions of 300 feet by 300 feet will be allowed two detached signs, provided that the second sign is no greater than one-half the size allowed the first sign and provided the separation between the two signs is a least equal to 50 percent of the total amount of frontage on both streets or roadways Where multiple businesses are located on a given lot, each business use shall be permitted a wall sign only. 
The supporting structure of the sign must be attached to the ground by a concrete foundation.  
3.  Marquee sign. 

Marquee Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions EU-RU-1, RU-2, RU-5 Not permitted. BU districts, RU-3M, RU-4L, RU-4M, RU-4 See conditions One N/A Illumination permitted: see general provision on illumination Sign shall not project above the top of the marquee. For purpose of counting signs each face of marquee shall count as an individual sign. Sign may not exceed five square feet in area per ten linear feet of street frontage. Sign shall not exceed 40 percent of the panel on which the sign is located. A marquee sign shall replace permitted wall signs on the building face where affixed.  
4.  Master-planned development entrance sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions BU, shopping centers 40 sf 1 monument or two wall signs attached to symmetrical entrance features 0' External 8' The base of monument signs must be landscaped. May not be placed in the intersection visibility triangle Residential zones 40 sf 1 monument or two wall signs attached to symmetrical entrance features 0' External 8' The base of monument signs must be landscaped. May not be placed in the intersection visibility triangle  
5.  Non-commercial on-site directional sign. 

Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions BU, shopping centers Three square feet Equal to the number of vehicular access points to the property. Four feet Must be shown and approved on site plans which indicate sign size, location, copy, etc. May not exceed four feet in height above grade. Residential zones Not permitted.  
6.  Noncommercial Sign. 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions All districts Maximum sign area per property* of 6 square feet in the residential districts, and 32 square feet in the nonresidential districts. 
* This signage is in addition to the noncommercial speech available on permitted signs by application of Div. 7.21 Not applicable Five feet from official r.o.w. and five feet from property under different ownership, except for site of use which shall be governed by applicable district regulations. Permitted Not applicable Not applicable  
7.  Parking area light standard sign. 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions Shopping centers Maximum of four square feet per side face Location determined by the administrative official or in his approval of the plat use plan for shopping centers. Signs must observe setback requirements applicable to other detached signs. Signs must be attached to light standards in parking lots and shall not contain any illumination save and except as provided by the overhead electrical lights supported by the standard or pole Minimum of 9 feet from the parking lot paved surface to bottom of sign. No more than 30 feet from parking lot paved surface to top a sign Permitted only in shopping center in BU-1A and more liberal districts. The property of the shopping center and its parking lot area must be under one ownership and abutting and immediately adjacent to one another; the electrical light standard and pole supporting such signs shall be sufficient to support the sign without the possibility of injury to persons and property. PS, public service district Maximum of four square feet per side face Signs must observe setback requirements applicable to other detached signs. Signs must be attached to light standards in parking lots and shall not contain any illumination save and except as provided by the overhead electrical lights supported by the standard or pole Minimum of 9 feet from the parking lot paved surface to bottom of sign. No more than 30 feet from parking lot paved surface to top of sign The property and its parking lot area must be under one ownership and abutting and immediately adjacent to one another; the electrical light standard and pole supporting such signs shall be sufficient to support the sign without the possibility of injury to persons and property. Residential district RU-5 BU Not permitted.  
8.  Projecting sign. 

Projecting Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions EU, RU residential districts 1.5 square feet 1 15 feet from row Five feet interior side See general section on illumination. Lighting permitted must not conflict with adjacent properties or motor vehicles Seven feet to bottom of sign None. BU district 40 square feet One per establishment at ground level N/A Permitted N/A 1. A projecting sign is permitted as a replacement For a wall sign. 
2. Permitted to be double-sided and erected perpendicular to the address street front of the establishment advertised. 
3. Sign may project outward a maximum of three feet and provide a minimum unobstructed clear space of 71/2 feet between grade and bottom of the sign; and signs must be firmly secured or fastened. Shopping Center Not permitted.  
9.  Wall Sign. 

Wall Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions EU-RU Not permitted. RU-5 12 square feet 1 N/A Permitted N/A Sign shall be mounted on wall. BU Total permitted sign area is limited to 10 percent of the area of the wall on which the sign(s) will be placed for a building, which includes the wall and glass area from grade to top of roof. As determined by tenant (see special conditions) N/A Permitted N/A 1. 10 percent of the wall area may be used for one wall sign, or one wall and one or more glass signs for a total not to exceed the maximum of 10 percent of wall area. 
2. Wall sign(s) may be placed on an architectural feature (e.g., a tower) as provided below: 
 (a) Signs identifying the shopping center or tenant(s) in the same building as the feature may be placed on the feature. 
 (b) A tenant located adjacent to an architectural feature may have both a wall sign on their tenant space and a wall sign on the architectural feature provided that the total sign area does not exceed 10 percent of the combined exposed and unobstructed area of the wall and feature on which the sign(s) is placed. 
 (c) If the only sign(s) is located on the feature, then the area of the sign(s) must not exceed 10 percent of the area of the faade of the feature on which the sign is placed. 
3. Sign(s) may be placed only on one wall of a building (or one building wall and one architectural feature wall as provided for in 2 above) except as follows: a) Tenant spaces located at an end of a building and having two facades each facing a different major arterial roadway may have signs on both facades; 
 b) Tenant spaces located at an end of a building and having two facades each facing the same major arterial roadway may have a sign on each facade when either of the facades is obstructed from view from either lane of the adjoining major arterial roadway due to an off-set building orientation. 
4. Signs placed on architectural features shall not be placed at a height greater than 28 feet above grade. PS Total permitted sign area is limited to 36 square feet. Maximum area of any sign is limited to 24 square feet Maximum number of signs permitted = 2 15' from r.o.w. Permitted 20'  
(b)  Temporary Signs. Unless otherwise specified herein, temporary signs may not remain in place for more than ninety (90) days. 
1.  Banner sign. 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions EU, RU residential districts Not permitted. Shopping centers BU, business districts RU-5, office development district 10 percent of the wall area on which the banner is attached 1 N/A Not permitted N/A Regulations. Permits for banner signs shall be obtained from the building and planning department upon submittal of an application and payment of applicable fees. The applicant may submit one application for multiple requests subject to compliance with this division. Banner signs may be permitted as follows 
1. Any banner sign to be displayed shall be subject to the following limitations: 
 a. All locations must obtain or have previously obtained a certificate of use and business tax receipt from the village. 
 b. Banners must be located on the wall of the business and shall be limited in size to ten percent of the wall area of the business to which the sign is attached. 
 c. All banners shall be securely fastened with screws, wire or tie mechanisms so as to prevent them from blowing in the wind or from removal as may be required by the building and planning department. 
 d. Window decorations shall be included in the ten percent of wall area but shall be permitted without time limitations. PS, public service district Maximum dimensions of any banner are limited to 4 x 8 feet N/A - Maximum banner display area on each outward side of a fence facing a public street is limited to 128 square feet. Banner signs may be placed on a diagonal side of a fence facing two intersecting streets in which case the area of signage placed on the diagonal side of the fence shall be substituted for one of the sides adjacent to either one of the two intersecting streets. N/A Not permitted N/A Regulations. Commercial banners are not permitted; recognition of businesses as sponsors of school events, activities and accomplishments on non-commercial banners is allowed provided that the area of the banner devoted to such sponsor recognition is incidental to the area devoted to the primary non-commercial message of the banner, such as, but not limited to, in the following example: 
Display of noncommercial banners shall be subject to compliance with the following restrictions and requirements:1.  Application. Schools and other permitted organizations intending to install noncommercial banner signs within the PS, public service zoning district shall submit an application and sign plan that accurately identifies the proposed area or areas designated and reserved for the display of banner signs for a permit that complies with the requirements of this code. A "no fee" permit shall be issued by the village for the display of such banner signs following review and approval of the submitted application and sign plan.2.  Size and Location. Banners shall be placed only on portions of the applicant's fence which have street frontage. The maximum vertical dimension of any display area shall be limited to four (4) feet. Banners shall have grommets in all four (4) corners and midway along the top and the bottom sides. All banners shall be maintained in good condition and securely affixed to the fence. Torn, faded or defaced banners must be removed or replaced in a timely manner. All signs on any fence shall be displayed contiguously.3. Banners shall be allowed to be displayed on a year-round basis. Display of any banner shall be limited to 90 consecutive days.  
2.  Construction/subdivision sign. 

Construction/Subdivision Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions Nonresidential districts 32 square feet One 15 feet from official r.o.w. 15 feet to property under different ownership or centered between interior property lines Not permitted Eight feet 1. One sign per project, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height above existing grade. 
2.  No construction sign shall be posted until a building permit for construction of the project has been issued and it shall be removed when the certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or certificate of completion is issued or the date that the building permit expires, whichever occurs earlier. Residential districts 6 square feet One 15 feet from official r.o.w. 15 feet to property under different ownership or centered between interior property lines Not permitted 1. One sign per project, not to exceed 6 square fee in area and eight feet in height above existing grade. 
2. No construction sign shall be posted until a building permit for the construction of the project ha been issued and shall be removed when the certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or certificate of completion is issued or the date that the building permit expires, whichever occurs earlier.  
3.  Real estate. 

Real Estate Sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions Nonresidential districts 32 square feet max 1, plus 1 additional sign may be installed only when the premises are available for inspection by the prospective buyer or tenant without an appointment. Said additional sign shall not be larger than two feet by two feet. 5 feet from official r.o.w. line unless attached to an existing building or sign 15 feet to an interior side property line or centered on a lot between interior side property lines Not permitted Eight feet measured from grade to top of sign. No permit required for signs that are no larger than six square feet and which are not electrically illuminated. Renewal of permit shall be contingent upon the applicant providing proof of vacancy. Signs shall be removed within three days of closing or the signing of the lease agreement. The attachment of balloons, streamers, flags, or other attention attracting devices is prohibited. All residential districts 6 square feet 1 plus 1 additional sign may be installed only when the premises are available for inspection by the prospective buyer or tenant without an appointment. Said additional sign shall not be larger than two feet by two feet. Two additional signs of the same size may be installed off-site during the same time period. Five feet from official r.o.w. line unless attached to an existing building 15 feet to an interior side property line or centered on a lot between interior side property lines Not permitted Eight feet measured From grade to top of sign. No permit is required for an on-premise sign that is no larger than 6 square feet. Real estate signs shall be removed within three days of the closing or the signing of the lease agreement. The attachment of balloons, streamers, flags, or other attention attracting devices is prohibited.  
4.  Temporary non-commercial signs. 

Temporary non-commercial sign 
Zoning District 
or Location 
Permitted Size Number Setback 
and Spacing Illumination Maximum 
Height Special Conditions All districts Maximum sign area per property of 6 square feet in the residential districts, and 32 square feet in the nonresidential districts. Five Feet from official r.o.w. and five feet from property under different ownership, except for site of use which shall be governed by applicable district regulations. Not permitted Not applicable Temporary non-commercial signage shall be allowed for a total of no more than 90 days per calendar year.  
  
(Ord. No. 200-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2007-1,  4, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2012-17,  2, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18; Ord. No. 2018-7,  2, 7-17-18) 
Div. 7.17. - Flag display standards. 
(a)  Location and maximum height. Except as otherwise provided herein, flags shall be displayed on flag poles. Such poles in nonresidential zoning districts shall not exceed the allowed height of the zoning district or 45 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles may not be placed on top of buildings or light poles. Flagpoles in residential zoning districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
(b)  Maximum number and size. 
1.  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flag pole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 50 percent of the vertical height of the pole. In addition, flags are subject to the following dimensional limitations: 
Pole Height Maximum Flag Size Up to 25 feet 24 total square feet 25 to 39 feet 40 total square feet 40 to 45 feet 60 total square feet  
2.  Each property shall be allowed only one flag pole. A maximum of three flags shall be allowed. References to a flagpole height in this subsection refer to vertical flagpoles. References to the number of flags and flag poles and flag dimensions refer to both vertical flagpoles and mast-arm flagpoles (for example, staff extending at an angle from a building). 
(c)  Setback. A vertical flag pole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance that is at least equal to the height of the pole. 
(d)  Condition of flag and pole or other permanent mounting. The flag and flag pole or other permanent mounting shall be maintained in good repair. Flag poles with broken halyards shall not be used, and torn or frayed flags shall not be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.18. - Penalty; injunctive remedy. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 in the discretion of the county court or special magistrate. Each day's violation shall be considered a separate violation. Any continuing violations of the provisions of this article may be enjoined and restrained by injunctive order of the circuit court in appropriate proceedings instituted for such purpose, or enforced by any other means legally available to the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.19. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All nonconforming signs must be brought into compliance with all current applicable regulations or must be removed within five years from the date of formal notification of non-conforming status by the village. The village shall provide, by certified mail to all property owners whose property contains a nonconforming sign, a notification of the nonconforming status following direction by the village council. Such notification shall clearly state the reasons for the nonconforming status and shall further indicate that a waiver or extension of the provisions of this paragraph may be requested under the variance procedures set forth in this Code. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign must be maintained. Routine maintenance and repair will not result in the loss of nonconforming status. In the case of nonconforming detached sign, a change of copy is permitted, provided, however, that the provisions specified in (c) and (d) below are not applicable. 
(c)  The structural elements of a nonconforming sign may not be altered, reconstructed, expanded, or enlarged. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign must be replaced or made to comply with the provisions of these regulations immediately, if one of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  If the sign is removed from a wall or faade of a building in order to renovate, enlarge, and/or structurally alter such faade or wall. 
(2)  If the sign is located on a building which is undergoing major reconstruction, renovation, or redevelopment. A major reconstruction renovation or redevelopment project is defined for the purposes of this division, as construction work equivalent to 40 percent or more of the assessed value of the building, as listed in the public records of the county property appraiser's office. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.20 - Severability. 
(a)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the final and valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, this declaration of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article. 
(b)  Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a) of this section, or elsewhere in this article, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(c)  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a) of this section, or elsewhere in this article, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or any other law is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign types prohibited and not allowed under Div. 7-13. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of Div. 7-13 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of Div. 7-13. 
(d)  Severability of prohibition on billboards. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article and/or any other code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on billboards as contained in Div. 7.13(k). 
(Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
Div. 7.21. - Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech; content-neutrality as to sign message. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, any sign permitted by this Code may be permitted to substitute or change the lettering on said sign face to convey any noncommercial message as often as the person owning or in control of the sign wishes, provided that all other criteria of this Code relating to design criteria, size, setbacks, etc., are satisfied. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based solely upon the content of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-5,  2, 5-10-16) 
ARTICLE 8. - PLATTING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions, div. 9.2. 

Div. 8.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article (platting regulations) is to assist implementation of the comprehensive development master plan by establishing procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of land within the village, in an effort to, among other things: 
1.  Provide proper legal description identification, installation of monuments and recording of real estate boundaries; 
2.  Aid in the coordination of land development in the village in accordance with orderly physical patterns; 
3.  Discourage haphazard, premature uneconomic or scattered land development; 
4.  Provide safe and convenient traffic control; 
5.  Encourage development of an economically stable and healthful community; 
6.  Develop adequate utilities; 
7.  Alleviate impacts of periodic and seasonal flooding by providing protective flood control and drainage facilities; 
8.  Protect environmentally sensitive areas; 
9.  Provide for management or protection of water resources, provide public open spaces for recreation; 
10.  Require the installation of adequate and necessary physical improvements, and provide that the purchaser of land in a subdivision has access to necessary improvements of lasting quality; 
11.  Avoid impacts and costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land and the lack of authority to require installation by the applicant of adequate and necessary physical improvements; 
12.  Require development in keeping with the topography and other site conditions; 
13.  Encourage aesthetically acceptable development; and 
14.  Protect privacy. 
(b)  Conformance required. No subdivision of a tract of land anywhere in the incorporated area of the village shall be created except in conformance with the comprehensive development master plan and land development code. No subdivision shall be platted or recorded and no lot shall be sold from such plat nor shall any building permit be issued unless the subdivision meets all the applicable laws of the state and has been approved in accordance with the requirements of these platting regulations. 
(c)  Subdivisions and lot splits. All future subdivisions and lot splits within the village shall be subject to these platting regulations, except the following: 
1.  The public acquisition of strips of land for the widening of existing streets; 
2.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where no new parcels or residual parcels smaller than any of the original lots are created; 
3.  The transference of part of one lot or tract to an adjacent lot or tract provided the transference results in a lot or tract that meets all of the minimum standards of these platting regulations. 
(d)  Recording of plats or lot splits. no final plat of any subdivision, lot split or other change in lot lines or boundaries intended to define land configuration shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court of the county until the subdivision, lot split or other change shall have been duly approved by the village as prescribed herein. Any such plat, lot split, or other record of change in land configuration must clearly display a written certification demonstrating village approval prior to being recorded. 
(e)  Revising plat after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of subdivision after approval has been given, unless the plat is re-submitted for a review and approval pursuant to these platting regulations. 
(f)  Unlawful sale or transfer of property. It shall be unlawful for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land in the village to transfer, sell, agree to sell, convey, or negotiate to sell such land by reference to, exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without having recorded an approved subdivision plat as required herein. If such unlawful use is made of a plat before it is properly approved and recorded, the owner or agent of the owner of such land shall be punished as provided for in the Village Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Building permits subject to final plat approval and recording. No building permit shall be issued nor shall any village services be rendered until a final plat for such impacted land has been approved and recorded pursuant to these platting regulations. 
(h)  Creation of subdivision by joint owners of land. Where it may subsequently become evident that a subdivision is being created by the recording of deeds by metes and bounds description of tracts of land, the village may, at its discretion, require all the owners involved to jointly file a plat of the subdivision being so created or require all owners of record to jointly conform to the applicable provisions of these platting regulations as are requisite for the issuance of building permits or the furnishing of any Village service. 
(i)  Effect on previously platted subdivisions. These platting regulations shall not apply to any land forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to November 27, 2000, but it shall apply to any re-subdividing of each prior subdivision and any subsequent subdivision. 
(j)  Effect on active subdivision development. Developments which have received preliminary plat approval prior to November 27, 2000 and recorded by December 31, 2001, shall be exempt from the requirements of these platting regulations. Developments not having received preliminary plat approval shall be subject these platting regulations. 
(k)  Relationship of deeds, covenants, and other private restrictions to the regulations for the subdivision of land. It is not intended by the provisions of these platting regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way, impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by a covenant, or private agreement, except that where these platting regulations impose higher standards than imposed by such deeds, covenants, or private agreements, then the provisions of these platting regulations shall apply. The village shall not be responsible for enforcement of such deeds, covenants, or agreements. 
(l)  Disapproval of plat. Upon disapproval of any plat, the village council shall indicate those sections, subsections, and/or paragraphs of these platting regulations with which the plan does not comply. 
(m)  Vested rights. Any property owner claiming a vested right to obtain action upon or approval of a preliminary plat or waiver to these platting regulations may submit an application for a determination of vested rights to the administrative official. The application shall be in a form determined by the village and shall have attached an affidavit setting forth the facts upon which the applicant bases a claim for vested rights. The applicant shall also attach copies of any contracts, letters and other documents upon which a claim of vested rights is based. The mere existence of a specific zoning district or future land use map designation shall not vest rights. The village attorney shall review the application and shall advise the village council if the applicant has demonstrated: 
1.  An act of development approval by the village; 
2.  Upon which the applicant has in good faith relied to his detriment; 
3.  Such that it would be highly inequitable to deny the landowner the right to obtain action on or approval of a preliminary plat. 
The council shall render a determination of vested rights pursuant to duly adopted procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.2. - Required improvements and design criteria. 
(a)  Generally. The following improvements are required in conjunction with the development of a subdivision within the village. A state registered professional engineer shall be employed to design all required improvements including streets, drainage structures, bridges, bulkheads, and water and sewer facilities. Design data, such as calculations and analysis, shall be submitted along with the development plans covering important features affecting design and important features of construction. Such calculations and analysis shall include, but not be limited to, high ground and surface water elevations, drainage facilities of all kinds, subsurface soil data, utilities, alternate pavement and subgrade types, and radii at intersections when standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) are inadequate. The design of required improvements shall be accomplished in such a manner that they shall be equal to or exceed those outlined in these platting regulations. The required improvements shall be completed prior to recording the plat in the manner prescribed in these platting regulations or the applicant shall submit to the village a guarantee in one of the forms prescribed by these platting regulations to assure the required improvements. 
(b)  Access. Ingress, egress, and access management shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  General design of access. Access shall be provided as follows: 
a.  In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to private property and the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets classified major collector and above, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated by the dedication of access rights to the village. 
b.  Street stubs to adjoining undeveloped areas shall be provided when required to give access to such areas or to provide for proper traffic circulation. Street stubs shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround. 
c.  Tapers, deceleration lanes, left-turn lanes, bypass lanes, median modifications or other design features may be required to protect the safe and efficient operation of the access street. 
d.  Every lot or parcel shall be served from a publicly dedicated street; however, an applicant may retain as private a local street if the following conditions are met: 1) Public right-of-way is not required in order to serve adjacent development that is existing or projected; 2) A permanent access easement is granted for service and emergency vehicles and for maintenance of public and semipublic utilities; and 3) A reciprocal easement for ingress and egress is granted all residents of the development. 
e.  Reserve strips restricting access to streets or alleys shall not be permitted. 
2.  Specific access design. Minimum dimensions between the edge of intersections to the edge of points of access (driveways) to lots developed within a subdivision shall be located as follows: 
TABLE 8-1 
Control Device Local Collector Arterial Stop sign 50 75 115 Signalization 50 175 230  
Note: These standards are consistent with FDOT Rule #14-97, State Highway System Access Management Classification System and Standards, which dictate the location of access to state facilities. 
The subdivision shall be designed to provide access to the lots by the use of local streets. A secondary means of access shall also be provided to all subdivisions for use by emergency vehicles. Local street connections to collector streets shall be a minimum of 660 feet apart and collector street connections to arterial streets shall be a minimum of 1320 feet apart. Where access is desired along collector or arterial streets, it shall be provided by means of a marginal access road. The first point of access to the marginal access (frontage) road from collector and arterial streets shall be a minimum of 330 feet from intersection right-of-way lines as shown on the comprehensive development master plan future traffic circulation map series, with intermittent points at median opening locations being a minimum of 660 feet from intersecting right-of way lines, unless otherwise approved by the administrative official. Access spacing of lesser lengths may be granted if requested by the applicant and if approved by the administrative official. 
3.  Nonresidential driveways and internal circulation. 
a.  Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property and vehicles located within one portion of the development must have access to all other portions without using the adjacent street system. 
b.  Acceptable plans must illustrate that proper consideration has been given to the surrounding street plan, traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular street capacities, pedestrian movements, and safety. 
c.  No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
4.  Service drives. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a limited access highway right-of-way, or arterial street, the village council may require a service drive or require the provision of future service drives approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial purposes in appropriate districts. Distances involving right-of-way shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(c)  Alleys. Alleys shall be required along rear lot lines of commercial subdivisions and shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts. No dead-end alley shall be permitted. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided and dead end alleys are prohibited. Fire lanes shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet. 
(d)  Blocks. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; 
3.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
4.  Most advantageous use of topography and preservation of mature trees and other material features wherever possible. 
a.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1500 feet in length between intersecting streets no shorter than 400 feet. 
b.  Where blocks are 900 feet in length or greater, a pedestrian crosswalk at least ten feet wide may be required to provide circulation or access to school, playground, shopping center, transportation, and other community facilities. In platting residential lots containing less than 12,000 square feet, the depth of the block should not exceed 250 feet. 
(e)  Culverts. Culverts shall be of such size to provide adequate drainage opening and sufficient length to extend eight feet on each side beyond the edge of the pavement of the street. 
(f)  Buffers, including berms, fences and landscaping. Screening such as fences, berms and other landscaping shall be required as follows: 
1.  Visual screening between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses or land use districts including, but not limited to, single-family residential development adjacent to multiple family or nonresidential structures. 
2.  Open space distances between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses or land use districts, especially when building heights vary or noises are identified as potential problems. 
3.  Movement barriers to prevent direct driveway cuts onto collector or arterial streets. 
4.  Screening consistent with provisions of this land development code shall be required on lot lines which border collector or arterial streets. The plat and planned improvements shall comply with such standards. Masonry walls or suitable alternatives shall be provided when noise from adjacent streets is, or is judged to be, a potential future problem. Suitable screening may be required between lots, especially commercial industrial, or offices, and adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses. A long collector or arterial roads may be used instead of a masonry fence, if noise from the road will not adversely affect the proposed use. Buffer zones may be required between adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses, especially where problems with building heights, noise, or scenic impairment might be a problem. 
5.  Where a buffer screen of decorative masonry, plant materials, fences or berms is required or where desired by the applicant and approved by the village, such walls, vegetative materials or fences shall be set back at least one foot from the right-of-way. Pilasters or fence terminal anchor posts shall be installed at the corners of each lot in such manner that each property owner might maintain his own section, or provisions shall be made to have them maintained by a community association or other appropriate private entity. 
(g)  Central water system. A complete water distribution system connected to the central water system shall be provided for all new subdivisions. The design of the entire system shall be engineered and coordinated with the county water and sewer department to comply with the department's adopted design standards as well as applicable policies and standards of the state department of environmental protection. The central water system shall include fire flow and other system improvements required to achieve compliance with the adopted fire protection codes and applicable standards prescribed and published by the National Fire Protection Association, as exists or may hereinafter be amended. Concurrency management criteria of the land development code must be met. The following are general requirements for central water systems: 
1.  Water supply. The central water system shall connect to the county water and sewer department water system. 
2.  Distribution system. The distribution system shall provide connections to each individual lot, to each public facility, to all required fire hydrants and fire protection systems and to median strips for irrigation where landscaped unless the median strips are irrigated by a separate system Water mains shall be required in each street right-of-way and shall be looped except in cul-de-sacs less than 300 feet long and at cross streets not requiring service connections. Plans for the central water system, including fire protection facilities and appurtenances, shall be submitted to the county water and sewer department as well as the administrative official and fire marshal, for review and approval. New water systems shall be designed and constructed for an economic life of not less than 20 years. 
(h)  Central collection wastewater disposal systems. New subdivisions shall be required to connect to a central wastewater system where connections are reasonably available. Design and construction specifications shall comply with the county water and sewer department policies and shall meet adopted level of service standards of the comprehensive development master plan, including the concurrency management regulations established in the land development code. 
1.  General requirements. The central wastewater system shall be designed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, conforming to acceptable standards of sound practices for wastewater collection systems, and must be engineered and coordinated with the comprehensive development master plan. The appurtenances to the system shall be equal to or shall exceed the minimum requirements of the village and applicable state statutes. New sewer systems shall be designed and constructed for an economic life of not less than 20 years. 
2.  Submittal requirements. Upon submittal of construction plans for a central system as prescribed by these platting regulations, the design engineer shall supply data, calculations and analysis showing important features affecting design, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Number of units, bedrooms, and other domestic wastewater generators. 
b.  The type of units and expected population or estimated flow of wastewater from any unit designed for use. 
c.  The number of proposed equivalent residential connections (ERC) to the system and the anticipated flow of sewage to the wastewater treatment plant computed in accordance with current criteria. 
d.  Any other meaningful information necessary to arrive at estimates of amounts and character of wastewater pertinent to the design. 
(i)  Individual wastewater disposal system. Individual wastewater systems consisting of pipes, tanks or treatment devices and subsurface absorption fields or other devices may be permitted upon approval by the county director of environmental resources management and shall be in accordance with all county and state regulations. All such systems, including septic tanks shall be installed in compliance with all of the requirements, specifications and standards of the county and the state, and shall be designed and located to facilitate a convenient and economical connection to a future central sewage system. Individual systems shall not be allowed where connection to the central wastewater system is feasible, as determined by the village. 
(j)  Curbs. Curbs or combined curbs and gutters may be constructed along all streets, if required by the administrative official. 
(k)  Easements. Utility easements including water, sewer, electric, telephone, gas and drainage shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Applicants are encouraged to install utilities in the public right-of-way. Easements for utilities along rear lot lines and, where deemed necessary, along side lot lines, of a minimum width of eight feet shall be provided as required for proposed utility installation, maintenance, or as may be required. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots, where necessary, for the extension of main sewer or other utilities or where multiple utilities and water and sewer lines are located within the same easement. Side lot easements may be decreased to ten feet when serving a single electric or telephone utility. 
2.  A drainage easement shall be provided when necessary. This easement shall be of sufficient width to provide adequately for watercourses, drainage ways, channels, pipes, culverts, or streams, and access to permit maintenance of the drainage easement. The drainage easement or right-of-way shall conform substantially to the alignment of such watercourse and the design of the drainage easement and improvements shall be consistent with best management practices and principles. 
3.  Swales shall be permitted within subdivisions; storm sewers shall be covered and open ditches permitted across undeveloped land only as an outlet into an established watercourse. This provision is subject, however, to the following: 
a.  The current requirements of the state department of environmental protection regulations and South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD). 
b.  Submission of acceptable hydraulic calculations. 
c.  Approval of the administrative official. 
d.  Approval of the state department of environmental protection and SFWMD. 
4.  Access to overhead electrical and utility line easements shall be provided and maintained where practical, by means of a gate or other practical means of access, subject to review and approval of the administrative official. 
(l)  Environmental considerations. All environmental performance standards of article 6 of the land development code shall be satisfied, including but not limited to: preservation of natural resources; preservation of wetlands; species of special concern; soil erosion, sedimentation control; and shoreline protection; freshwater lens protection; preservation of wildlife habitats and protection of upland vegetative communities and endangered or threatened flora and fauna; land use and soil compatibility, and floodplain protection. 
1.  Fill. The subdivision shall be graded and, where necessary, filled to comply with the surface water management requirements prescribed in article 6 of the land development code. The fill shall be free of muck, peat clay, unstable soils, organic matter such as logs, stumps, trees, clippings and cuttings and any form of junk, rubbish, trash, liquid or solid wastes, any form of debris that is subject to consolidation, disintegration, erosion or encourages the presence of insects, termites, or vermin. The type of fill within the rights-of-way shall be satisfactory to and meet with the approval of the administrative official, who shall require soil tests of the backfill and the underlying material at the cost of the applicant and who shall require the development's project engineer to certify the type of material and method of placement. 
2.  Soils. The plan shall show the location and results of test borings of the subsurface condition of the tract to be developed. The tests shall be the type performed by the soil conservation service including percolation characteristics and detailed soils data. When non-pervious soils (hard pan or other impervious soils) or unstable (peat muck, etc.) are encountered, the plan shall reflect a satisfactory design to cope with such conditions. If the soil analysis reflects that the area contains impervious soils or contains peat, muck or other unstable materials, the administrative official shall require such additional design and construction as are necessary to assure proper drainage and development of the area. The administrative official may also require environmental audits. The number of tests and their location shall be mutually determined by the applicant's engineer and the administrative official and shall be recorded as to location and result on the construction plans. Land which is subject to periodic flooding or which has unsuitable soil conditions shall not be subdivided until all water and soil hazards have been reasonably eliminated in relation to the purpose for which the land is to be used. 
3.  Erosion control. Seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or other acceptable methods shall be performed as required to prevent undue erosion during all construction activities. Erosion, sedimentation control and shoreline protection measures required by article 6 of the land development code shall be planned out as applicable. The applicant shall be required to keep accumulations of sand and earth out of the curb, gutter, swales, and drainage ditches. Temporary siltation basins may be required during construction. The applicant shall provide maintenance for the two-year period of the road guarantee and for each lot until final inspection is passed. 
4.  Land clearing and excavation. Land clearing, excavation, and fill permits shall be obtained from the administrative official or other designated staff prior to commencement of clearing, grading or filling work. Similarly, all requisite permits from the county, state, SFWMD, or the federal government shall be obtained and presented to the village prior to commencement of any clearing, filling or excavation. Applicants shall be required to clear all rights-of-way and to plan and construct all grades, for streets, alleys, lots and other areas, in a manner which is consistent and compatible with all performance criteria of the land development code. In the interest of preserving existing trees and other natural beauty, the council or designated staff may vary the requirements of these platting regulations where aesthetic and environmental conditions will be enhanced but will not adversely affect property drainage of the area. 
5.  Shoreline protection. Improvements installed along the shoreline shall require a permit issued by the administrative official. Bulkheads shall not be constructed below the ordinary high water line unless permitted by the controlling federal or state agency. Any such plans and improvements shall require site plan approval and all environmental performance criteria in article 6 of the land development code including, but not limited to, preservation of wetlands; and other environmentally sensitive areas; soil erosion, sedimentation control, and shoreline protection preservation of wildlife habitats and other related performance criteria. No development order shall be approved until appropriate federal and state permits are issued. 
(m)  Fire protection facilities. The fire protection facilities described below shall be provided in all subdivisions: 
1.  Fire hydrant location. Fire hydrants in single-family residential district shall be located so that they are spaced no more than 300 feet apart and no more than 150 feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision. In all other districts, fire hydrants shall be located so that they are spaced no more than 300 feet apart and no more than 150 feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be connected to or supplied by water distribution mains not less than eight inches in diameter, unless a larger main is required by the fire department. 
2.  Fire hydrant cut-off valve. A cut-off valve with the top of its valve box located at finished grade to house the valve stem shall be installed between each fire hydrant and the distribution main supplying it with water. At all times the cut-off valve shall remain in the "ON" position except when it is used to cut off the water flow to the fire hydrant for repair or replacement of the hydrant and its branch piping. 
3.  Fire hydrant installation. Fire hydrants shall be installed so that the elevation of the bottom of hose connection outlets shall be not less than 12 inches above finished grade at each hydrant. Finished grade shall be level for a radius of not less than five feet around each hydrant. 
4.  Water distribution mains installation. Water distribution mains shall be installed in all streets, except cross-streets not requiring service connections and cul-de-sacs less than 300 feet long. Water distribution mains shall be looped or interconnected with valves to enable localizing any portion of the distribution system except for short branches supplying not more than five lots. 
5.  Storage capacity/emergency pumping. Sufficient storage or emergency pumping facilities shall be provided to an extent that the minimum fire flows will be maintained for at least four hours at 20 PSI. 
(n)  Commercial subdivisions. Commercial subdivisions shall comply with all of the requirements of these platting regulations, except that all local streets shall be designed according to the collector street typical section contained in these regulations. 
(o)  Lots. All lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a street at the right-of-way line and a minimum area, frontage, width and depth complying with the applicable zoning district regulations. Lots shall be graded to at least four feet above mean sea level. The minimum width of a lot fronting on the inside of curvature of a street or cul-de-sac shall be measured from side boundary to side boundary along the chord of the front setback line. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are to be retained, lots are to be designed so as not to cause said structures to become nonconforming with respect to building area or lot size. Access from individual lots generally should not be permitted directly to collector or arterial streets. Flag lots shall be expressly prohibited. The entire parent tract being subdivided shall be placed in lots, streets, and other usable tracts so that remnants and other landlocked areas shall not be created. No lot shall be divided by a municipal boundary. 
1.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. A decorative masonry wall or, in the sole discretion of the village council, a combination of fence and landscaping shall be provided and shall include a satisfactory buffer along the rear property line, across which there shall be no right of vehicular access. This portion of the lot line shall be shown as a limited access line on the final plat. The required front yard shall be provided on each street on double frontage or through lots. 
2.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width equal to the width required by this land development code for internal lots, plus the difference between the required front yard width and required side yard width. 
3.  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at substantially right angles or radial to street lines. 
(p)  Walls and screening. In order to prevent graffiti vandalism, the following options shall be utilized for walls abutting zoned or dedicated right-of-way: 
1.  Walls and landscaping. The wall shall be setback 21/2 feet from the right-of-way line and the resulting setback area shall contain a continuous extensively landscaped buffer, which must be maintained in a good healthy condition by the property owner, or where applicable, by the homeowners, condominium or other maintenance association. The landscape buffer shall contain one or more of the following vegetative materials: 
a.  Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height when measured immediately after planting and shall be planted and maintained to form a continuous, unbroken solid, visual screen within one year after time of planting. 
b.  Hedges. Hedges shall be a minimum of three feet in height when measured immediately after planting and shall be planted and maintained to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within one year after time of planting. 
c.  Vines. Climbing vines shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height immediately after planting. 
2.  Walls with anti-graffiti paint. A concrete block stucco wall may be placed on the property line and shall be treated with anti-graffiti paint. 
(q)  Median strips and entranceways. 
1.  Median strips. Median strips, which are part of a dedicated or deeded right-of-way, may not be utilized for any purpose other than by the village or a public utility. Where an applicant desires or is required to beautify a median strip in a subdivision he may do so by placing grass, shrubs, and/or approved species of trees within the median strip in accordance with the landscape ordinance and the Village Code of Ordinances. 
2.  Subdivision entranceways. Subdivision entranceways consisting of wall fences, gates, rock piles or the like are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a dedicated or deeded right-of-way. Entranceways, if divided, shall be divided by a raised or landscaped median strip and shall be not less than two lanes each 12 or more feet wide. Decorative entranceways shall be constructed upon plots of land adjacent to the right-of-way in compliance with the land development regulations and building codes and placed so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. A guardhouse located so as not to create a traffic hazard may be constructed at the entrance to a development having private streets. Where an applicant is specifically permitted by the village to construct decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping within the right-of-way of any street the applicant or community homeowner association shall provide an adequate bond to guarantee maintenance for a specified period and to provide for removal for such structures and for landscaping at the end of such period on order by the village for cause. The village shall not accept any liability or responsibility for maintenance for decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping in rights-of-way. Such improvements shall be designed in such a manner so as to not obstruct desirable visibility or restrict turning movements. 
(r)  Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in accordance with division 5.22, off-street parking, including provisions for ingress, egress, vehicular and pedestrian movement, and orderly temporary storage of motor vehicles. Parking areas including spaces, driveways, and access aisles shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Parking areas for all residential lots and for commercial lots having an area of 15,000 square feet or less shall have a wearing surface of one inch of type SI or type R asphalt or concrete laid over a base not less than six inches thick, free of muck and organic materials, and stabilized to a minimum 50 psi. 
2.  Nonresidential parking areas for lots with areas greater than 5,000 square feet shall be paved in the same manner as a local street. 
3.  Drainage shall comply with the adopted level of service standard in division 5.21, concurrency management. 
(s)  Permanent survey monuments. 
1.  Permanent monuments of stone or concrete shall be placed at all block corners or at tangent points of curves connecting intersection street lines; at the point of curvature and tangency; at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision except at such corners which are inaccessible due to topography; and at such other points as may be designated by the village council. Such monuments shall be set flush with the surface of the ground or finished grade. 
2.  Monuments shall be of pre-cast concrete two feet in length and three inches square, or four inches in diameter, having a metal dowel imbedded therein. 
(t)  Sidewalks and bicycle paths. Concrete sidewalks of a minimum width of five feet shall be constructed along both sides of all streets, if required by the administrative official, or alternatively, a fee shall be paid as required by the village's fee schedule for construction of pedestrian sidewalks prior to the commencement of construction of public improvements within the approved subdivision. Sidewalks shall be constructed with other required improvements and shall meet local sidewalk construction requirements. The construction of bicycle/pedestrian paths may be used to waive required sidewalks by the village council as a form of pedestrian circulation. Such paths shall be a dual system consisting of sidewalks within the road right-of-way and bicycle/pedestrian paths outside of the road right-of-way with a minimum width of eight feet. Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be constructed according the FDOT Bicycle Facilities Planning and Design Manual. Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be constructed concurrently with other required improvements. The control and maintenance obligation of bicycle/pedestrian paths not located within the road right-of-way shall be placed in a property owner's association, condominium association or cooperative apartment association, as defined by the state law, or an improvement district. 
(u)  Stormwater management. All subdivisions shall have an adequate comprehensive storm water management system compliant with the article 6 of the land development code. Necessary ditches, canals, swales, percolation areas, berms, dikes, piers, detention ponds, storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, headwalls, end walls, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions for the positive drainage of stormwater. In addition, storm water treatment facilities shall be required in the subdivision to control storm water runoff quality by providing for on-site percolation and/or retention or other appropriate treatment technique for stormwater. The applicant's engineer shall submit design data of the drainage system shall be submitted along with the construction plans in a report form indicating the method of control of storm and ground water. 
(v)  Streets. All streets and related facilities required to serve the proposed subdivision shall be constructed and paved by the applicant pursuant to specifications herein. The construction shall consist of, but not be limited to, street grading, sub-grading stabilization, base preparation and surface course along with drainage as required under this article. All roadway improvements shall comply with concurrency management provisions of division 5.21. 
1.  Street layout. The proposed subdivision street layout shall be coordinated with the adopted comprehensive development master plan or as may hereinafter be amended, and with the street system of the surrounding area. Consideration shall be given to existing and planned streets, relation to topographical conditions, to public convenience, safety and their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Costs of paving streets. The village council shall pay no part of the cost of paving in any undeveloped subdivision. Where access streets to a subdivision are not adequately paved to handle the anticipated traffic, the developer shall arrange for paving the access streets with the village prior to acceptance of the final plat by the developer. All paving installed in and adjacent to these subdivisions shall be at the entire cost of the applicant and shall be pursuant to the sections of these platting regulations. 
3.  Streets adjoining unsubdivided land. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, new streets which in the opinion of the council are required to serve the abutting unsubdivided land, shall be appropriately designed to carry projected traffic and shall extended to the boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided. 
4.  Local streets. All local streets shall be designed in a manner that will discourage through traffic. 
5.  Impact of future traffic circulation map series. The new subdivision shall provide for the incorporation and compatible development of present and future streets as generally delineated on the future traffic circulation map series adopted by the comprehensive development master plan, when such present or future streets are affected by the proposed subdivision. Notwithstanding, where the village council determines that there is a need for incorporating a new or realigned street based on characteristics of specific development proposals as well as changed conditions since the adoption of the comprehensive development master plan, the village shall require subdivision applicants to conform to the newly prescribed road improvement. 
6.  Traffic analysis. A subdivision preliminary plat shall include preparation of a traffic impact analysis pursuant to division 5.21 of the land development code, if the proposed subdivision is projected to generate a traffic flow above the threshold therein defined. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes, capacity of street systems proposed or affected by the development and the phasing of improvements. 
7.  Street right-of-way characteristics. Street improvements shall be designed in a manner compatible with design characteristics of the village future traffic circulation system and the village minimum right-of-way standards as cited below: 
TABLE 8-2 
Street Classification Minimum Right-of-Way Width 
(feet) Arterial roadways 80-90 Collector streets 60-80 Local streets 50-60 (if curb and gutter) Marginal 45  
The village shall preserve existing rights-of-way and shall enforce standards requiring dedication of roadways for which the need is generated by new development. These design parameters may be adjusted based on projected traffic carrying capacities of specific developments and application of accepted principles and practices of traffic engineering and design of facilities. The administrative official prior to acceptance by the village council shall recommend the specific design features as a condition of approval. 
8.  No outlet streets (cul-de-sacs). Cul-de-sac or no outlet streets shall provide a terminal turnaround having a minimum diameter of 84 feet, and a minimum street property line of at least 100 feet. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length. 
9.  Temporary cul-de-sac turnaround streets. Streets that terminate temporarily, and thereby take on the character of a dead-end street, shall be provided with a temporary terminal turnaround having a radius of not less than 40 feet. When one or more temporary turnarounds are shown, the following note should be included on the plat "The area on this plat designated as "temporary turnaround" will be constructed and used only until the street(s) is/are extended, at which time the land in the temporary turnaround area will be abandoned for street purposes and will revert to adjoining lot owners in accordance with specific provisions in their respective deeds." 
10.  Street grades. All streets shall be graded to the appropriate grade to their full width, with side slopes and fills where required. The grade of all streets at the crown shall be at least four feet above mean sea level. 
11.  Intersection of streets. Street jogs at intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are prohibited. 
12.  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing limited access highway, freeway or arterial,a marginal access street shall be required to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
13.  Subdivision access points. Wherever possible, all subdivision access roads shall be located at existing median opening. If a subdivision access road is not located at an existing median opening, the applicant's paving plan shall provide for construction of a median opening, where permitted, or shall provide for the modification of existing openings, where required, at no cost to the village. The design of subdivision access roads shall comply with the requirements of the jurisdiction of the highway in which the median is located. The design of access streets shall, where required, provide for acceleration, deceleration, storage, channelization, and drainage modifications as are necessary to comply with the required standards of that jurisdiction. 
14.  Local streets. Local streets shall be so laid out that use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
15.  Half streets. Half or partial streets shall not be permitted. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be required to be dedicated and constructed within such tract. A proposed subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street which does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of these regulations shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that the minimum right-of-way requirements of these regulations are fulfilled. 
16.  Street names. Extensions of existing named streets shall bear the same numerical name of the existing street. A non-numerical name may be selected by the developer and included on the plat. In no case shall the name of a proposed new street which is not part of an existing facility duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. 
17.  Alignment, intersections, and radii. 
a.  Alignment. The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provisions for the continuation of the existing or platted s streets into adjoining areas or their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided, insofar as they may be deemed necessary by the village council. The street and alley arrangement shall be such as not to cause a hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. 
b.  Intersections. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street right-of-way shall intersect another at an angle of less than 80 degrees unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. All intersections shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in accordance with the current edition of AASHTO Standards. Intersections with major streets should be located no less than 800 feet apart. 
c.  Radii. The point of curvature of any local street shall not be closer than 100 feet to the point of intersection. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to assure safe sight distance and driver comfort, but never less than a minimum centerline radius of 100 feet. Property lines at street intersections shall have 25 feet or greater radius and street pavement radii shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
18.  Private streets. A private street as a principal means of access to individually owned lots may be permitted in the EU districts only, but shall be discouraged. If private streets are proposed, they shall comply with all applicable standards of public streets. If private streets are proposed, the developer shall provide sufficient assurances acceptable to the village council that the streets and right of ways will be adequately maintained, including identification of the legal entity with responsibility for maintenance. Public streets are required in all districts other than the EU districts. 
19.  Standards for roadway section. A properly prepared subgrade and an approved road base and wearing surface shall be provided for all streets. Subgrade shall be adequately compacted and bonded prior to treatment and shall be stabilized from curb to curb. After subgrading, there shall be given one course penetration treatment of emulsified asphalt and local aggregate to the full width of the street and an additional course to the middle twenty-two (22) feet of said street, all to the specifications and requirements of the village. 
20.  Street lighting. If a plat desires to include street lighting, a special taxing district shall be required so that the subdivision is responsible for installation and maintenance. If street lights are proposed, they shall be installed at each street intersection, at mid-block locations where the distance between intersections exceeds 900 feet, and at the end of each cul-de-sac. Such lights shall be required on interior streets and may be required on alleys, boundary streets and access paths if the village council finds that the anticipated frequency of usage makes such requirement reasonable for public safety and welfare. Wherever, in the opinion of the administrative official, a dangerous condition is created by sharp curves or irregularities in street alignment, additional lights shall be required. The streetlights and mounting poles shall be a type approved by the administrative official and shall be wired for underground service except where overhead service is permitted. 
21.  Street markers. Street name signs shall be provided and installed by the village at the expense of the subdivision. 
(w)  Traffic control devices. The following traffic control regulations shall apply to subdivisions where the administrative official determines that traffic control devices shall be required: 
The applicant shall install all required traffic control devices based on design requirements, including but not limited to, traffic lights, information and warning signs, acceleration or deceleration lanes, lane delineators, and other necessary traffic control devices on all roads within and interfacing with the subdivision. A traffic impact analysis pursuant to division 5.21, "Concurrency-Management" of this Code, approved by the administrative official and other appropriate agencies, shall determine traffic light requirements. All control devices shall be consistent with the Florida DOT Manual entitled "Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" as per F.S.,  316.131. If, at any time prior to final acceptance, an unforeseen need becomes apparent for signing, pavement markings, or other traffic controls that were not shown on the approved plans, the village reserves the right to require the additional traffic control devices in the interest of public safety and as a condition of village acceptance. 
(x)  Utilities. New subdivisions shall be required to install underground utilities, including franchised utilities, power and light, telephone and telegraph, water, sewer, cable television, wiring to street-lights and gas. 
1.  Coordination of easements. Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities and shall be provided as prescribed by these platting regulations for the installation of underground utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance with the respective utility authority's rules and regulations. 
2.  Waivers. The administrative official may waive the requirement for underground installation if the service to the adjacent area is overhead and it does not appear that further development in adjacent areas with underground utilities is possible. Any new service which is allowed by the waiver herein to be supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel that is convertible for underground utility service at a future date. 
3.  Applicant responsibility for underground installations. The applicant shall make necessary cost and other arrangements for such underground installations with each of the persons, firms or corporations furnishing utility service involved. 
4.  Construction within easements. Utilities shall be constructed in easements as prescribed by the Village Code. 
5.  Utility installation. After the subgrade for a street has been completed, the remainder of the street right-of-way has been graded and before any road or street construction material is applied, all underground work for the water mains, sanitary sewers gas mains, telephone electrical power conduits, cable television and any other utilities with appurtenances and branches for surface connections shall be completely installed throughout the width of the street to the sidewalk area, or provisions made so that the roadway or right-of-way will not be disturbed for utilities installations or service connections. All underground improvements so installed for the purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and backfilled and their locations identified. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18) 
Div. 8.3. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Construction method. The construction methods and all materials used in the improvements required by these platting regulations shall comply with applicable specifications of the village approved by the administrative official and those methods and materials based on best management principles and practices as established by the FDEP, SFWMD, and other institutions with broad based standing among professionals. 
(b)  Measurements and test. During construction, the applicant's engineer shall make such measurements, field tests and laboratory tests or cause them to be made to certify that the work and materials conform to the approved development plans and the provisions of these platting regulations. The administrative official or other representative designated by the Council may require tests and measurements which are deemed necessary and which shall be performed at the expense of the applicant or his engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.4. - Administration. 
(a)  Staff administrative review responsibility. The administrative official shall administer the provisions of these platting regulations. 
(b)  General responsibility of council and mandated compliance with comprehensive plan and land development regulations. Prior to the approval of any proposed subdivision, the area to be subdivided shall be determined by the village council to be consistent and in compliance with the comprehensive development master plan and applicable land development regulations. 
(c)  Burden of proof and other general responsibilities of applicant. The burden of proof of all applications, plans, plats, reports, tests, compliances, dedications, existence of agreements, liens, mortgages, surety, and other pertinent documents and instruments shall rest with and be the responsibility of the applicant or his duly authorized agent as prescribed in these regulations. 
(d)  Hold harmless provision. The applicant shall furnish to the village council a waiver, release and hold harmless from all liability and responsibility, including provisions for indemnification for any and all damages or losses caused directly or indirectly by the breakdown, collapse or failure to any buildings, installations or structures constructed or installed in connection with the applicable development or project. 
(e)  Enforcement. The village council or any aggrieved person may have recourse to any remedies in law and equity that may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these platting regulations, including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person violating the provisions these platting regulations and the court shall upon proof of the violation of the article have the duty to forthwith issue those temporary and permanent injunctions that are necessary to prevent the violation of these platting regulations. In addition to other remedies, the village council may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent a violation or attempted violation, to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent any act that would constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.5. - Submission procedures for lot split. 
    Any applicant desiring to create a lot split shall submit to the administrative official copies of a final plat in conformance with these platting regulations, as prepared by a land surveyor and any other requirements of F.S. ch. 177. The administrative official shall approve the plat which meets the requirement of these platting regulations. Upon approval, the applicant shall file the plat of record with the administrative official within a required time period from the date of approval. Failure to file within the required time period shall void said lot split approval. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.6. - Subdivision procedures. 
(a)  Required pre-application procedures. Prior to submitting an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant for subdivision approval shall meet with the administrative official or other designated village staff to discuss, informally, preliminary studies and sketches and their relationship to these regulations. The pre-application meeting provides an opportunity for the applicant to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the policies of the comprehensive development master plan that affect the area in which the proposed subdivision lies. Applicants shall be subject to the following pre-application procedures. 
1.  Application. The applicant shall submit a written pre-application to the administrative official for review by staff. The pre-application shall contain a written statement and sketch plan. These are described in detail in table 8-3, required supplementary submission documents. 
2.  Staff review. Upon receipt of a satisfactory completed statement, plan and fee, the administrative official shall distribute copies to the appropriate staff for review and comment. Any opinion by the staff regarding the preapplication shall be advisory only. 
(b)  Preliminary plat procedures. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to present the proposed subdivision in an exact and precise manner in order that it may be evaluated pursuant to these platting regulations. The preliminary plat shall be completed and approved prior to construction of the improvements required by these regulations. The village council shall determine by resolution the number of copies, related fees, and the time periods for each of the preliminary plat procedures. 
1.  Preparation of preliminary plat. The applicant shall retain the services of a civil engineer and/or land surveyor registered in the state to prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet and shall include information as outlined and detailed in table 8-3, required supplementary submission documents. 
2.  Filing fee. Upon filing the preliminary plat with the administrative official, the applicant shall submit a fee, which shall be determined by the resolution of the village council, payable to the village. The fee is not reimbursable but is to help defray the cost of administering and processing the preliminary plat. If more than one resubmittal of a corrected or revised preliminary plat is required by the staff or reviewing entity, an additional fee shall be charged for each resubmittal, as shall be determined by resolution of the village council. 
3.  Review procedures. The village council shall coordinate the review of the preliminary plat and supplemental information as to their completeness and specific conformance with these platting regulations. The staff shall inform the applicant's engineer whether the plans and/or plat as submitted meet the general provisions of these platting regulations. 
a.  When the staff finds that the preliminary plat and required data do not meet provisions of these platting regulations, the applicant shall be so advised in writing as soon as practicable concerning what corrections or revisions are necessary to meet the provisions of this article. Upon receipt of such findings, the applicant shall make the corrections or revisions and resubmit the preliminary plat and required data to the administrative official for review of the amended plan. If the applicant chooses not to provide the corrections, revisions, or other information requested by staff, the administrative official shall, at the request of the applicant, forward the application to the village council accompanied by the staff's comments, including documentation of unresolved issues. 
b.  When the administrative official determines that the preliminary plat and required data meet the provisions of these platting regulations, such written recommendations shall be submitted to the applicant and the subdivision application will be scheduled for the next step or steps in the review process. Similarly, if the applicant fails to provide satisfactory response to issues identified by staff, the applicant shall be allowed to appear on the agenda of the village council. In such case, written comments of staff shall be provided to the village council and the applicant and the subdivision application shall be forwarded to the village council. 
c.  Subsequent to receiving a staff recommendation, the applicant shall be scheduled for the next available regular public meeting of the village council. Prior to the village council's review, the applicant shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and required data to the administrative official. The number of copies to be submitted and the timing of the procedure shall be established by resolution of the village council. The village council may consider the physical characteristics of the property, the availability of community services, traffic impact, economic impacts, appropriateness of the type and intensity of the proposed development, existing and future development, existing and future development patterns, land development regulations, relationship of the project to the capital improvements program, or other such factors as may, relate to the comprehensive development master plan or elements thereof. 
d.  The applicant shall not be allowed to introduce new material at the village council meeting unless the applicant has previously provided the same to the administrative official and given the administrative official reasonable time to review and prepare and disseminate a written technical evaluation to the village council and the applicant prior to the scheduled village council meeting. The number of copies to be submitted and the timing of the procedures for review by the village council shall be established by resolution of the council. During its review, the village council shall consider the written recommendations of staff, any other reviewing agencies, and presentations by the public. The village council may approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and required data. When an application is disapproved, the village council shall state the reasons for disapproval and indicate what further actions, if any may be undertaken by the applicant to secure the village council's approval. 
e.  When a proposed development is a development of regional impact (DRI) as defined by F.S.  380.06, the additional public hearing requirements for a DRI shall be followed simultaneously. Copies of all plans, reports, maps and other documents required by the regional reviewing agency shall be submitted to the administrative official if the proposed development is a DRI. 
f.  No construction shall be permitted until the village council has approved the preliminary plat and all other required permits and approvals have been obtained and submitted to the village council. 
g.  The village council may by resolution shorten or extend the review time for development reviews generally, and direct such shortening or extension for any given application, if the village council determines that such action is necessary and proper to the orderly and efficient processing of land development applications. 
(c)  Subdivision final plat approval procedures. As the final step in the subdivision review process, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plat. The village council shall determine by resolution the number of copies, related fees, and the time periods required for each of the final plat procedures. No final plat shall be recorded until the required improvements have been installed or performance guarantee posted pursuant to the requirements of this article. No such required improvements including streets, drainage and other required facilities shall be accepted and maintained by the village, unless and until the same have been duly inspected and approved by the village staff, and have also been approved and accepted for maintenance by the village attorney and village council. Prior to acceptance and approval of the required improvements the final plat shall be approved by the administrative official, village attorney, and the village council and the applicant shall duly record the approved plat with the clerk of the circuit court of the county, who shall record only those final plats which have been so approved in accordance with the platting regulations. The applicant shall provide the village the following: 
1.  Fee for final plat. Upon filing application for final plat approval, the applicant shall pay to the village a processing fee, the amount of which shall be determined by resolution of the council, in order to help defray the cost of processing the final plat. 
2.  Timing of final plat submission. Failure to submit the final plat within a specified amount of time shall require reapplication under the preliminary plat provisions of these platting regulations unless the council grants an extension of time. 
3.  Required compliance. The final plat shall conform to the approved subdivision master plan, shall meet the legal requirements of platting as defined by Chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended, and shall consist of a fully executed correct plat map, meeting all state and local standards, final engineering drawings and auxiliary submittals, and all required legal instruments. Notwithstanding, the final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat and subdivision master plan which the applicant proposes to record and develop within a required time period. When an application is disapproved, the village council shall state the reasons for disapproval and indicate what further actions, if any, by the applicant may be undertaken to secure the village council's approval. 
4.  Content of final plat. The final plat shall include one original to be drawn or printed on 24-inch by 36-inch mylar or other approved material and two copies of the final plat and of all other required data. The final plat shall be prepared by a state registered engineer and is to be clearly and legibly drawn with black permanent drawing ink or other approved process to a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet or as otherwise determined by the village. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and shall conform to the requirements outlined in table 8-3, required supplementary submission documents. 
(d)  Schedule of development phases. The applicant may schedule proposed development phases within any proposed subdivision. The scheduled development phases shall have been specified on the approved preliminary plat and shall be of such a size and design and be scheduled so that all portions completed at any time can exist independently as a subdivision in complete conformity with the requirements of this article. The village council must approve any change in the schedule of phases. If phased, the applicant shall have the option of requesting either final plat approval or the issuance of a certificate of completion on one or more of the development phases in conformity with all the procedures and requirements of the code. 
(e)  Time restriction on development. The applicant may not apply for final plat approval on any portion of the approved preliminary plat that is not proposed to be recorded and developed within the required time period. Failure to make application for final plat approval of a development phase or for the issuance of a certificate of completion for a development phase on an approved preliminary plat within the required time period from the date of approval of the preliminary plat (or within required time period of the final plat approval for a related phase of a multi-phase development) may result in revocation of said preliminary plat unless the applicant applies for an extension from the council prior to the lapse. The request for extension must be made in writing to the village council and shall be filed with the village clerk at least 90 days prior to the scheduled expiration of the preliminary plat. The applicant must demonstrate good cause for the extension. The village council shall consider the request at a meeting and may extend the prescribed time period if the applicant presents evidence that demonstrates that the applicant has progressed in good faith toward implementing the preliminary plat. 
(f)  Submission of final plat. Upon completion of the foregoing requirements, prints of the final plat and reproducible mylars of the final plat shall be submitted to the administrative official and be accompanied by the supplementary materials as outlined in 8-3, required supplementary submission documents. 
1.  Review by staff. The administrative official and village attorney shall examine the final plat as to its compliance with the state law and the ordinances of the village. The recommendations as to compliance shall be in writing and reported within a required time period, or at such other time as shall be determined by resolution of the village council. 
a.  If any deficiency exists, a reference shall be made to the specific Code provision with which the final plat does not comply. The applicant upon written notice shall correct any such deficiency. 
b.  If the final plat meets the provisions of the platting regulations and complies with other applicable laws and ordinances, the administrative official shall recommend approval to the council. 
c.  No revisions shall be allowed to the final plat after it has received village council approval. 
2.  Council review procedure where required improvements constructed prior to recording. Upon submittal of the reproducible final plat, certification and approvals contained on the plat shall be current and the plat shall be checked as required by these platting regulations prior to presentation to the village council for approval. 
3.  Council review procedure where performance guarantee posted. In the event the applicant elects to record the final plat prior to completion of the required improvements under performance guarantees as provided for in the Code, the final plat shall be presented to the village council by the village attorney accompanied by appropriate legal instruments. Action by the village council shall be taken within a required time frame after receipt of the final plat and supporting data to the village unless the applicant requests delay. If the village council certifies that the development has met all requirements of these platting regulations, the plat shall be endorsed as finally approved by the mayor and attested by the village clerk in order that it may be recorded among the public records of the county. 
(g)  Final plat recording requirements. The final plats for subdivisions within the incorporated area of the village shall not be recorded until the developer has installed the required improvements or has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the village council that such improvements will be installed. 
1.  Completion of required improvements prior to final plat recording. In the event the applicant exercises the right to construct and complete required improvements prior to recording of the final plat, the village staff shall have the right of entry upon the property to be platted for the purpose of inspecting and reviewing the construction of the required improvements during the progress of such construction. The applicant shall coordinate the construction with the village staff. When the required improvements are complete, the final plat along with the records and data as herein prescribed shall be submitted by the applicant to the administrative official and shall be reviewed by the administration official as provided for in these platting regulations. When all requirements of this chapter have been complied with the plat and a completion certificate, rendered on a form to be provided by the administrative official, shall be presented for review and approval to the village council by the village staff, within a required time frame after receipt of the completion certificate. Upon such approval the plat shall be submitted by the administrative official to the office of the clerk of the circuit court for recording. 
2.  Performance guarantees. A guarantee shall be required from the applicant who chooses not to install the required improvements prior to final plat approval providing guarantees to ensure the proper installation of required street, utility, and other improvements, in the event of default by the applicant. The guarantee shall be presented in one of the following forms. 
a.  Cash deposit. The applicant shall deposit with the village or place in an escrow bank account subject to the control of the village, cash in the full amount of 125 percent of engineering and construction costs for the installation and completion of the required improvements. The applicant shall be entitled to receive all interest earned on such deposit or account. In the event of default by the applicant or failure of the applicant to complete such improvements within the time required by the Code, the village, after 60 calendar days written notice to the applicant, shall have the right to use such cash deposit or account to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or 
b.  Personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit. The applicant may furnish to the village a personal bond secured by unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to 125 percent of the total estimated cost of engineering and construction of or the installation and completion of the required improvements. The expiration date of the letter of credit shall be at least three months following the date of certification of all improvements. The letter of credit shall be issued to the village by the state or United States banking institution. Such letter of credit shall be in the form set forth by the village attorney and approved by the village council. In event of default by the applicant or failure of the applicant to complete such improvements within the time required by this ordinance, the village, after 60 days written notice to the applicant shall have the right to use any funds resulting from drafts on the letter of credit to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or 
c.  Surety completion bond. A surety completion bond, including a payment of vendors clause, executed by a company having a Best's rating of AAA and authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the village, shall be furnished and payable to the village for two years in the sum of 125 percent of the total cost of the engineers estimates for streets street and traffic control devices, markings, sidewalks, drainage facilities, street signs, water and sewer facilities and other improvements as shown on the final development plan; the bond to run from the date the building in the development or the last building in an approved phasing of the development is certified for occupancy by the building official. In the event of default in reasonable maintenance as determined by the administrative official shall do either of the following: 1) Demand performance within ten days by certified mail; 2) Call maintenance bond required under these platting regulations and expend all sums as required without reaction or limitation to cure defaults or remove structures when required. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14) 
Div. 8.7. - Administration of construction. 
    After submittal of the final plat and supplementary material an applicant may construct the required improvements subject to obtaining all required permits. The administrative official shall be notified in advance of the date of commencement of such construction. 
(a)  Surveillance. Construction shall be performed under the surveillance of, and shall at all times be subject to, review by the administrative official. This in no way shall relieve the applicant and the applicant's engineer of the responsibility for close field coordination and final compliance with approved plans, specifications and requirements of this article. 
(b)  Construction administration by state registered engineer. The applicant shall employ a state registered engineer for complete administration of the construction of the required improvements. The applicant shall require progress reports and final certification of the construction of the required improvements from such engineer be filed with the administrative official. 
(c)  Right to enter. The administrative official shall have the right to enter upon the property for the purpose of inspecting the quality of materials and workmanship and reviewing the progress of such construction. 
(d)  Progress reports. The applicant's engineer shall submit construction progress, reports at points of progress prescribed by the village. The applicants engineer shall coordinate joint reviews of construction with the administrative official. 
(e)  Stop work orders. The administrative official shall have the authority to stop the work upon failure of the applicant or his engineer to coordinate the construction of the required improvements as prescribed by these platting regulations. 
(f)  Final inspections. Upon completion of the required improvements the applicants engineer shall give the administrative official, within a certain time period, notice to make the final inspection of the improvements, landscaping, and sign installations. The administrative official shall also have the authority to withhold or deny approval of certificates of occupancy relative to buildings and/or structures of a subdivision until the construction and installation of required improvements of that subdivision have been satisfactorily completed as prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.8. - Completion certificate. 
    The required improvements shall not be considered complete until a completion certificate along with the final project records, including "as built" drawings have been furnished to, reviewed and approved by the administrative official. The certificate shall be certified by the applicant's engineer, stating that the required improvements were installed under his responsible direction and that the improvements conform to the approved construction plans and the Code. The applicant's engineer shall also furnish a copy of each of the construction plans on a high quality, durable reproducible material, acceptable to the administrative official, showing the original design in comparison to the actual finished work and a copy of the measurements, tests and reports made on the work and material during the progress of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.9. - Conditions for release of applicant from bond. 
    As a condition for the final release of the applicant from his bond, or for the release of any cash securities deposited with the administrative official, the following must be furnished. 
(a)  Evidence by reference to plat book and page that the approved final plat has been filed; 
(b)  A statement from the administrative official that he has found the work to be in accordance with the general provisions of the development plan; 
(c)  The submission by the applicant's engineer to the administrative official of a complete set of "as built" drawings together with operating manuals and parts lists for any mechanical installations made; 
(d)  A statement by the applicant's surveyor verifying completion of all required survey work and installation of all required P.R.M.; and 
(e)  A release from the contractor, engineer, surveyor or any other person or persons performing any service or furnishing any material for the subdivision that they will not file a lien on the subdivision for nonpayment of service or material charges. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.10. - Time extensions. 
    All required improvements for a project or each phase thereof shall be completed within a required time period from the date of preliminary plat approval. The village council, upon the recommendation of the administrative official, may grant time extensions for demonstrated good cause. The applicant shall present a written request for extension to the administrative official. Each time extension shall not exceed the time period required. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 8.11. - Acceptance and maintenance of required improvements. 
(a)  Workmanship and material agreement. The applicant shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the required improvements against defect in workmanship and materials for one year after acceptance of such improvements by the village council. Said agreement shall be submitted to the administrative official along with the completion certificate and project records. 
(b)  Procedure for accepting dedications. The dedication of public space, parks, streets, right-of-way, easements or the like on the plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the village. The applicant shall apply to the village for acceptance of improvements by the village council. The village council shall accept no dedication until the administrative official has approved all environmental audits required pursuant the land development code. The acceptance of the dedication shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the administrative official. Such acceptance shall occur only upon adoption of resolution by the village council, which shall accept the subject dedications at such time as all improvements meet or exceed the standards set forth by the land development code. The applicant's engineer shall furnish to the administrative official in writing a sealed and signed certificate stating that the required improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plan and compliance with all applicable codes. The administrative official shall receive notice in adequate time to arrange for inspection prior to the beginning of construction and at appropriate staged intervals thereafter. The administrative official may require laboratory or field tests as well as staged inspections at the expense of the applicant when appropriate. Any failure of work or materials to conform to the plans and specifications or failure to notify the village in time for indicated inspections shall be cause for the village council to reject the facilities. 
(c)  Recommendation of administrative official. The administrative official upon satisfactory completion, receipt of the applicant's engineers completion certificate, affidavits from all contractors and others who furnished goods and services for the required improvements acknowledging payment in full therefore, and receipt of the agreement, shall certify that the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this ordinance and shall recommend to the council the acceptance of the dedications and, when applicable, the maintenance of the required improvements. 
(d)  Acceptance by the village council. Upon recommendations by the administrative official, the village council by resolution shall approve the subdivision, all dedications on the plat and the maintenance responsibilities of the improvements. 
(e)  Applicant's failure to complete required improvements. 
1.  Premature recording of plats (or where applicant fails to complete required improvements). When a plat has been recorded and the applicant fails to complete the required improvements as required by these platting regulations, the village council shall direct the administrative official to complete the required improvements under the guarantees provided by the applicant. In such case, the village council shall direct the administrative official and/or the village attorney to call upon the guarantees to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements. Legal notice of such action shall be deemed to have been duly served upon posting via certified mail return receipt requested. Upon the completion of construction of the required improvements, the administrative official shall report to the village council and the village council shall accept by resolution the dedications and maintenance responsibility as indicated on the plat. In such cases, the remaining guarantees posted by the applicant shall be retained for a period of one year after completion in lieu of the agreement. Any defects occurring during this period shall be repaired using funds remaining in the guarantee. 
2.  In cases where plat has not been recorded. Where an applicant has elected to install the required improvements prior to recording of the plat and fails to complete such improvements within the time limitations of this ordinance, all approvals of the subdivision shall be null and void and the land shall revert to its original state. No reference shall be made to the plat with respect to the sale of lots or issuance of building permits, unless and until the plat has been resubmitted with all of the supplementary material and approvals as herein prescribed have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
TABLE XIX-A 
REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENTS 
Item # Pre-application Preliminary Plat Final Plat I. PROJECT PLAT INFORMATION 1. Owner(s)/applicant identification: a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner of record, mortgage holder or any other person having a legal equitable or beneficial interest in the land; X X X b. A statement from such owners, or others that will have an interest in the land that they will join in the dedication of the proposed subdivision. X X 2. Written statement: 
Copies of a written statement generally describing the condition of the site and the proposed development of the entire subdivision including, but is not necessarily limited to, data on existing covenants, location of utility facilities, general soil characteristics and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of units, lot dimensions and areas, public areas, anticipated utility source and any other information considered pertinent. X 3. Cover sheet (page 1): 1 
If more than one sheet is required for the map, the plat shall contain an index sheet on page 1, showing the entire subdivision on the sheet indexing the area shown on each succeeding sheet and each sheet shall contain an index delineating that portion of the subdivision shown on that sheet in relation to the entire subdivision. X X X 4. Title block: 
Title blocks shall be printed in bold legible letters and denote the following information: Date of original preparation and subsequent revisions; name of subdivision 2 , name of municipality, city, county, and state; the section, township and range as applicable or if a land grant, so stated, type of application, tax map sheet, block and lot and street location. X X X 5. Vicinity map: 3 
Appearing on the cover sheet at a scale no smaller than 1? = 2,000', the vicinity map shall illustrate the following information: location of land to be subdivided (relative to nearest major thoroughfare and the section, township and range and tie-in to the nearest section corner; approximate acreage; natural features such as low or wetland areas; streams or canals; identification of adjacent lands; owner's name; date; north arrow; general lot and block layout; and all adjoining streets. X X X 6. Legal description: 
A full and legal description of the land within the plat shall be lettered or printed on the plat. The description shall show the section, township and range in which the lands are situated or if a land grant, so stated, and must be so completed that from it, without reference to the map, the starting point can be determined and the boundaries run. X X X 7. Land use district requirements: a. Comprehensive plan map future land use designation and land use district classification of the tract. 4 b. The village's policy on size and dimension criteria with regards to the intended use planned for the subdivision including lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard requirements, setbacks, building coverage, open space, and off street parking. Reference articles X and XV and section 4-19.2(P). X 8. Location of structures: 
The location of all temporary structures 5 or permanent structures having a temporary use. Permanent structures having a temporary use shall contain a statement outlining temporary use. X X 9. Certifications: a. Clerk of the circuit court. On each sheet of the plat a three-inch by five-inch space in the upper right-hand corner to be used by the clerk of the circuit court for recording information and each sheet shall reserve three inches on the left margin and a half inch margin on all remaining sides. X b. Surveyor/engineer. 6 The name business address, telephone number, signature, registration number and official seal of the land surveyor, certifying that the plat is a true representation of the land surveyed under his responsible direction and supervision. X X X c. Mortgagee's consent and approval. 7 Verification notarized in the presence of two witnesses. X d. Certification of Title. 8 From an acceptable abstract company certifying that the parties executing plats are owners of the land included in the plats; all recorded mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances; taxes and assessments have been paid to date; the description shown on the plat is correct. X e. Signature blocks. The mayor, village attorney, and the village manager shall certify that the plan meets all the village's requirements and shall sign in India ink, within the signature blocks provided, on all prints of the original plat being submitted. X f. State board of health. Certification that the designs and plans of water and sewer systems are acceptable and meet current regulations. X g. Certification of payment. Acknowledging that development charges for subdivisions in areas indicated by the administrative official to have critical drainage or other development matters significantly affecting adopted overall comprehensive plans have been paid. X h. Village council certificate. Statement and signatures of approval shall be on the page of record containing the drawing. X 10. Schedule of development phases: 9 
Clearly indicate initial and subsequent phases of development. The phases shall be of such a size and design and be scheduled so that all portions completed at any time can exist independently as a subdivision in complete conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. X X 11. Monumentation: 
Certify that permanent reference monuments 10 , "P.R.M.", have been set in compliance with village ordinance and F.S. ch. 177, as amended, as well as the location and description of the permanent reference monuments and the permanent control points, "P.C.P.", will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within one (1) year from the date the plat was recorded. Reference:  4-19.2(Q) X X 12. Development boundaries: 
All existing and proposed property lines, easements and ROW's, their purpose, their effect on the property to be subdivided, and the proposed layout of lots and blocks 11 , showing all bearings and dimensions as determined by an accurate survey in the field, including any stage development and planned platting for the future recording of the tract in phases. X X 13. Deed restrictions or covenants: 12 
Copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed subdivision deed restrictions or protective covenants. See  4-19.1(K) X X 14. Dedications, right-of-ways, and easements: 13 a. Indicate names, locations, and dimensions of any areas reserved for use by the residents or the subdivision as well as areas reserved for public use including but not limited to parks, rights-of-way for roads, streets or alleys, and utility or drainage easements or rights-of-way. The plat shall contain a statement that "no buildings or any kind of construction or trees or shrubs shall be placed on easements or dedications without written approval of the village council. See  4-19.2(J). X b. Sites proposed for any other dedicated sites or private recreation. X X 15. Drainage facilities: 
Locate and describe all existing drainage facilities and their ultimate right-of-way requirements as they affect the property to be subdivided. Refer to section 4-19.2(D, J, and T) for guidelines required by the village. X 16. Permits: 
List of required regulatory approvals or permits. X 17. Variances: 
List of variances required or requested. X 18. Payment of application fees: 
A check made payable to the village to cover administrative review costs. X X X 19. Plat recording payment: 
A check made payable to the clerk of the circuit court of the county for recording the plat in the amount established by that office. X II. SETTING ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION 20. Adjacent parcel information: 
The names of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and the property owners and property lines of all parcels within 300 feet identified on the most recent tax map sheet together with plat book and page reference number. X X 21. Vehicular circulation: a. The name 14 , alignment, and width of all existing and proposed streets 15 , alleys, ROW's, or easements, adjacent to, or within 300 feet of the tract including name, ROW width, street or pavement width and established centerline elevation. Existing streets shall be dimensioned to the tract boundary. See  4-19.2(U). X X b. Access points to collector and arterial streets showing their compliance to the access requirements established by this ordinance. See  4-19.2(A). X X 22. Survey Requirements: a. Contour map 16 X X b. Topographic conditions 17 X X c. Results of borings or general description of soils generally to be found on the tract. X d. Describe the site's construction capacity and suitability for the development being considered (i.e., septic tanks, foundation excavations, dwellings with basements, etc.) X X e. All intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be joined by the long chord of minimum radius of 25 feet and all dimensions shall be shown. X 23. Environmental survey: 18 a. Using a map and narrative show the location and describe the vegetative communities present including specimen and or endangered flora. See  4-19.2(K). X X b. Locate and describe existing wildlife habitats on the site especially those of threatened or endangered species X c. Discuss construction methods used to preserve vegetative and wildlife communities as well as aquifer recharge areas and other environmentally sensitive areas. X 24. Shoreline protection: 
For properties bordering canals, the applicant shall establish the ordinary high water line and so delineate it on the plat. The applicant shall consider shoreline stabilization acceptable to the South Florida Water Management District and the village. Transitional zone along the shoreline shall also be designated together with plans for preserving native indigenous plant communities within the zone transition. See  4-19.2(K)(4). X X 25. Not-included parcels: 19 
Not included" or "excepted" parcels must be marked "not part of this plat" and must have sufficient easements or rights-of-way for access, utilities, and drainage. X III. IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION 26. Utilities: a. Indicate all existing utility (telephone, electric, water, gas, cable television, sewer, street lighting, etc.) providers for the land to be subdivided and for abutting parcels. Reference  4-19.2 (F, G, J, U, and W) for specific improvement requirements. X b. Existing or proposed water treatment plants and sewage treatment plants. X c. Submit a statement verifying that all utilities are available and all providers have been contacted. X 27. Soil erosion and sediment control plan: 
Applicants must comply with all requirements of  4-19.2(K) and standards contained in article XVIII, "Site plan review procedures." X 28. On-site wastewater disposal data: 
When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the suitability of the soil to support on site disposal shall be determined by the state board of health and a report of its findings shall be submitted to all reviewing bodies. 20 See  4-19.2(K) X 29. Stormwater management: 
A master stormwater management plan outlining the primary and secondary drainage facilities needed for the proper development of the subdivision application. 21 See  4-19.2(T) X 30. Traffic impact analysis: 
The analysis shall comply with article XVIII, "Site plan review procedures" and shall adequately address concurrency management criteria for roadways identified in article 9, "Concurrency management." 22 and  4-19.2(U) X 31. Required park land and/or facility improvements: 
All preliminary plats shall comply with the park land and recreation facility standards and procedures identified in article 9, "Concurrency management." X 32. Required potable water improvements: 
All preliminary plats shall comply with the potable water supply and improvement requirements of  4-19.2(F) and criteria and procedures identified in article 9, "Concurrency management." X 33. Required wastewater improvements: 
All preliminary plats shall comply with the wastewater improvements requirements of  4-19.2(G) and (H) and criteria and procedures identified in article 9, "Concurrency management." X 34. Required wetlands protection: 
The plan shall comply with wetland protection requirements in article XI and  4-19.2(K). X 35. Reference to required specifications: 
Design specifications for all required improvements, as they are to be incorporated, shall be submitted and shall be subject to the standards set forth in  4-19.3 "Construction standards," herein. X 36. Traverse Sheets: 23 
Worksheets showing the calculated closure and limits or error of the exterior boundaries and major irregular blocks or parcels within the subdivision. X X 37. Construction plans, specifications, and cost estimates reference to required specifications: 24 
Construction plans, specs, and cost estimates for all required improvements including streets, street and traffic-control devices, street markings, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities 25 , water supply and distribution facilities 26 , sewerage collection and treatment facilities, and plans for excavating, filling, and grading lands, prepared by a state registered engineer with his professional seal on the plans. X 38. Maintenance guarantee: 
A maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the surety completion bond payable to the city guaranteeing the performance of required subdivision improvements for one year after the date of completion and acceptance by the city, executed and enforceable in the same manner as the surety completion bond described above. X 39. Landscaping: 
Applicants must comply with the requirements outlined in  4-19.2(E) and article XIII regarding landscaping and tree protection requirements. X X 40. Performance guarantee: 27 
A guarantee from the applicant who chooses not to install the required improvements prior to final plat approval providing performance guarantees to ensure the proper installation of required street, utility, and other improvements, in the event of default by the applicant. The guarantee shall be in the form of a cash deposit, personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit, or surety completion bond. All these shall be approved in writing by the village manager, village attorney and the mayor. 41. Statement of improvement construction timing: 
A statement indicating whether the required improvements are to be constructed prior to recording the plat or after recording the plat. X 42. Association or condominium documents: 
A copy of the homeowner's association or condominium documents if applicable indicating the maintenance responsibility for the required improvements and shall provide for the formation of a special taxing district to assume maintenance responsibility for the required improvements in the event of the dissolution of the condominium or homeowner's association. X  
1. When numbering pages, each sheet shall show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of sheets included, as well as clearly labeled match lines to each sheet. 2. The name of the subdivision or identifying title shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the incorporated area of the Village. If the plat is a replat, amendment or addition to an existing subdivision, is shall include the words "section," "unit," "replat," "amendment," or similar designation reflecting the same. 3. All maps shall include a north arrow, graphic scale, and date of original preparation and date of subsequent revisions. The scale must be approved by the village, but in no case shall such scale of plats be smaller than one inch to 200 feet. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 4. Any change in such classification shall be made known to reviewing bodies by presenting proof indicating that any required applications and fees for attaining such policy changes have been submitted. All applications shall comply with requirements outlined in the village code. 5. Subdivision preliminary plats showing temporary structures or permanent structures having a temporary use shall be reviewed by the village staff with 18 months from the last approval date. Following approval of a subdivision master plan, such approved temporary structures may be erected prior to plan recording. All village permit requirements, including but not limited to village land development regulations governing temporary structures, as amended, shall be satisfied. A mobile home may not be used as a temporary structure, except that mobile homes approved for use as temporary construction trailers, may be considered for exemption from the application of said definition when fully bonded to assure removal. 6. The survey data compiled and shown on the plat shall comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance and F.S. ch. 177, as amended. The certification shall also state that permanent reference monuments (PRM) have been set in compliance with this ordinance and F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and the permanent control points (PCP) will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within one year from the date the plat was recorded. When required improvements have been completed prior to the recording of a plat, the certification shall state the PCP's have been set in compliance with the laws of the state and ordinances of the village. When plats are recorded and improvements are to be accomplished under surety posed as provided for by this ordinance, the required improvements and surety shall include installation of P.C.P.'s. 7. The verification shall state that "the mortgagee(s) consents and agrees to the platting of the land embraced in this plat and to the dedication(s) shown hereon; and, further, should it become necessary to foreclose the mortgage covering the said property, that all pieces and parcels dedicated to the public will be excluded from said suit, and the dedication remain in full force and effect." In the case the mortgagee is a corporation, the consent and approval shall be signed in behalf of the corporation by the president or a vice president and the secretary or an assistant secretary, respectively, by and with the authority of the board of directors. 8. The title certification must be an opinion of an attorney at law licensed in the state, or the certification of an abstractor, or a title insurance company licensed in the state. 9. If the proposed subdivision is of such size that its development will be undertaken in increments, those increments and their order shall be indicated. Where increments of high elevations are undertaken before those of lower elevation, ultimate storm water disposal courses in the lower increments must be concurrently developed. 10. The permanent reference markers should be set at such critical points and so interconnected and dimensioned that any registered land surveyor can lay out lots in the subdivision correctly by referring to the plat alone without any additional information. 11. All lots shall be numbered or lettered in each block by progressive numbers individually throughout the subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwest corner of each block of the subdivision. Blocks in each incremental plat shall be lettered consecutively throughout a subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwestern most corner of the subdivision. Block perimeter returns at block line intersections shall be stated in terms of tangent distances of five foot internals, with a minimum tangent distance of 20 feet. All monumentation shall comply with the guidelines established in  4-19.2(R). Lot and block design criteria shall comply with  4-19.2(C) and (O). The dimension of all lots and parcels to the nearest hundredth, except where riparian boundaries are involved which may be plus or minus. Whenever lands are subdivided along waterways, lot dimensions shall be shown to the approximate ordinary high water at date of survey. 12. Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of water supply type and use of sanitary facilities; use and benefits of water areas, canals and other open spaces, odd-shaped and substandard parcels; restrictions controlling building lines; establishment and maintenance of buffer strips and walls, and restrictions of similar nature shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be noted on the plat. Documents pertaining to restrictive covenants shall be submitted with the final plat. 13. The purpose of all reserved areas shown on the plat shall be defined in the dedication on the plat. All areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision as well as all areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision as well as all areas reserved for public use, including but not limited to parks, rights-of-way for roads, streets or alleys, utility or drainage easements or rights-of-way, together with all other area lands to be used by the public or subdivision residents shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the plat is recorded. Easements, dedications, and ROW shall comply with guidelines in  4-19.2(K), (J) and (U). 14. The plat shall contain the name of each street shown on the plat. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the same name of the existing street. In no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street, excluding a numerical system, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, or similar suffix. 15. All streets and their related facilities designed to serve more than one property owner shall be dedicated to the public use. Notwithstanding, private streets shall be permitted within property under single ownership, a property under single ownership, a property owner's association or a condominium or cooperative association as defined by state law. Where private streets are permitted, ownership and maintenance association documents shall be submitted with the final plat and the dedication contained on the plat shall clearly dedicate the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse to the village or any other public agency. For other design guidelines for streets see  4-19.2(V). 16. The contour map shall show ground elevations at intervals of not more than six feet of the area to be subdivided and of a perimeter strip at least 50 feet and up to 150 feet in width around the area as required by the village. 17. Topographical conditions on the subject subdivision including all the existing water courses, drainage ditches and bodies of water, marshes and other significant, natural or man-made features. 18. Applications shall comply with article XI, "Environmental protection," including, but not limited to preservation of wetlands and transitional wetlands; aquifer recharge protection; wellfield protection; wildlife habitat preservation; protection of upland vegetative communities and endangered or threatened flora and fauna; floodplain protection; soil erosion, sedimentation control, and shoreline protection; and other performance criteria. 19. No strip or parcel of land shall be reserved by the owner unless the same is sufficient in size and area to be of some particular use or service. The intended use for all reserved areas shall be shown on the plat in note form on the cover sheet. 20. An adverse report by the state board of health shall be deemed as sufficient grounds for disapproval of the proposed subdivision or portion thereof. Any subdivision being denied on such grounds shall not be reconsidered until the requirements of the state board of health are met. 21. The master surface water management plan for the subdivision shall comply with all applicable requirements of article XII of this Code and all specifications adopted by the village public works director, SFWMD, and DEP. 22. The preliminary plat shall comply with concurrency management procedures identified in article 9. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes and capacity of the street system proposed or affected by the development and the phasing of improvements. 23. The traverse map shall mathematically close with 0.01 feet shall be accurately tied to all township, range and section lines occurring with the subdivision by distance and bearing. In addition, the initial in the description shall be accurately tied to the nearest quarter section corner or section corner or government corner. The point of beginning shall be labeled with the letters "P.O.B." in bold letters. 24. In special cases involving small subdivisions of three acres or less, the council may in its discretion waive the requirement for estimates of cost prepared by a state registered engineer, provided alternate descriptive data and procedures ensuring satisfactory compliance with the purposes of this chapter are submitted and accepted. As an alternative to submittal of an engineer's estimate of costs, bids for the work from two reputable contractors or a copy of an executed construction contract for the work will be acceptable. 25. Storm drainage plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements in article XII, "Stormwater management and flood damage prevention" and all specifications adopted by the village public works director, SFWMD, and DEP. The final plat shall include an as-built of all improvements with certification as to their respective locations by the applicant's engineer and the developer. 26. If the water distribution or sewerage collection system is to be an extension of existing systems, the submittal need not include complete plans and specifications for the total basic existing system but shall include certification with supporting data by the applicant's engineer demonstrating that adequate plant and other system capacity is available to serve existing connections plus those proposed in general accordance with the design standards listed in the village regulations. Additionally, the plans will show the connection of proposed facilities to existing systems and all proposed facilities within the proposed subdivision. 27. Performance guarantees can be presented as either; a cash deposit; personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit; or a surety completion bond as described in  4-19.6.  
ARTICLE 9. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 

Div. 9.1. - Rules of construction. 
    The village hereby adopts the following rules of construction for the land development code. 
(a)  The particular shall control the general and, in case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this land development code and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(b)  The word "may" is permissive, but the words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not discretionary. 
(c)  When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular number. 
(d)  The word "structure" shall include the word "building." The phrase "used for" shall include "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." The word "lot" includes the word "plot," "tract," and "building site." The word "area" and "district" may indicate and include the meaning "zone." When consistent with the context, the word "unit" shall mean, "dwelling unit." The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, unincorporated association, partnership or other legal entity The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like, kind, or character. 
(e)  When this land development code refers to other ordinances, codes, or statutes the reference shall imply the most up-to-date ordinance, code, or statutes, as amended. 
(f)  Words and terms not otherwise defined in this article shall be interpreted first by reference to other sections of this land development code, the Code of Ordinances, the comprehensive development master plan, or the building codes; and secondly, by reference to generally accepted engineering, planning, or other professional terminology if technical; and otherwise according to common usage. 
(g)  When any requirement of this land development code results in a fraction of a dwelling unit or other measurement, the fraction will be disregarded and the nearest lower whole number shall apply. Whenever, a density calculation for a legal lot of record results in less than one dwelling unit being permitted, the fractional requirement will be disregarded and one dwelling unit will be permitted subject to compliance with this Code. Whenever a calculation of green space, parking, pervious surfaces, or open space required herein results in a fractional number, such number shall be rounded to the next higher number or unit. When calculating requirements for off-street parking, landscape and open space, impervious surfaces, and similar regulatory measures, any fraction of a unit shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. When calculating density or floor area ratios, any fraction of a unit shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. 
(h)  Requirements in the land development code are cumulative and a provision in one section shall not be interpreted as the only provision applicable to development. 
(i)  More specific provisions of this Code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. Where the provisions of the Code appear to conflict with another provision in this Code or another applicable law, the most restrictive provision shall govern. This land development code is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, where the land development code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of building or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules or regulations or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8,  3, 11-13-02) 
Div. 9.2. - Definition of terms. 
    For the purpose of administering this Code, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Accessory unit. A detached building separate from the principal building, which is used by temporary guests of the principal residence. A guesthouse or worker housing not to be rented. An affidavit stating the limited purpose of the dwelling shall be signed and the owner shall certify that the accessory dwelling unit shall remain compliant with the land development code. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure). A structure which is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, and may not be used for human habitation and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, swimming pools and enclosures, and chickee huts. A guest house shall not be considered an accessory structure for purposes of the flood regulations. 
    Accessory use. See "Use, accessory." 
    Accessways shall mean vehicular ingress/egress points from a right-of-way, private street easement, or other vehicular travel way. 
    Addition (to an existing building). An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. For purposes of flood regulations, addition shall mean any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is considered new construction. 
    Administrative official. The administrative official shall mean the village manager or those persons to whom he has charged the enforcement or interpretation of this land development code or selected provisions thereof. 
    Adult congregate living facilities. See "Homes, special facilities." 
    Adult entertainment establishment. A site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain adult use activities or operations are conducted, such as, but not limited to adult bookstore, adult theater, adult night club, adult video store, massage establishment, adult modeling establishments and encounter studios. 
    Advertise or advertising. Any form of public announcement intended to aid directly or indirectly in the sale, use or promotion of a commercial product, commodity, service, activity, or entertainment. 
    Aggregate area or aggregate width. The sum of two or more designated areas or widths to be measured, limited, or determined under these regulations. 
    Aggrieved party. A real property owner who is entitled to receive notice from the village of a procedure affecting his/her property. 
    Agricultural activities, bona fide shall mean land used for the growing of food crops, nurseries for the growing of landscape material, the raising of livestock, horse farms, and other good faith agricultural uses, except any portion of the property not eligible for agricultural exemption. 
    Alcoholic beverage. Beverages containing alcohol as defined by the state. 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment. Any establishment devoted primarily to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Alley. A public or private right-of-way that is not generally used as a thoroughfare by pedestrians and vehicles, affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, and is not designated as a street. 
    Alteration. Any change, rearrangement, enlargement, extension, reduction of any structure or part thereof on the same site. 
    Amortization. The installment costs of a use or structure extended throughout a predetermined life of such use or structure. 
    Animal hospital. See "Veterinary clinic." 
    Animated sign/electronic message board. A sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. 
    Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar), wireless communications signals or other communication signals, including directional antennae, such as panel and microwave dish antennae, whip and omni-directional antennae, but excluding radar antennae, amateur radio antennae and satellite earth stations. 
    Apartment. A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house, arranged, intended or designed to be used as a home or residence of one family with kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of one family. Apartments shall not be permitted to have to bedrooms with doors that lead to a means of egress, exclusive of balconies. 
    Apartment building. A building which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for three or more families living in separate apartments, in which the yard areas, hallways, stairways, balconies and other common areas and facilities are shared by families living in the apartment units. 
    Arborist standards. The standards developed by the ANSI (American-National Standards Institute) and published in ANSI Publication #300, as well as other commonly accepted best management principles and practices published through ANSI. 
    Architect. A person licensed by the state to practice architecture. 
    Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or VO zone on the village flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within the village subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Assembly occupancies. Occupancies that include, but are not limited to all buildings or portions of buildings used for gatherings of persons, for such purposes as seminars, schools, conventions, conferences, deliberation, entertainment, dining, amusement or awaiting transportation. 
    Awning. A roof-like cover extended over a window, door or an opening of a structure, including garage or porte-cochere vehicle openings, being fastened, in a manner provided for such fastening, to the structure of which it is a part and design; and used for the purpose of shielding such window, door or opening from the rays of the sun, rain and like elements of weather. 
    Awning sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee sign is not an awning sign. 
    Banner. A temporary sign possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations, if any, applied to cloth, paper, fabric, or like kind material with only such material for backing. A banner may or may not have a frame, and is not of permanent construction requiring compliance with the building code. A banner is not designed to fly from a flagpole and cannot be considered a flag. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a year as depicted on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Basement. See "Cellar." That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is so located that one-half or more of the clear height from floor to ceiling is below grade. 
    Beekeeping. A use not to exceed five hives, provided the same are located no closer than 150 feet to a street line nor closer than 150 feet to a residential structure. 
    Billboard. A commercial sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Buffer/buffer yard. A strip of land with natural or planted vegetation extending the full length of the property lines located between a use or structure and a front, side or rear property line intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two abutting land uses or properties from one another or to screen a use from public view. 
    Buffer, perimeter landscape. An area of land which is set aside along the perimeter of a parcel of land in which landscaping is required to provide an aesthetic transition between different land uses and to reduce the adverse environmental impact, and incompatible land use impacts through the use of visual screening. 
    Building. A roofed and walled structure that is completely enclosed, except as otherwise provided in the land development code, the use of which demands a permanent location on the land. 
    Building coverage. The area of the lot expressed as a percentage of the total lot area covered by the ground floor of all principal and accessory uses and structures, including all areas covered by the roof of such uses and structures measured along the exterior faces of the walls and or between the exterior faces of exterior supporting columns or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings or a combination of the foregoing whichever produces the greatest total ground coverage for such uses and structures. Exterior unenclosed private balconies above the first floor, overhangs extending more than 36 inches from the face of the building or column, shall be included in building coverage. 
    Building frontage. See "Frontage, building." 
    Building height. See "Height, building." 
    Building permit. See "Permit." 
    Building setback line. See "Setback." 
    Building site. A building site shall be as follows: 
(a)  A parcel of land having not less than the minimum area permitted by the land development code for a building to be erected thereon, including such open spaces as this Code requires. 
(b)  A parcel of land heretofore approved by the village or the county as a building site inclusive of properties reflected on Map I-1 Future Land Use Map-2015 dated February 9, 1999. 
    Business establishment. Any individual person, nonprofit organization, partnership, corporation, other organization or legal entity, required to hold a valid occupational license. 
    Cafe, outdoor. See "Restaurant, outdoor." 
    Cafeteria. See "Restaurant." 
    Caliper. For trees under four inches in diameter, the trunk diameter measured at a height of six inches above natural grade. For a tree diameter four inches or greater (i.e. monocot), the trunk diameter measured at 12 inches above natural grade. 
    Canopy. See "Awning." 
    Capacity. Refers to the availability of a public service or facility to accommodate users, expressed in an appropriate unit of measure, such as gallons per day or average daily trips. 
    Capacity, available. Capacity which can be reserved or committed to future users for a specific public facility. 
    Capacity, committed. The amount of capacity, which has been committed to accommodate existing developments, developments which have been issued a final development order, committed development, and vested developments. 
    Capacity, reserved. Capacity which has been removed from the available capacity pool and allocated to a particular property for a set period of time. 
    Carnival. An exhibition or amusement consisting of rides, side shows, games, or exhibits. 
    Carport. A roofed structure that provides space for parking of vehicles and is not enclosed on more than three sides. 
    Cellar. See "Basement." 
    Certificate of occupancy. A document prepared by the administrative official certifying that a specific development has been designed and constructed in a manner consistent with applicable terms of the land development code and applicable building codes, so long as uses associated with the development are carried out consistent with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
    Certificate of use. A document prepared by the administrative official certifying that a specific use as designed and proposed is consistent with applicable terms of the land development code so long as the operation of the use is carried out consistent with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
    Child care or family care, private. Also see "Homes/special facilities. As used in this article, the term "child care" or "family care" shall include, but is not limited to, the following when the same do not come under the direct operation and administration of the county school board or the state. Such facilities shall be regulated pursuant to the Code. The terms "child," "student," "pupil," and their plurals are used interchangeably in this article. 
1.  After school care: Child care and recreation for children above the age of five when no formal schooling program is conducted and where the care provided is generally after school, on weekends, school holidays and vacations. 
2.  Day nurseries: Child care for infants and children up to and including age six. 
3.  Child and family day care homes: Child and family day care and recreation with a maximum of six persons including the day care operator's own children. 
    Clear story. That area within a building whose height extends from the first finished floor level to the underside of a ceiling where that ceiling is 14 feet or higher from finished floor. 
    Clinic, medical, dental or optical. A facility which does not provide for overnight accommodations wherein professional services concerning personal health of humans are administered by medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, dentists or any other such profession, which may lawfully be practiced in the state. 
    Clinic, veterinary. A facility that provides for care of animals wholly within a soundproof, air-conditioned structure and wherein overnight boarding of animals is accommodated for medical reasons. 
    Club, private. A building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purpose, open only to bona fide members and guests of the private organization operating the facility. 
    Cluster development. A form of residential development that concentrates buildings or lots on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for common open space, recreation and preservation of natural and environmentally sensitive features. The concentration of lots is facilitated by a reduction in lot size. 
    Coastal high hazard area. The area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone VI-30, VE or V. 
    Colonnade. A roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk, open to the street and sidewalk, except for supporting columns or piers. 
    Commercial message. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation or image that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a product, service, sale or sale event or other commercial activity. 
    Commercial recreation use. A use of the property for a commercial purpose for, which a fee is charged where the use of the property by the customer is for a recreational use, such as but not limited to a miniature golf course, health club or a commercial swimming pool. 
    Common facilities and land. All the real property and improvements set aside for the common use and enjoyment of the residents of a cluster development, including, but not limited to, buildings, common open space, private streets, parking areas, walkways, recreation areas, easements, and utilities. 
    Common lot line. A line dividing one lot or parcel from another lot or parcel. 
    Common open space. Undeveloped land within a cluster development that has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development and is set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents of the development. Common open space shall not be part of individual lots, and shall be substantially free of structures, and shall not include conservation and preservation areas otherwise set aside under this division. 
    Comprehensive plan. The village comprehensive plan, as hereafter may be amended, adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, Part II, by the council and which consists of several maps, data, analysis, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the village, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, public utilities, land use or other similar information. 
    Concurrency. The necessary public facilities and services that must be available to maintain the adopted level of service standards when the impacts of development occur. 
    Concurrency facilities. Public facilities and services for which a level of service must be met concurrent with the impacts of development or an acceptable deadline, as mandated in the comprehensive development master plan pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, and F.A.C.  9J-5.0055, shall include: Potable water, recreation, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage and roads. 
    Concurrency management monitoring system. The data collection, processing and analysis performed by the village staff to determine available capacity for concurrency facilities. Data utilized shall be the most current reliable information available to the village. 
    Concurrency review. Evaluation by the village planner and designated staff based on adopted level of service standards to ensure that public facilities and services needed to support development are available concurrent with the impacts of such development as defined in this concurrency management system and if such facilities are not available, that the developer of a proposed development shall bear a cost of providing public services and facilities at a level of service defined by the comprehensive development master plan and concurrent with the impacts of a proposed development. 
    Concurrency status report. A status report prepared by the village identifying available concurrency facility capacity. The status report shall be produced, modified and adjusted from time-to-time as a result of the reservation of capacity or other act, which alters the availability of concurrency facility capacity. 
    Condominium. A form of real property ownership as defined by state statutes. 
    Conservation easement. A voluntary restriction placed by the landowner on the use of his or her property to protect resources such as wildlife habitat, preservation areas, conservation lands, natural areas, scenic views, historic structures, or open spaces. The landowner retains title to the property, and the easement is donated to a qualified conservation organization, such as a land trust, or a government agency. 
    Construction/subdivision sign. A temporary sign displayed on property only during the progress of actual construction work. It is erected and maintained by the property owner/tenant, or on the owner/tenant's behalf by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor, or materials vendor that is furnishing labor, services, or material on the premises. 
    County. Miami-Dade County. 
    Courtyard. An open, unoccupied, unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot as a building, which may have trees or shrubs. 
    Coverage. See "Lot coverage." 
    Cul-de-sac. A minor street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the other end by a vehicular turn-around area with a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
    Customer service area (patron area). Customer service area is the area of an establishment available for food or beverage service or consumption, or both, calculated by measuring all waiting areas and areas covered by customer tables and bar surfaces, and any floor area within five feet of the edge of said tables and bar surfaces, measured in all directions where customer mobility is permitted. "Customer service area" shall include any outdoor or patio floor area used or designed for food or beverage service or consumption, or both, including customer waiting areas, measured as specified above. Areas between tables or bars, which overlap in measurement with another table, shall only be counted once. 
    Day care. See "Childcare." 
    Density. The number of dwelling units permitted on a particular lot or parcel of property calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units by the total number of acres. Density shall be determined by dividing the "dwelling units on the site" by the "net acres on the site." (i.e., dwelling units/residential land acres). All residential densities denoted on the land use district map stipulate the maximum densities permitted for development on the land. In calculating residential density, land area shall only include contiguous land area proposed for residential development, which is under unity of title. Gross residential acreage for determining estate density in EU-1C, EU-1 and EU-S shall include the land area assigned to residential use plus one-half of the adjacent right-of-way. 
    Depth, lot. See "Lot." 
    Design capacity. The potential or suitability for holding, storing or accommodating the demands upon a concurrency facility. 
    Detached sign. Any sign not attached to or painted on a building, but which is permanently attached to the ground. 
    Developer's agreement. An agreement between the village and a party associated with the development of land, including agreements associated with development orders issued pursuant to F.S.  380.01. 
    Development (development activity). The use of any structure, land, or water; or the change, expansion or addition to any use, land, or water; or the carrying out of any building activity; or the making of any change in the appearance of any structure, land or water; or the subdividing of land into two or more parcels; provided, however, that building activity that is carried out exclusively within a previously constructed structure which does not affect the intensity of use or affects only the exterior color of the structure shall not be considered development. Development activity includes, but is not limited to the following activities: 
(a)  Construction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site. 
(b)  Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a structure, impervious surface, or water management system, and including the long-term storage of materials. 
(c)  Subdividing land into two or more parcels. 
(d)  Removal of a tree for which authorization is required under this Code. 
(e)  Erection of a sign for which authorization is required under this Code. 
(f)  Alteration of a historic property for which authorization is required under this Code. 
(g)  Change of use and/or tenant of a site so that the need for parking is increased. 
(h)  Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway on to a public street. 
    Development order. Any order granting, denying or granting with conditions an application for a development permit or any other official action of the village having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Development permit. See "Permit." 
    Distance requirements. Unless otherwise provided herein, distances shall be measured in accordance with the following: 
(a)  When the land development code requires a distance between uses or developments on different development sites or there are requirements in the land development code for a development which is located within a certain distance from another development the distance shall be measured using a straight line measurement from property line to property line using the closest property line of the parcels of land involved. 
(b)  When the land development code imposes requirements on a development which is located within a certain distance of a land use district, the distance shall be measured using a straight line measurement from the land use district line lying closest to the closest property line of the parcel of land involved. 
(c)  When there is a distance requirement between a structure or building on the same development site, the distance shall be measured from the exterior of the building's walls or columns or the exterior of the said structure, using a straight line measurement from the closest points between the structures being measured. 
(d)  When a portion of a parcel or development site lies within a certain distance of a land use district or development and the land development code imposes requirements or regulations on a development or parcel within such distance, the requirements and regulations shall be applicable to the entire parcel or development site and not just to the portion within the specified distance. 
    District. Any certain described area to which these regulations apply and within which the land use regulations are uniform and consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
    Drip line. An imaginary vertical fine extending from the outermost horizontal circumference of a tree's branches to the ground. 
    Driveway. An area on a site used for ingress and egress of vehicles. 
    Dry cleaning. A process of removing dirt, grease, paint and other stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs, and similar materials which complies with all state and county requirements. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building occupied or intended to be occupied by more than two families, living separately and with separate kitchens or facilities for cooking on the premises. 
    Dwelling, residential. A single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling, which is not a dwelling used for transients or tourists and which contains one cooking area/kitchen per dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for and/or containing only one dwelling unit with one cooking facility which is designed for the use of one family. Its living and sleeping area shall be arranged so that all spaces are interconnected wholly within the building and has only one electrical service meter. 
    Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A building designed for and/or containing two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit. A single unit consisting of living area providing complete, independent living facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but not including recreation vehicles, tents, hotels, motels or boardinghouses. 
    Easement. A grant to another party by a property owner of the right to use the owner's land for a specific purpose such as, but not limited to drainage, placement of utility lines, or ingress/egress. 
    Effectively destroy. The girdling, or damaging of a tree's trunk, branch or root system or cutting, pruning or trimming not done in accordance with the most recent American National Standards (ANSI) A-300, Standard Practices for Tree Care Operations. 
    Effluent. The emission of pollutants from any source. 
    Electronic sign. Any type of electronic display board, electronic message board, digital, LED, programmable ink or other sign capable of displaying words, pictures, symbols, video or images including, but not limited to, any electronic, laser, digital, or projected images display that can be changed electronically or mechanically by remote or automatic means. Architectural lighting that is designed to illuminate building walls, architectural features or landscaping is not a sign. 
    Elevated building. A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls. 
    Elevation certificate. A certificate from a registered architect, professional engineer or land surveyor indicating the elevation of the finished floor, base flood elevation and highest crown of road. 
    Energy conservation zone. A zone located no more than 22 feet from a structure in a 180-degree band from due east of the northeast point of the structure, to due south, to due west of the northwest point of the structure. 
    Engineer. A person professionally licensed by the state to practice engineering. 
    Essential services. Public utility facilities which are related to the water, sanitary sewer, storing drainage, solid waste, telephone, cable television, gas and electrical collection or distribution systems that service the village but not including buildings housing employees; or administrative or recreational facilities. 
    Excavations. Unearthing, scraping, digging or grading of earth material for any purposes. 
    Existing construction. Any construction for which the start of construction commenced before May 12, 1998 based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard (i.e. FIRM). 
    Existing development. A residential or nonresidential site with structures that are currently present on the site and which were legally approved through the issuance of a certificate of use and certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion, as of September 5, 2001. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed May 12, 1998. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Facultative. Plants with a similar likelihood of occurring in both wetlands and uplands, which are not recognized indicators of either wetland or upland conditions. 
    Fair market value. The value of property or structures, as used in the definition of substantial improvement, as determined by the county property appraiser, or M.A.I. or S.R.A. appraisal, either before the improvement was started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
    Family. One person or a group of two or more persons living together and interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage, domestic partnership or legal adoption, or a group of persons not more than three in number who are not so interrelated, occupying the whole or part of a dwelling as a separate housekeeping unit with a single set of culinary facilities. The persons thus constituting a family may also include gratuitous guests and domestic servants. Any person under the age of 18 years whose legal custody has been awarded to the state Department of Children and Family Services (DCF) or to a child-placing agency licensed by DCF, or who is otherwise considered to be a foster child under the laws of the state, and who is placed in foster care with a family, shall be deemed to be related to and a member of the family for the purposes of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to include any roomer or boarder as a member of a family. 
    Fence. See "Wall." Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry or other materials, erected for the purpose of privacy, protection or aesthetics. 
    Fill. Any material, such as earth, clay, sand, top soil, gravel, rock, concrete, rubble, wood chips or material of any kind, that is placed, stored, or dumped upon the surface of the ground resulting in an increase in the natural surface elevation. 
    Flag. A piece of fabric with a color or pattern that represents a government, or other noncommercial organization or idea designed to be flown from a flagpole. Banners are not included in this definition. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of the village, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of the village on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the village, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Floor. Also see "Finished floor." The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. 
    Finished floor. The first floor of a structure established by either the base flood elevation or eight inches above the highest crown of the adjacent road(s) as reflected on a current survey or elevation certificate. This elevation establishes the measuring point for building height. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum intensity permitted for residential and nonresidential activities is stated in terms of floor area ratio. A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. FAR computations shall include all uses on the lot, parcel or site, including both residential and nonresidential floor area. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Illustration 
1 acre site: 43,560 square foot 
Site FAR = 0.3 
FAR = TOTAL BUILDING FLOOR AREA 
      TOTAL LOT AREA 
When a roof height exceeds that permitted for a one-story building, that portion of the roof exceeding the maximum height shall be counted toward the second floor, floor area ratio calculation. Exterior unenclosed balconies or terraces above the first floor shall be counted in the FAR calculation. FAR not utilized on the ground floor of a single-family home may be transferred to the second floor of the home to be used for unenclosed balconies and/or terraces. A property owner transferring FAR pursuant to this section shall record a covenant in the public records of Miami-Dade County, on a form approved by the village attorney, prohibiting such unenclosed balconies and/or terraces from being enclosed in the future. 
    Frontage. The length of the property line for a parcel that runs parallel to, and along, a road right-of-way or public or approved private street, exclusive of alleyways. 
    Frontage, building. The single facade constituting length of building or that portion of a building occupied by a single office, business or enterprise abutting a street, parking area or other means of customer access such as an arcade, mall or walkway. 
    Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities. 
    Garage, parking. A building or structure designed or used for the parking or storage of vehicles. 
    Glass sign. A sign located on the glazed area of a building facing the exterior. 
    Governing body. The village council of the village as constituted in the village charter. 
    Government facilities. Public services and facilities provided by the village, state or federal government. 
    Grade, established. The established grade, as applied to any building site shall be the average elevation of the sidewalk abutting such building site or, if there is no sidewalk, the average elevation of the crown of the road or street abutting such building site. Where a building site abuts more than one road and /or street, the established grade shall be the average elevation of the sidewalks abutting upon such building sites, or if there are not sidewalks, the average elevation of the crown of the road and/or streets abutting such building site. Where an existing residential site has a floor level below the crown of the road due to topography, but which is not subject to flooding, grade shall be established as existing site grade. 
    Grade existing. The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
    Grade, finished. The elevation of a site after all fill, land balancing or site preparations have been completed as may be required by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The first inch of rainfall must be contained on-site. 
    Green space (pervious area). A permeable area or areas open to the sky (except for roof overhangs up to three feet) including beautification strips, consisting of those materials such as, but not limited to hedges, trees, planted ground cover, grassed areas, planted floral installations, and dry retention areas, all of which must be composed of natural plantings only. Green space or landscaped area excludes water bodies, swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar improvements. 
    Gross floor area. See "Floor area, gross/total." 
    Group home. See "Homes/special facilities." 
    Guest/worker housing. Living quarters, excluding kitchen facilities, either attached or detached from the principal structure, used as a residence by persons employed to provide domestic services to the occupants of the principal structure or their guests. 
    Hatrack. To flat-cut or prune the top of a tree, severing the leader or leaders or the removal of any branch three inches or greater in diameter at any point other than the branch collar hedge. A dense row of shrubs or bushes placed to form a boundary or barrier. 
    Height (excluding building). 
1.  For signs. The vertical distance measured from ground level nearest the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. 
2.  For structures other than buildings. When referring to a tower, antenna or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point on the tower or structure is an antenna. 
    Height, building. The vertical measurement from eight inches above the average crown of the adjacent street(s) or the elevation set by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 whichever is higher in non-flood hazard areas; and from the base flood elevation plus one foot, or the back of the sidewalk elevation plus one foot, or if there is no sidewalk, the elevation of the average crown of road or street abutting such building site plus one foot, whichever is greater in flood hazard areas. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation walls of a building. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
5.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; 
6.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs; or 
7.  Individually listed on a local inventory of sites designated by the village or county as historically significant. 
    Homes/special facilities. The following uses are types of special facilities and home care services: 
    Adult congregate living facility. Any state licensed institution, building(s), residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other place whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding 24 hours, one or more personal service for four or more adults, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who require such services. A facility offering personal services for fewer than four adults will be within the meaning of this definition if it holds itself out to the public to be an establishment which regularly provides such service. 
    Adult congregate living facility unit. Any room or interconnected rooms with one main entrance, in an adult congregate living facility, containing one or more beds. 
    Community residential facility. A residential facility licensed as a community residential facility by the state department of children and family service (CFS) which provides a community living environment for seven to 14 persons and includes supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall not be more than allowed pursuant to state law. 
    Child and family day care. See "Child and family day care, private." Public child and family day care facilities are regulated as government facilities. See "Government facilities." 
    Foster care. A residential facility licensed as a foster care home by the state department of children and family service (CFS) which provides a family living environment for up to six children and includes supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall not be more than allowed pursuant to state law. 
    Group home. A residential facility licensed as a group home by the state department of children and family service (CFS) which provides a family living environment for up to six children and includes supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall not be more than allowed pursuant to state law. 
    Homeowners association (HOA). An association combining individual home ownership with shared use, ownership, maintenance, and responsibility for common property or facilities, including common facilities and land (but excluding conservation and preservation areas) within a cluster development. 
    Hydromulch. A sprayed application of seed, mulch and water. 
    Illegal sign. Any of the following: 
1.  A sign erected without first obtaining a permit and complying with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use; 
2.  A sign that was legally erected but whose use ceased because the business it identifies is no longer conducted on the premises which now shows neglect or has become dilapidated; 
3.  A nonconforming sign for which the amortization period has expired; 
4.  A sign that was legally erected but which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its current replacement value; 
5.  A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or 
6.  A temporary sign that has remained in place longer than the allowed term specified in the applicable Special Conditions of Div. 7.16(b). 
    Impervious surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to or prevents infiltration by stormwater. It includes surfaces such as compacted lime rock, gravel, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar surfaces. 
    Impervious surface ratio (ISR). A measure of the intensity of hard surfaced development on a site. An impervious surface ratio is the relationship between the total impervious surface area on a site and the net land area. The ISR is calculated by dividing the square footage of the area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the square footage of the net land area. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR) ILLUSTRATION 

    Incidental. Subordinate and minor in area, purpose and significance, and serving or bearing a reasonable relationship to the primary use. 
    Intersection visibility triangle. The triangle portion of a lot formed by the street or alley frontage of such lot and a line drawn between the points along such street or alley frontage 50 feet distant from their point of intersection. 
    Irrigation plan. A plan drawn at the same scale as the landscape plan indicating location and specification of irrigation system components and other relevant information as required by landscape regulations of this Code. 
    Junk. Inoperative, dilapidated, abandoned or wrecked materials, including but not limited to vehicles, trucks, tractors, wagons, boats and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap materials, scrap building material scrap contractors' equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery and similar materials having no intrinsic value. 
    Junkyard. A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including vehicle wrecking yards where vehicles are dismantled or wrecked and the used parts are stored and/or sold, house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition, used or salvaged materials as a part of manufacturing operations. 
    Kennel. The keeping of any domestic animal, regardless of number, for sale, breeding, boarding or treatment purposes, except in a animal hospital, animal parlor or pet shop, as permitted by law, or the keeping of five or more domesticated animals, six months or older, on premises used for residential purposes, or the keeping of more than one domesticated animal on vacant property or on property used for business or commercial purposes. 
    Landscape plan. A plan indicating all landscape areas, stormwater retention/detention areas, site grades, areas which qualify to be excluded from maximum permitted lawn area existing vegetation to be retained, proposed plant material landscape legend, landscape features, planting specifications and details, and all other relevant information in compliance with the landscape regulations of this Code. 
    Landscape architect. A person licensed by the state to practice landscape architecture. 
    Landscaped area. See "Green space". 
    Lawn area. An area planted with lawn grasses. 
    Level of service. An indicator of the operational efficiency of service provided by a concurrency facility. 
    Level of service standard. The adopted volume of demand required for each concurrency facility in order to achieve acceptable operational efficiency. 
    Livestock, limited. Keeping and maintaining any combination of horses or cows, not to exceed two such horses and cows, or five poultry, or birds provided: 
1.  Such use is incidental to an existing residential use; 
2.  The area used to keep and maintain such animals is part of the residential site; 
3.  Such animals are fenced at least 50 feet from property under different ownership; except that no separation from the property line shall be required for hens; and 
4.  Structures for the keeping of any limited livestock shall be considered general accessory structures and shall be located in compliance with applicable general accessory structure setback requirements; except that structures for the limited keeping of hens, when such structures are 150 square feet or smaller in area, may be located ten feet from the side and rear property lines. 
    Living level. The number of floors in a building above the finished floor. 
    Loading space (berth). A space which provides for the loading or unloading of service vehicles and has a minimum size of 12 feet in width, 30 feet in length and 14 feet in height with a backup space of 32 feet. 
    Local governing body. The village council of the Village of Pinecrest as constituted in the Village Charter. 
    Local planning agency. An advisory body to the village council as legally established by ordinance with designated power as referenced by the land development code and Florida Statutes. 
    Lot. (See "Parcel"). A parcel of land meeting minimum district requirements for size, width, and area and capable of providing such yards and other open spaces as are required in the land development code and may consist of: 
1.  A single lot of record; 
2.  A portion of a lot of record; 
3.  A combination of complete lots of record, and portions of lots of record; and 
4.  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot area. The horizontal plane area within the lot lines, excluding right-of-way, expressed in these regulations in square feet or acres. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets, alleys or other public way at their intersection or at a street corner having an interior angle not greater than 135 degrees along the right-of-way. The boundary with the smallest frontage on the street shall be designated as the front yard. The yard opposite to the front yard shall be designated as the rear yard. The side yard along the other street shall be designated as the side street yard. The side opposite shall be designated as the side yard (see figure 9-4 at the end of this division). In instances where a principal structure has been permitted and constructed on a lot with a required side street yard setback adjacent to the boundary with the smallest frontage, subsequent additions and modifications to an extent less than 50 percent of the floor area of such structure may be continue to be permitted in accordance with the established setbacks. 
    Lot coverage. The total of impervious surface area and green space. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite mean rear line of the lot. For through lots, the lot depth is the distance between the adjacent streets. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot with a frontage on one street only (see figure 9-1 at the end of this division). 
    Lot line. The line bounding a lot as herein defined as established by ownership except that where a lot line lies within a private street or waterway the edge of the private street right-of-way or waterway shall be considered to be the lot line for the purposes of calculating net density, lot, yard and bulk requirements. 
    Lot line, front. That line running adjacent and parallel to the street (see figures 9-2-9-7 at the end of this division). 
    Lot line, rear. The line opposite and parallel to the front line (see figures 9-2-9-7 at the end of this division). 
    Lot lines, side. Those lines connecting the street frontage with a rear lot line and generally running perpendicular thereto (see figures 9-2-9-7 at the end of this division). 
    Lot lines, side street. That line on a corner lot parallel to the side street (see figure 9-4 at the end of this division). 
    Lot, nonconforming. A single lot, tract or parcel of land shown on either a recorded or unrecorded map, plat, drawing or survey, where such map, plat, drawing or survey was in existence as of November 27, 2000, or subsequent amendment thereto, such lot failing to meet the requirements for area, width or depth for any permitted use within the district in which it is located. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been duly approved and recorded in the public records of the county or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been thus recorded. 
    Lot, through (double frontage lot). An interior lot having a street, alley or other public way on each end (see figure 9-3 at the end of this division). 
    Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the required front right-of-way line. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of this Code. 
    Maintenance services provided by itinerant service companies. Maintenance services provided by itinerant service companies shall include services provided from a mobile vehicle including locksmith services, mobile car wash services, emergency automobile and roadside assistance services, exterior power washing and painting services, landscaping services, and other customary maintenance and repair services provided at the location of the required service. 
    Mandatory requirements. Requirements or provisions of the land development code not subject to relaxation or waiver by the variance process. 
    Mangrove stand. An assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Longuncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocalpus erecta). 
    Manually changeable copy sign. A sign or portion thereof which has a readerboard for the display of text information that can be changed or rearranged manually without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
    Manufactured home. A building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Marquee sign. A sign affixed to a permanent roof-like structure and projecting over the entrance of the building generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Master-planned development entrance sign. A sign in a master-planned development, not attached to or affixed to or painted on a building, but which is permanently attached to the ground within common areas that are dedicated to a property owners' association for maintenance, and which are used to identify uses or locations and direct traffic. 
    Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
    Medical marijuana retail center. A retail establishment, licensed by the Florida Department of Health as a "medical marijuana treatment facility," "medical marijuana treatment center," "dispensing organization," "dispensing organization facility" or similar use, that sells and dispenses medical marijuana, but does not engage in any other activity related to preparation, wholesale storage, distribution, transfer, cultivation, or processing of any form of marijuana or marijuana product, and does not allow on-site consumption of marijuana. 
    Mezzanine. An intermediate level placed between the floor and ceiling in any story or room which does not exceed one-third the gross area of the room or story on which it is superimposed. 
    Monument sign. A freestanding sign where the foundation and supporting structure are visually an integral part of the sign creating a continuous form from the ground to the top of the sign. Monument signs shall be an integral and complementary element of the overall architectural and streetscape composition and shall be integrated with the building and landscape design. 
    Moisture and rain sensor switches. Devices which have the ability to switch off an automatic irrigation controller after receiving a predetermined amount of rainfall or moisture content m the soil. 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain as corrected in 1929. 
    Native habitat. An area enhanced or landscaped with an appropriate mix of native tree, shrub and groundcover species that resembles a native plant community or natural forest community in structure and composition or is naturally occurring. 
    Native plant species. Plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the county, including the village, that are not introduced by man. Plants which are described as native to the county in botanical manuals such as, but not limited to, "A Flora of Tropical Florida" by Long and Lakela and "The Biology of Trees Native to Tropical Florida" by P.B. Tomlinson, are native plant species within the meaning of this definition. 
    Net acre. The unit of land area which comprises an acre, less that portion of land area within public ownership. Public land area shall include public rights-of-ways, public waterways, and other publicly dedicated areas. 
    Net site square feet. The square footage of the existing or proposed lot, less that portion of land area within public ownership. Public land area shall include public rights-of-ways and public waterways and other publicly dedicated areas. 
    New construction, for purposes of flood regulation, shall mean any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 12, 1998, based upon specific technical base flood elevation data, which establishes the area of special flood hazard (i.e. FIRM). The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 12, 1998. 
    Noise. A subjective description to an undesirable or unwanted sound. 
    Noncommercial message. Any message which is not a commercial message. 
    Noncommercial on-site directional sign. A sign that is permanently erected and used to provide direction or information to pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises and not displaying a commercial message, e.g., "entrance," "exit," "one-way only," and the like. 
    Nonconforming structure or use. A structure or land use legally existing by the virtue of a permit, variance or other government action at the time of the passage of this Code or subsequent amendment thereto, which currently does not conform to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the districts in which it is located. 
    Nuisance. An act, which is committed by a person or persons, or a condition which is allowed to exist on a property by a person or persons, which has an adverse economic effect on neighboring properties or which threatens the public health, safety or welfare. 
    Nursery school or kindergarten. Any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of nonresident children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system whether or not for compensation, as licensed by the state. 
    Nursing home or convalescent home. A home for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured as licensed by the state. 
    Occupants. The total number of persons that may occupy a building or portion thereof or other areas designated for occupancy or use at any one time. The term "other areas designated for occupancy or use" shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, decks, patios or other improved areas of the site for use by the patrons. 
    Odor. Stimulus affecting the olfactory nerves. 
    Off-premise sign. A sign that directs attention to a commercial business, commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. Also referred to as "billboard." 
    Office. A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service industry or government. 
    Official zoning map. The official zoning map of the village that depicts the zoning district classifications of this Code. 
    Open space, common. An area required as open space under the Code for the various zoning districts. 
    Open space. That portion of property consisting of green space and other impervious areas but excluding all buildings. 
    Parcel. See "Lot." 
    Parking area light standard sign. A sign consisting of two dual-face signs extending horizontally and projecting from opposite sides of a light standard located in the parking lot of a shopping center or use in the PS, public service district, used to identify the location of the parking areas. No advertising is permitted on the sign. 
    Parking lot. An off-street, surfaced, ground level open area, for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles. 
    Parking space. An area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle and permitting the necessary ingress and egress of a motor vehicle. 
    Patron area. See "Customer service area." 
    Permanent sign. Any sign intended for permanent use. For the purposes of this chapter, any sign with an intended use of 90 days or more shall be deemed a permanent sign. 
    Permit. A document issued by the building and planning department of the village allowing a person to begin an activity provided for in these regulations. 
    Permit, development. A permit signifying compliance with the provisions of these regulations as to design, use, activity, height, setbacks, density, site planning, special use status or planned unit development status. 
    Personal service store. An establishment which provides personal services directly to the consumer, such as, but not limited to, barbershop, beauty salon, dry cleaning, shoe repair shop and tailor shop, but which does not have as its primary function the sale of retail goods. 
    Pervious area (green space). Any portion of a lot or parcel not required, designated for or encumbered by either principal or accessory uses, buildings and structures and other site uses, including driveways, decks, walkways, stepping stones, tennis courts, swimming pools, or other such amenities. 
    Plant species controlled. Those plant species, which tend to become nuisances because of their ability to invade proximal native plant communities or native habitats, but which, if located and cultivated properly may be useful or functional as elements of landscape design. 
    Planting detail. A graphic representation of the plant installation depicting the materials to be used and dimensions to be met in the placement of landscape materials. 
    Plat. A map depicting the division or subdivision of land, tracts or portions thereof, however the same may be designated. 
    Plat of record. A plat which conforms to all the requirements of the applicable laws of the state, the county and this Code and has been filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court for the county. 
    Point of sale sign. A sign identifying the premises of a commercial establishment. 
    Pole sign. A detached sign with a visible support structure, such that the sign face and support structure do not appear as one solid monolithic appearance, or otherwise having a support structure that is not architecturally integrated into the overall design of the sign, but not including a flag on a flagpole. 
    Pool, available capacity. The total unused capacity of concurrency facilities existing at any point in time. 
    Portable sign. Any sign not attached to or painted on a building and not affixed or permanently attached to the ground. A sign that is tied down with metal straps, chaining, or otherwise temporarily anchored to the ground or an existing structure. Portable signs may also be described as sandwich/sidewalk signs. 
    Premises. Any lot and/or all buildings and structures thereon. 
    Principal use. See "Use, principal." 
    Proceeding in good faith. Tangible and continuing actions taken by an applicant of an approved final development order to perform actual project construction and implementation leading to completion of a final development plan within a reasonable period of time. More over, a certificate of completion for the development of infrastructure must be received within three years of the date from which the construction was authorized in order to satisfy the definition of this term. This provision can only be modified through a development agreement approved by the village council. 
    Professional planner. A person who is engaged in the profession of urban planning who possesses appropriate education and professional experience. 
    Prohibited plant species. Those plant species listed in the county or village landscape manual or Code of Ordinances that are demonstrably detrimental to native plants native wildlife, ecosystems, or human health, safety, and welfare. 
    Projecting sign. Any sign which is an independent structure, which is attached to the building wall and which extends at any angle from the face of the wall. No projecting sign shall extend above the roof. 
    Property. The overall area represented by the outside boundaries of a parcel of land or development. 
    Property line. See "Lot line." 
    Property owners' association. A nonprofit organization recognized as such under the laws of the state operated under recorded land agreements through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision, be it a lot, home, property or any other interest, is automatically subject to a charge for a prorated share of expenses either direct or indirect for maintaining common properties within the subdivision, such as roads, parks, recreational areas, common areas or other similar properties. Within the text of this Code, a property owners' association is considered a single entity for property ownership. 
    Public facilities and services (concurrency facilities). Those facilities covered by the comprehensive development master plan required by F.S.  163.3177, and for which level of service standards must be adopted under F.A.C. ch. 9J-5. The facilities are: 
1.  Roads; 
2.  Sanitary sewer; 
3.  Solid waste; 
4.  Drainage; 
5.  Potable water; 
6.  Parks and recreation. 
    Public notice. The legal advertisement given of an action or proposed action of the village as set forth in these regulations or applicable state statutes. 
    Public service uses (PS). Uses such as governmental buildings, public and not-for-profit schools, hospitals and supportive health care units, arts and cultural or civic facilities, essential public services, utilities, fire and emergency operations facilities, and places of worship and accessory facilities. 
    Public utilities. Public and quasi-public services regulated by the state for purposes of providing essential infrastructure to residential and/or nonresidential areas in order to further the public health, safety, and welfare. 
    Real estate sign. Any sign which indicates real property that is for sale, rent, or lease. 
    Rear lot lines. Those lines connecting the side lot lines at the opposite end of a lot from the street frontage line and generally running perpendicular to the side lot lines and parallel to the street frontage line. 
    Recreation area or space (private). An accessory use consisting of one or more areas, enclosed within a structure and/or open space, devoted to the active and/or passive recreational enjoyment of one or more persons residing within the principal use to which it is accessory. When developed and/or equipped for various recreational pursuits, the areas shall not be allowed for any other required site uses except open and/or rear building setback areas. 
    Recreational accessory uses. Uses which are customarily incidental to and subordinate to a principal residential land use, including a private swimming pool, tennis court, shuffle board court, or similar accessory residential structures for the recreation on family members and their guests. 
    Restaurant, consumption on premises. An establishment where food is ordered from a menu, prepared and served for pay, for consumption on the premises but not a drive-in restaurant. 
    Restaurant, drive-in. Any food or beverage dispensing operation at retail to the general public where the public is served while remaining in vehicles or other motor vehicles. 
    Restaurant, fast casual. A type of restaurant positioned between fast food and full-service dining that does not offer full table service. Counter service accompanied by handmade food (often visible via an open kitchen) is typical. The menu is usually limited to an extended overcounter display, and options in the way the food is prepared are emphasized. While full table service is not offered, conveniences like utensils and plates are common. 
    Restaurant, fast food. A type of restaurant characterized both by its fast food cuisine and by minimal table service. Food served is offered from a limited menu; is cooked in bulk in advance and kept hot; is finished and packaged to order; and is usually available ready to take away, though seating may be provided. Fast food restaurants are typically part of a restaurant chain or franchise operation, which provisions standardized ingredients and/or partially prepared foods and supplies to each restaurant through controlled supply channels. 
    Restaurant, outdoor. A use approved by the village council characterized by outdoor table service of food and beverages prepared for service in an adjacent restaurant. 
    Restaurant, take-out. Any food or beverage dispensing operation at retail to the general public where the public purchases food and beverages at a counter and consumption occurs only off premises. 
    Retention or to retain. The prevention of, or to prevent the discharge of a given volume of stormwater runoff into surface waters of the state by complete on-site storage where the capacity to store the given volume of stormwater is again provided within 72 hours following the storm event. The required storage volume must be provided by a decrease of stored water caused by percolation through soil, evaporation, transpiration, or spray irrigation. Retention shall be "off-line" (i.e. outside of the primary drainage path), unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that water quality in the receiving waters will not be adversely impacted by "on line" retention. Wet retention refers to an area the lowest elevation of which penetrates the dry season groundwater table. Dry retention refers to an area the lowest elevation of which lies at least two feet above the wet season groundwater table. 
    Right-of-way. The area of a highway, road, street, way or parkway or other such strip of land reserved for public use, whether established by prescription, easement, dedication, gift, purchase, eminent domain or any other legal means. 
    Roof sign. Any sign, which is painted on, fastened to, or supported by the roof or erected over the roof. 
    Rooming house shall mean any dwelling, or part of any dwelling, containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator on a predominantly permanent basis to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother of the owner or operator. For the purpose of this Code, boardinghouses are included in this category. 
    Rotating sign. A sign that rotates or revolves. 
    Sale of homegrown produce limited to production and sale of produce grown on the premises. Fruit growing incidental to an existing residential use, provided that no more than one sign which is no greater that four square feet is posted during the fruit growing season and no more than one fruit stand, which is no greater than 16 square feet horizontal surface area, is temporarily located on the property. Such use shall be confined to an area no closer than ten feet to an official street right-of-way line. 
    Satellite antenna. Any parabolic or spherical antenna, which receives television or other signals from orbiting satellites or other devices. The height of a groundmounted antenna shall be the maximum height to which it is capable of being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade of the roof adjacent to the structure. A satellite antenna shall be considered as an accessory structure when it is not part of a public utility. A web or mesh type antenna is an antenna primarily constructed of a web or mesh material so that it does not substantially impair visibility. A ground mounted or "short pole" installation denotes a pole of nine feet or less in height. A "long pole" installation denotes a pole of greater than nine feet in height that is braced to the side of a building for added rigidity. 
    School or educational facility, private. An institution which provides instruction from kindergarten level through the college level and which does not come under the direct operation and administration of the county school board or the state. 
    Sediment. The mineral or organic particulate material that is in suspension or has settled in surface water or groundwater. 
    Service station. See "Vehicular service station." 
    Setback. The required minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines of a lot and the front, rear and side lines of a building, or, in the case of open structures, to the face of the structural columns; including those structures specifically permitted to extend beyond the height of the building. 
    Shopping center. An area zoned for business where at least 250 feet of street frontage has been zoned for commercial purposes under one application and one ownership, and where it contains off-street parking containing two or more retail uses. 
    Shrub. A self-supporting woody perennial plant normally growing to a height of 24 inches or greater, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. 
    Sign. Any display of characters, letters, logos, illustrations, or any other ornamentation designed or used as advertisement, announcement or to indicate direction. This term shall not be interpreted to include traffic control devices or warning signs. A sign that is not visible from any nearby public or private property is not a sign subject to regulation under Division 7. 
    Snipe sign. A sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects. 
    Specimen tree. A tree with any individual trunk which has a measured diameter at breast height (DBH) of 18 inches or greater, but not including the following: 
(1)  All trees listed in the list of tree species that do not require a removal permit; and 
(2)  All multi-trunk trees in the palm family, except Accelorrhaphe wrightii, which have a minimum overall height of 15 feet. 
    Spot zoning. An illegal rezoning which occurs when: (1) a small parcel of land is singled out for special and privileged treatment; (2) the singling out is not in the public interest but only for the benefit of the land owner; and (3) the action is not in accord with the adopted comprehensive development master plan. 
    State. The State of Florida and all its duly appointed agencies. 
    Store, convenience. A small retail establishment, which sells a general line of goods and products, intended for the convenience of surrounding residents and whose gross floor area does not exceed 3,000 square feet. 
    Store, retail. An establishment which sells goods or products directly to the public for compensation. 
    Stormwater. The flow of water that results from, and that occurs immediately following a rainfall. 
    Stormwater management system. The system, or combination of systems, designed to treat stormwater, or collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater on, through and from a site. 
    Stormwater retention/detention area. An area designed, built and used for temporary storage of stormwater. For purposes of this Code, these areas are intended to be permanently exempt from wetland regulations. 
    Stormwater runoff. That portion of the stormwater that flows from the land surface of a site either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the lower surface of the floor next above or any portion of a building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. A basement or cellar shall not be counted as a story. Mezzanine shall be counted as a story. 
    Street. Any thoroughfare, street, avenue, boulevard, highway, parkway or space which may or may not be dedicated or deeded to the public for use and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property for the purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Street, collector. Streets penetrating neighborhoods, collecting traffic from local streets in the neighborhoods, and channeling it onto the arterial system. 
    Street, expressway. A street that is to be used only for the movement of vehicles providing for no vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property except at permitted, authorized and controlled points. 
    Street, local. Streets not classified in a higher system, primarily providing direct access to abutting land and to the higher systems, offering the lowest level of mobility and usually carrying no bus routes. 
    Street, major arterial. A designated street or highway on the DOT functional classification system that carries high traffic volumes and interconnects regions of the county or the state such as US 1 (South Dixie Highway/Pinecrest Parkway). 
    Street, marginal access. A street parallel and adjacent to an expressway, arterial or limited access street or in the immediate vicinity of such streets and which has as its principal purpose of relieving such street from local service of abutting property by providing protection from conflicts with through traffic. 
    Street, minor arterial. Streets and highways interconnecting with and augmenting the urban principal arterial system and providing service to trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility. The system places more emphasis on land access and distributes travel to geographic areas smaller than those identified with the higher system. 
    Street, private. Any street existing prior to or at the time of adoption of these regulations which has not been dedicated for public use and not accepted for ownership or maintenance by the appropriate public agency. 
    Street, public. Any road, street or right-of-way designed to serve more than one property owner which is dedicated to the public use and accepted for ownership and maintenance by the appropriate public agency; includes any street right-of-way dedicated to the public prior to or at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. 
    Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; or the rearrangement of interior partitions, floors, ceilings, roof, and similar structural features. 
    Structure. Anything built, constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the land, or attached to something having a permanent location on the land. Structure includes any composition, artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner or any rooflike structure or storage apparatus whether movable or nonmovable which may or may not be self-supporting or may or may not be affixed to a "structure," or to a building. Structure shall also include swimming pools, tennis courts, decks, patios, driveways, sidewalks, chickee huts, gazebos, screened-in rooms, recreational equipment, sheds, and accessory buildings. 
    Subdivision. The division of real property into two or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units or any other division of land, or if the establishment of new streets and alleys is involved, any division of such parcel. The term includes re-subdivisions and, when appropriate to the text, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided. 
    Submerged land. The land area situated below the ordinary high water line of a standing body of water, including lake, pond, river, canal or stream. For the purpose of this definition retention areas that are a function of development and wetlands shall not be considered submerged land. 
    Survey, certified. A survey, sketch, plan, map or other exhibit containing a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards certified, signed and sealed by a state registered land surveyor under whose supervision the survey was prepared. 
    Survey, current. A certified survey performed or updated within the past five years. A certified survey performed more than five years ago with an affidavit submitted by the owner attesting to the accuracy of the survey, including all existing conditions shall be acceptable as a current survey. 
    Surveyor. A person licensed by the state to practice land surveying. 
    Temporary. A time period of not more than 90 days. 
    Temporary noncommercial sign. A temporary sign with a message that is not commercial in nature. Unless otherwise provided for in these regulations, a temporary noncommercial sign shall not remain in place for longer than 90 days. 
    Temporary signs. Any sign intended for use not permanent in nature. For the purposes of this chapter, any sign with an intended use of 90 days or less shall be deemed a temporary sign. 
    Tent. Any portable or removable shelter made of canvas and/or some other similar fabric either natural or synthetic. 
    Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission/relay towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
    Townhouse. A building or structure designed for and/or containing one dwelling unit and/or intended for occupancy by not more than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings or structures by not more than two party walls extending from the foundation to the roof and providing two direct means of access from the outside. For the purpose of this land development code, a townhouse may include a building or structure in fee simple, condominium, cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof. 
    Traffic control device. A sign located within the right-of-way and that is used as a traffic control device and described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the Federal Highway Administration as the National Standard and as may be revised from time to time. A traffic control device includes those signs that are classified and defined by their function as regulatory signs (that give notice of traffic laws or regulations), warning signs (that give notice of a situation that might not readily be apparent), and guide signs (that show route designations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, and other geographical, recreational, or cultural information). These devices are not regulated as signs under this article. 
    Tree abuse shall include: 
(a)  Damage inflicted upon any part of a tree, including the root system, by machinery, construction equipment, cambium layer penetration, storage of materials, soil compaction, excavation, chemical application or spillage, or change to the natural grade. 
(b)  Hatracking. 
(c)  Girdling or bark removal of more than one-third of the tree diameter. 
(d)  Tearing and splitting of limb ends or peeling, and stripping of bark resulting from improper pruning techniques not in accordance with the current ANSI -A300 Standards. 
(e)  Cutting of a tree which destroys its natural shape. 
(f)  Use of climbing spikes unless for the purpose of removing the entire tree. 
(g)  Flush cuts that cut into the branch collar. 
    Tree canopy cover. The aerial extent of the branches and foliage of a tree measured in width at the drip line. 
    Triangle of visibility. A triangular area of land occurring at the intersection of a driveway and street right-of-way which is maintained free of visual obstructions so as to provide visibility of vehicles and pedestrians. 
    Understory. The complex of woody, fibrous, and herbaceous plant species that are typically associated with a natural forest community, native plant community, or native habitat. 
    Use, accessory. A subordinate use that is incidental to and associated with the principal building or use and which is located on the same lot with the principal building or use. An accessory use cannot be used to authorize a use otherwise not permitted in the district. The term "other accessory uses" refers to additional accessory uses, as herein defined, any one of which is not specifically cited in the list of accessory uses appearing the regulations for each district but which is compliant with applicable provisions of the land development code. 
    Use, conditional. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the land use district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, and relation to the neighborhood or impacted vicinity, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, or prosperity of the neighborhood. 
    Use, permitted. A use permitted in a district upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of the land development regulations. 
    Use, principal. The primary use of any lot. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from this Code by the village council or zoning board that permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Code. 
    Vehicle. A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except devices moved exclusively by human power. 
    Vehicular paint and body shop (major repair). Any building, structure or land used primarily for the major repair of vehicle chassis, outer surfaces, and the painting or coating of the same. 
    Vehicular service station. Any building, structure or land used primarily for the dispensing, or sale of any vehicle fuels, oils, accessories or goods and which may provide repairs to vehicles, excluding paint or body work vehicular use area (referred to as VUA). Any area used by vehicles including, but not limited to, areas for parking, display, storage or traverse of any and all types of motor vehicles, bicycles, watercraft, trailers, or construction equipment. 
    Vested rights. A concurrency system development order shall be deemed "vested" and not subject to requirements of concurrency management if development circumstances meet criteria for common law or statutory vesting, as defined below. All nonvested development or development orders are subject to all requirements of the concurrency management system. 
    Vested rights, common law. A right not created by statute or the provisions of the comprehensive development master plan which would authorize the development of real property or the continued development of real property notwithstanding the provisions of the comprehensive development master plan. The village may find such vesting to exist whenever the applicant proves by a preponderance of evidence that the real property owner, acting in good faith upon some act or omission of the village has made a substantial change in its position or has incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the right to develop or to continue the development of the real property. The assignment of the particular district classification or the assignment of a particular land use designation to parcel of real property does not guarantee or vest any specific development rights to any person or entity as to said real property. 
    Vested rights, statutory. A statutory right to develop or to continue the development of real property pursuant to the provisions of F.S.  163.3187(8), or its successor provisions. Such vesting may be found to exist if a valid and unexpired final development order was issued by the village prior to the effective date of this Code, if construction has commenced on the subject development and the development is in the process of being completed or further development is continuing in good faith. Statutory vesting does not occur unless all material requirements, conditions, limitations and regulations of the development order have been met and are being maintained. 
    Vine. A plant with a flexible stem that normally requires support to reach mature form. 
    Wall sign. A flat sign affixed to an exterior building wall (including glass) which is used to identify a use. 
    Window sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. The word window shall be construed to mean any glass that comprises part of the surface of the wall, regardless of its movability. 
    Yard. An open space at grade between a building and adjoining lot lines, unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard, required front. The minimum distance required by this land development code extending across the full width of the lot or parcel measured along the street frontage line and the front building setback line. 
    Yard, required rear. The minimum distance required by this land development code between the rear of a principal building or structure and the lot line farthest from the street. 
    Yard, required side. The minimum distance required by this land development code extending along and parallel to the side line and building setback line and located between the required front and rear property lines. 
    Yard, required side street. The minimum distance required by this land development code extending along the side street and parallel to the side yard and building set back line, located between the front and rear property lines. 
    Yard, required waterfront. Any lot that abuts a waterway shall have the required yard that abuts said waterway designated as the required waterfront yard. 
    Zoning district. An area of the village designated by a single zoning classification with uniform use and development regulations throughout. 
    Zoning board. A board appointed by the village council as legally established by ordinance with designated power as referenced in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-7,  4, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2005-3,  1, 3-15-05; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-8,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2015-9,  2, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2015-14,  2, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2016-5,  3, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 2018-1,  3, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-5,  2(Exh. A), 5-8-18; Ord. No. 2018-8,  2, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 2018-12,  2, 9-11-18) 

Basic Types of Lots 

Interior Lots 

Through Lots 

Corner Lots 

Irregular Lots (No Parallel Lot Lines) 

Irregular Lots 

Example of Yard Definitions 
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the village used in the Land Developement Regulations. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2000-07 11-27-00 1-2       Added 30-1-30-208 2001-08  9- 5-01 2       Added 30-119-30-129 30-131-30-146 2002-8 11-13-02 1       Rpld 30-118 2       Rpld 30-82, 30-84 30-85 3       Rpld 30-12 30-14-30-20.5 30-21-30-81 30-83 30-86-30-117 30-119-30-208       Added Divs. 1.1-1.4 Divs. 2.1-2.4 Divs. 3.1-3.9 Divs. 4.1-4.6 Divs. 5.1-5.23 Divs. 6.1-6.13 Divs. 7.1-7.119 Divs. 8.1-8.11 Divs. 9.1, 9.2 4       Rpld 26-81 2004-3  6- 8-04 1       Added Div. 4.7 2004-7 10-12-04 2       Added Div. 4.2(c)2.b. 3       Added Div. 5.24 4 Div. 9.2 2005-3  3-15-05 1 Div. 9.2 2005-5  7-19-05 1       Added Div. 5.25 2005-7  9-12-05 1       Added Div. 5.26 2006-1  5-18-06 1       Added Div. 5.19(i) 2007-1  1-16-07 1 Div. 7.5 2 Div. 7.10 3 Div. 7.12 4 Div. 7.16 2009-2  6- 9-09 1 Div. 4.2(g) 2 Div. 4.6, table 4.30 2009-5 12- 8-09 1 Div. 4.3 2 Div. 4.6, table 4.31 2010-3 11- 9-10 1 Div. 5.17(e) 2011-5  6-14-11 2       Added Div. 6.14 2011-7  9- 6-11 2 Div. 4.2, table 4.2       Added Div. 4.2(g.1) 2012-4  3-20-12 2 Divs. 4.2-4.5, 4.7, 5.22, 6.1, 6.2       Added 5.27 2012-14  9-11-12 1 Divs. 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.9 2012-17 11-13-12 2 Div. 7.16 2012-18 11-13-12 2 Div. 5.23 2014-02  4- 8-14 2 Divs. 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2, 3.4-3.9, 4.2-4.7, 5.5-5.11, 5.17-5.19, 5.21-5.23, 5.25-5.27, 6.1-6.3, 6.12, 7.8, 7.13, 7.14, 7.16, 7.17, 8.2, 8.6, 9.2       Added 4.8, 5.28-5.30, 6.15 2014-7 10-14-14 2 4.2, 4.3 4.6, 5.19 5.22, 5.27(b) 2015-7  9- 8-15 2 Divs. 3.1, 4.3, 5.1, 5.19       Added 5.31 2015-8  9- 8-15 2 Divs. 5.19, 6.1, 6.2, 6.15, 9.2       Added Div. 3.9(d) 2015-9  9- 8-15 2 Div. 9.2 3 Div. 4.7 4       Added Div. 5.32 5 Div. 5.22 2015-11  9- 8-15 2       Added Div. 6.2(d),(e) 2015-14 12- 8-15 2       Rpld Div. 6.3       Added Div. 6.3 3 Div. 9.2 2016-4  4-12-16 2 Div. 4.2 Div. 5.5 Div. 5.16 2016-5  5-10-16 2 Divs. 7.1-7.16       Rpld Div. 7.17       Added Div. 7.17 Divs. 7.18, 7.19       Added Divs. 7.20, 7.21 3 Div. 9.2 2017-3  5- 9-17 2 Div. 3.1(c) 2017-4  1-10-17 2       Added Div. 5.33 2017-6  6- 6-17 2 Div. 4.3       Added Div. 5.34 2018-1  1- 9-18 3 Div. 9.2 4 Div. 4.3 Div. 4.7 5 Div. 5.22(b) 6       Rpld 5.32 2018-2  1- 9-18 2       Added Div. 5.35 2018-5  5- 8-18 2(Exh. A) Div. 3.3 Div. 4.2 Div. 4.3 Div. 4.4 Div. 4.5 Div. 4.6 Div. 5.2 Div. 5.5 Div. 5.6 Div. 5.7 Div. 5.19 Div. 5.22 Div. 5.27       Rnbd Div. 5.33-5.35       as Div. 5.32-5.34 Div. 6.1 Div. 6.2 Div. 6.3 Div. 6.12 Div. 7.16 Div. 8.2 Div. 9.2 2018-6  7-17-18 2 Div. 5.32 2018-7  7-17-18 2 Div. 7.16 2018-8  7-17-18 2 Div. 9.2 2018-12  9-11-18 2 Div. 9.2  
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Land Development Regulations either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Division  
this Code 38.06 8.6 161.055 6.3 ch. 163 9.2 ch. 163, pt. II 1.1 7.2 163.3202(2)(f) 7.2 5.21 166.041 3.8 166.041(3)(b), (c) ch. 30 166.0445 ch. 30 163.2511 et seq. ch. 30 163.3161 et seq. 3.7 163.3174 2.1 2.2 163.3177 9.2 163.3180 5.21 163.3184 3.8 163.3187(8) 9.2 163.3201 1.2 163.3220 5.21 ch. 166 1.1 ch. 177 8.5 8.6 186.001 et seq. ch. 30 ch. 212 5.32 316.131 8.2 320.01 6.3 320.8249 6.3 373.036 6.3 ch. 380 5.21 380.01 9.2 381.0065 6.3 ch. 419 5.12 5.34 ch. 440 6.2 ch. 458 9.2 ch. 459 9.2 ch. 471 6.15 ch. 509 5.32 ch. 515 5.32 553.73 6.3 553.73(10)(k) 6.3 553.501 et seq. 5.22 604.50 6.3 666.02 6.3 757.12 et seq. 5.6 ch. 847 5.18  
